Style Makers; David Rogers, Sculptor
David Rogers, 31 years old, started his career as a sculptor by welding metal.
But by the time he reached his late teens, he was using tree branches as his medium.
"I really got going about eight years ago when I met a guy in Sea Cliff, N.Y., who was making furniture by bending cottonwood," he said.
Instead of dry branches, Mr.
Rogers started experimenting with what he calls "green materials." Saplings became his material of choice and were turned into love seats and chairs.


FAMILY ISN'T EVERYTHING
If Henig's intent was to show how one's life should not revolve around children, she makes a good case.
Children enrich and challenge us; they do not
define
who we are, any more than we can define who they will ultimately become.
Yet children are not just another enriching experience.
They should be valued because they have lessons to teach us about ourselves: our level of patience, our ability to tolerate disorder, our capacity to love.
They force us to go outside ourselves, delay our own gratifications and act responsibly.
They make us larger than ourselves.
And that is what gives meaning to our lives.
The payoff is not that the child leaves his parents for good, but that he maintains a loving connection with his parents that transcends the parent-child relationship.
SHELLY LEAL Brooklyn


Count on Magic
To the Sports Editor:
I spent four years of my life and career (1985-89) working for the Los Angeles Lakers.
It was my job to introduce the corporate world to the Lakers and the Forum properties, and to convince marketers that the Lakers' mystique was well worth their advertising dollars.


Staving Off the Silencers
AMERICANS HAVE MORE freedom to think what we will and say what we think than any other people on earth.
We can denounce politicians in uninhibited language.
We can read books banned in Britain or Israel.
We can even burn our flag, as a political protest, without fear of punishment.
All this we owe to the unflinching guaranty in the First Amendment: "Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press." Those bold words were added to the Constitution, along with the rest of the Bill of Rights -- the first 10 amendments -- on Dec. 15, 1791.
We approach the anniversary secure in the knowledge that Americans have been free to speak and publish without fear for 200 years.


Small Business's Borrowing Lament
To the Editor:
"Wanted: An Investment-Led Recovery" (Forum, Nov. 10) suggests ways to use tax law changes to encourage investment.
A real problem for small businesses, which do a great deal of the investing for growth in this country, is their inability to take long-term advantage of today's low interest rates.


Sharing the Vision
Hollings C. Renton earned a reputation as a sound operations man after succeeding the mercurial Robert Fildes as president of the Cetus Corporation last year when the Food and Drug Administration turned thumbs down on the company's key drug.
Mr.
Renton then presided over efforts to sell the company and found a buyer last summer in the Chiron Corporation.
Now, as the merger of the two biotechnology companies nears completion, he has emerged as Chiron's new president and chief operating officer.
Last week's announcement was something of a surprise, since Mr.
Renton had been slated to join a four-man office of the chairman at Chiron.
That will now be a three-person office with the departure of the man he is succeeding: Gregory B. Lawless, president and chief operating officer since March 1989, who is leaving to pursue other opportunities.


A Car Phone Is Not a Prize in a Robbery
Gloria Yelling's car was stolen in New Hyde Park, L.I., Wednesday evening, and even before calling the police, she called the robber on her car phone.
And the robber answered.
He would return the car, the police said he told her, if she would bring $2,000 in cash to Veterans Plaza at Springfield Boulevard and Jamaica Avenue in Queens Village at 10:30 Friday morning.


Who the Rich Are and What They Should Pay; We Need Productivity
To the Editor:
We can all criticize our economy, but it's much more important to offer suggestions that will improve it.
In that vein, I offer these:


Miss Haiback Marries W. C. Clyne
Kimberly Jane Haiback, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert F. Haiback of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday to William Colomba Clyne, a son of Mrs.
William C. Clyne of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Dr.
Clyne.
The Rev.
Philip Stowell, an Episcopal priest, officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Sam Fayed, a Roman Catholic priest, at St.
Bartholomew's Church in White Plains.
Mrs.
Clyne, 30 years old, is a retail consultant with the New York office of Deloitte &amp; Touche, a management consulting firm in Wilton, Conn.
She graduated from Emory University and received an M.B.A. from Rutgers University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company in New York.


Making a Difference; The Winner in a Week of Tumult
In all the turmoil that I.B.M. has gone through in the past week, the clear winner is 46-year-old Robert J. LaBant, who was named to take over as vice president and general manager of the company's United States business.
The appointment was announced just a day before the International Business Machines Corporation said that it would cut another 20,000 positions in 1992, the latest in a series of work-force reductions.
At the same time, the company said it would decentralize its businesses so that they could respond more quickly to market conditions.


Kerry Stein Marries Jean M. Jackson
Jean M. Jackson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Jackson of Temple Hills, Md., was married yesterday to Kerry D. Stein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Stein of Hartsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel officiated at the Hudson River Club in the World Financial Center in New York.
Mrs.
Stein, 27 years old, is an assistant director of Barclays de Zoete Wedd, the New York government-securities arm of the London investment house.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.


U.S., Down 2-1, Is Left Wishing It Were April in Paris
He enters with a raised fist and departs blowing kisses, and as long as he is on the tennis court, the stadium is no longer an inanimate object: the bleachers roar, the glass doors steam over and a fever pitch prevails.
Henri Leconte, the curse of Paris after his 1988 French Open surrender to Mats Wilander, is currently the lion of Lyons.


Managing; Listening to Women and Blacks
TO stem disproportionately high turnover among women in sales, S C Johnson Wax rejiggered territories to reduce travel time, arranged for the women to give each other advice and gave them -- and other salespeople -- more autonomy to negotiate prices.
"They're staying because we made the jobs more doable and more interesting," said Gayle P. Kosterman, a vice president of human resources.
When Corning Inc. discovered that blacks were quitting at three times the rate of white men, it strengthened its career development and coaching programs and its appraisal systems, to insure that blacks get accurate feedback.
It even helped beauticians expert in black hair styles to set up shop in town and arranged for the local cable system to carry Black Entertainment Television.
"We made Corning the company and Corning the city more hospitable places," said Dawn M. Cross, director of cultural diversity, who says the turnover gap has narrowed.


Stamford Museum Offers Movie Palaces Real and Imagined
SOME people have all the fun -- like John Margolies, who gets to drive from one end of the country to the other, photographing 20th-century Americana.
Sponsored by foundations and individuals like Philip Johnson, Mr.
Margolies has been doing this since the mid-1970's, marking his forays with books and exhibitions.
The photographer's subject is popular architecture, but his pictures seldom if ever include people.
The effect, therefore, is of a civilization abandoned yet preserved, Pop bright in the morning sunshine.
The formula works equally well for hotels, diners, gas stations and miniature golf courses designed by Morris Lapidus, but it has never seemed more appropriate than in "Ticket to Paradise." This is the coast-to-coast survey of movie houses that is now at the Stamford Museum and Nature Center.


FAMILY ISN'T EVERYTHING
My husband and I have been married for eight years, and for eight years we, too, have weighed the pros and cons of having children.
We usually come up with more cons than pros, and so have remained childless -- a decision with which we are only now becoming cautiously comfortable.
Many of the mothers I know confide to me that, if they'd been able to look into a crystal ball before having children, they might have made a different choice.
The notion that everyone should have children is as simplistic as it is ill-advised.
So I'd like to thank Robin Henig for having the guts and intelligence to assert her own commitment to motherhood while at the same time acknowledging that a different life style "could be just as meaningful." ALICE L. TUFEL
Philadelphia


A Fitting Elegy To a Painter Dying Young
The case of Richard Parkes Bonington, who is the focus of a major exhibition here at the Yale Center for British Art, presents one of the great "what if's" in 19th-century art.
Who knows what the English-born, French-trained painter might have accomplished if he had lived beyond the age of 25?
All that can be said with certainty is that his death in 1828 ended a career of rare promise.
Whether in a small painting of the bed chamber of Henri IV of France, with its mastery of glazings and light effects, or in an atmospheric oil sketch of Lugano, in which distant mountains gently blend into billowing clouds, or in an image of an old man and a child that achieves in watercolor something of the somber dignity that Rembrandt conveyed in oils, Bonington was a consummate virtuoso.


Grady's Gift
GRADY SHOWED UP ONE DAY at our house at 1409 Fifth Avenue West in Birmingham, and by and by she changed the way I saw the world.
I was 7 when she came to iron and clean and cook for $18 a week, and she stayed for seven years.
During that time everyone in our family came to accept what my father called "those great long talks" that occupied Grady and me through many a sleepy Alabama afternoon.
What happened between us can be expressed in many ways, but its essence was captured by Graham Greene when he wrote that in every childhood there is a moment when a door opens and lets the future in.
So this is a story about one person who opened a door and another who walked through it.
It is difficult to describe -- or even to keep alive in our memories -- worlds that cease to exist.
Usually we think of vanished worlds as having to do with far-off places or with ways of life, like that of the Western frontier, that are remote from us in time.
But I grew up in a place that disappeared, and it was here in this country and not so long ago.
I speak of Birmingham, where once there flourished the most complete form of racial segregation to exist on the American continent in this century.


Kennedy Captures the City Title
KENNEDY 24, LEHMAN 14 -- Kennedy, led by the flashy running of Ed Gaines and Renaldo Pope and the strong kicking of Frank Nagy, captured its second Public Schools Athletic League title yesterday by defeating Lehman.
The contest was played in front of 2,000 fans in Wien Stadium in Upper Manhattan.
The Knights' first title came in 1984 when they defeated John Adams.
Kennedy (10-1) and Lehman (8-3) used four different backs in their offensive schemes and were able to run on each other at will.
But Kennedy's offense proved to be more resourceful than Lehman's, with the Knights turning more of their long drives into scores.
Despite the emphasis on running, it was a 33-yard pass from Kennedy's Gary Peroune to Giscard Bernard that put the game out of reach.
Wilfredo Vega then sealed the victory for Kennedy with his fourth interception of the season.


High-Tech Wood Rats Assist in Study of Species in New York
With a radio strapped to his chest, an antenna in one hand and a stopwatch in the other, Edwin McGowan listened intently to a steady beeping.
"That's 10 beeps in 12.19 seconds," he said.


Shoulder Problem May Sideline Elway
The effects of a bony abnormality in JOHN ELWAY'S throwing shoulder have left him questionable for the Broncos' game today game against the New England Patriots in Denver.
The quarterback said earlier this week that a sore shoulder made him pessimistic about starting today.
His status was downgraded yesterday from probable to questionable, and the final decision on whether he will play will be made by noon today, said BARRY HAWKINS, a Broncos spokesman.


Small Worlds in Three Museums
ARCTOPHILES ought to be among the happiest visitors to London.
Here is a city that offers lovers of bears, teddy bears to be more exact in this instance, three substantial opportunities to see some of the softest, sweetest and most sentimental images of Ursa Major ever devised by Homo sapiens.
All three of London's museums for children -- the Bethnal Green Museum of Childhood, Pollock's Toy Museum and the London Toy and Model Museum -- boast teddy bear collections along with their other holdings to satisfy the tastes of both young and old.
Children will, of course, likely be charmed and parents will probably be delighted with the change of pace and moved by the evocations of childhood.
Though these are great places to take the kids, one does not have to be a child to find immense satisfaction in them.
The only requirement for enjoyment is having been a child at some point.


Travel
Some years ago, I was assigned by a newspaper to cross the United States with a group of people traveling in house trailers.
Each night our caravan pulled into another trailer park.
Out came the camp chairs and, in the soft Ohio twilight -- or Indiana or Nebraska twilight -- the talk turned to trailer parks the travelers had known, the arcana of hitching and unhitching and the relative merits of theme parks, then a new cultural phenomenon.
Those trailer people ranged the continent, re-creating their little New Jersey backyards every night.
Sophisticated travelers?
No.
But their odyssey provided good copy day after day.


Christmas Outings Coast to Coast
IT'S December, and an amazing number of places throughout the land, from historic homes to entire communities, go all out to celebrate Christmas.
As recently as the 1970's, Christmas festivities at museums, gardens and town squares were more often than not modest, with a decorated tree, perhaps, and cookies and chocolate.
But this is 1991, an era of candlelight tours, historically correct tree decorations and champagne Christmas concerts.
Celebrations can merit a trip: More than 200,000 tiny lights illuminate the trees at Longwood Gardens, the magnificent outdoor estate in southern Pennsylvania, for example.
And at Biltmore, the 1895 Vanderbilt mansion in North Carolina, this year's decorations include over 10,000 feet of evergreen roping.
A feeling of tradition and continuity is prized at this time of year.
A history-steeped place like Colonial Williamsburg seems made to order.
Yet tradition can turn up in unexpected places, like, for instance, Southern California.
This is the 83d anniversary of the Newport Harbor illuminated boat parade, a weeklong pageant of more than 200 decorated boats of all kinds. (Never mind that it wasn't always held at Christmas.)


Manila Party Rejects Aquino Candidate
The biggest political party in the Philippines today chose Ramon Mitra, the Speaker of the lower house of Parliament, as its candidate in the presidential election next May, rejecting the former Defense Secretary, Fidel V. Ramos, the candidate quietly supported by President Corazon C. Aquino.
Mr.
Mitra's nomination put to rest speculation that the party, the Struggle of Democratic Filipinos coalition, might put forth the candidacy of Mrs.
Aquino herself in next year's election.


Deirdre Stanley Has Wedding
Deirdre Stanley, an associate at Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, and Ronald L. Christopher, an associate at Chadourne &amp; Parke, both New York law firms, were married yesterday in Huntsville, Ala.
The Rev.
Herbert Cartwright Jr. performed the ceremony at the First Missionary Baptist Church.
Mrs.
Stanley Christopher, 27 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thornton Stanley of Huntsville.
She graduated from Duke University and the Harvard University Law School and has a master of laws degree from the London School of Economics and Political Science.
Her father owns Stanley Enterprises, a construction and real-estate development concern in Huntsville.
Her mother, Dr.
Mary E. Stanley, is an associate professor of English at Alabama A &amp; M University in Huntsville.


Where the Yule Things Are; Christmas in Amherst
When The Book Review asked Maurice Sendak to create the drawings for many of the features in this holiday issue, we asked him, as has been our custom, to include an extra picture that others might interpret in stories or verse.
Mr.
Sendak has dedicated his drawings for this issue to Herman Melville, to commemorate the centenary of his death.
Some of our contributors chose to follow Mr.
Sendak's lead; others, in the spirit of Bartleby, preferred not to.


Dr. Kopeloff To Wed in May
Dr. and Mrs.
Arnold I. Kopeloff of Paramus, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Iris Hope Kopeloff, to Dr.
Michael Gabriel Rahmin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Rahmin of Woodmere, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Dr.
Kopeloff, 28 years old, is a dermatology resident at the New York University Medical Center.
She graduated summa cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a medical degree from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Her father is an endocrinologist in Paramus.


Shuttle Mission Is Cut Short After Guidance Unit Fails
NASA decided yesterday to cut short the planned 10-day military mission of the space shuttle Atlantis and land the winged spaceship as early as today after one of its three navigational units failed.
It is the first time this particular problem has struck a shuttle, and only the second time in the history of the shuttles that an orbiter equipment failure has forced an early return.
The first such return occurred a decade ago.


Condo Owners Sue, Demanding More Municipal Services
CONDOMINIUM owners in Naugatuck have joined forces to fight a town policy that denies them municipal services like garbage pickup and winter road clearing.
The battle could ultimately affect communities across the state.
The owners' associations have filed suit in United States District Court in Hartford over the issue, said an organizer of the effort, Jean F. Dobbin, who lives in the Country Club Estates complex.
Mrs.
Dobbin said condominium owners pay taxes at the same rate as owners of detached single-family houses, and they should get the same services.
She said the town would be universally condemned if it tried to deny services to another class of citizens, on the basis of race or religion, for instance.


For Profits, A New Peak In Bad News
When a customer has no effective choice, profit margins go up.
When choices arrive, those margins can suffer.
Last week brought big writeoffs at Philip Morris and I.B.M., both companies that seem to have been slow to recognize changes in their markets that were inevitably going to slash margins.


Camille R. Campbell Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Robert Campbell of Southampton, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Camille Rogers Campbell, to Count Joachim von Arnim, a son of Count Adolph-Heinrich von Arnim-Boitzenburg of Schlossborn, Germany, and Countess Maria von Arnim of Munich, Germany.
Miss Campbell is a fund raiser in the public affairs department of the New York Zoological Society.
She graduated from Denison University and was a member of the New York Junior Assembly.
Her father, who is retired, was president of the Personal Economics Group, a financial services company, in New York.


Italian Culture Is Reborn In a Loft in the Bronx
Which name embodies the spirit of the Italian Renaissance -- Marc, Dante or Lou?
All of them, and not a dead poet in the bunch.


E Stands for Elephant
MONDAY -- A rush of parties heralded Thanksgiving weekend.
A four-year-old elephant greeted guests as they entered Cartier's on Fifth Avenue for a cocktail party and preview of the store's new jewelry collection "The Spirit of India." It also honored Laura and John Pomerantz and the committees for the American Foundation for AIDS Research's Masquerade fund raiser on Dec. 5.
At Mortimer's, a cocktail party celebrated "David Hockney's Alphabet," a new book resulting from the artist's collaboration with 26 writers.
Proceeds from book sales will benefit the AIDS Crisis Trust in Britain and the AIDS Care Center at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


Despite Civil War, Croats and Slovenes Save Their America's Cup Entry
The story of what was to be Yugoslavia's first America's Cup campaign and the boat that carries that bid has endured more bizarre twists than a le Carre novel.
At first an apparent casualty of the fighting among ethnic groups in the Yugoslav republics, the country's cup challenge became an unexpected survivor when a 75-foot boat was recently transported by truck under the threat of gunfire from Slovenia to safe harbor in Italy.
The breakup this year of Yugoslavia's Communist regime created havoc with yachtsmen's plans to compete.
The Yugoslav civil war, which began last June, robbed the team of potential sailors, and caused arguments among others.


Big Diet Doctor Is Watching You Reaching for That Nice Gooey Cake
The soup was cold, the chicken was dry, and so, when the waiters appeared with a rich chocolate dessert, the guests at the charity dinner generally brightened.
An exception was Henry Burr, who stared at his dessert plate before turning to the woman on his right.
"That cake is talking to me," he told her.
"Me, too," the woman said. "It looks yummy."


Tools Need Attention Before Storage
THERE is nothing quite so final for any outdoor gardening season as putting tools away, though rakes should remain handy, just in case straggly leaves or twigs need to be cleaned off.
And if tools are put away properly, they will be ready to be put to work in spring.
Hand tools such as trowels and cultivators should be put away clean.
An excellent way to get them clean is to put them into an old box or bucket full of sand -- beach sand or whatever sand is handy.


Miss Howard, Student, Weds
Marjorie Ellen Howard, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Howard of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last night to Paul Michael Matchen, the son of Nancy Burger of White Plains.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs officiated at the Westchester Reform Temple in Scarsdale.
The couple, both 22 years old, attend Pace University, where she is studying nursing and he computer science.
Her father is a vice president and tax counsel at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in New York.
Her mother, Sheila Howard, is a psychiatric nurse at the Riverdale Mental Health Center in the Bronx.


Hearings Begin on the County Budget
WHITE PLAINS
COUNTY LEGISLATORS began the painful process last week of weighing a no-tax- increase budget proposed for next year by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke against the conflicting pressures of county employees faced with layoffs and reduced program subsidies.


Sincerely Yours
IF SINCERITY WERE SOMETHING HE COULD MARKET, NICK HILTON WOULD BE SURE TO HANG IT on a rack.
But Hilton, the designer and head of Hilton Clothes, an American manufacturer of men's wear, has done the next best thing.
The showpiece of his spring collection, which will reach most stores this month, is a three-button suit whose understated, un-self-conscious style suggests a certain candor.
"It's the sort of suit Humphrey Bogart might have worn," Hilton says.
"It is anything but dapper." "Dapper," as Hilton defines it, is a fitted suit that mimics the body's contours.
The look, he says, epitomized by Fred Astaire and the Prince of Wales in their flamboyant heydays, ought to live on in legend only.
Hilton points out that the low-key look of his suits -- with their subtly notched collars, moderately wide shoulders, roomy chests and soft, muted fabrics -- originated in the unpretentious, optimistic Truman era, "the last time in memory when American men truly felt like heroes." One of a handful of leading designers to have mined that period for both style and mood, Hilton drew inspiration from the well-thumbed pages of a 1949 Life magazine.
For his own spring collection, the designer Alexander Julian used old movies as a point of reference.
He cites "Sabrina," a 1954 classic in which Humphrey Bogart and William Holden wore suits that were elegant but, as Julian points out, never studied.


Yeltsin to Finance Soviet Payroll to Avert Bankruptcy
Faced with the imminent bankruptcy of the Soviet Government, President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic agreed today to finance the Soviet payroll for the immediate future and to guarantee sufficient credits to meet the minimal needs of the Kremlin.
The 11th-hour agreement was reached at a meeting of Mr.
Yeltsin and his top economic advisers with the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and the head of the Soviet State Bank.


Tar Heels Have Little Trouble
Hubert Davis scored 21 points and Derrick Phelps 20, and North Carolina used a 13-2 spurt in the second half this afternoon to secure a 98-88 victory over Towson State.
All five Tar Heel starters scored in double figures as North Carolina withstood 28 points by Towson State's Terrance Jacobs and 26 by Chuck Lightening.


Tools Need Attention Before Storage
THERE is nothing quite so final for any outdoor gardening season as putting tools away, though rakes should remain handy, just in case straggly leaves or twigs need to be cleaned off.
And if tools are put away properly, they will be ready to be put to work in spring.
Hand tools such as trowels and cultivators should be put away clean.
An excellent way to get them clean is to put them into an old box or bucket full of sand -- beach sand or whatever sand is handy.


Merrill Becker Weds Aaron Spicker
Merrill Sharon Becker, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin I. Becker of Cliffside Park, N.J., was married last evening to Aaron Jon Spicker, a son of Prof.
Stuart F. Spicker of Farmington, Conn., and Judith Spicker of West Hartford, Conn.
Cantor Kenneth Butensky officiated at Turnberry at Rillo's, a catering establishment in East Hanover, N.J.
Mrs.
Spicker, 27 years old, is an accountant at Robinson's, a Los Angeles department store group.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and has a master's degree in accounting from New York University.
Her father is a vice president and the chief accounting officer of the New York Power Authority.


THE HOUSE WE LIVED IN
Our family enjoyed reading Hafner's account of the Wallich family's attempts to recover its properties in East Germany.
The article mirrors my own family's efforts to reclaim our usurped properties.
While the details are different, many of the same patterns are present -- from the hostility of the present owners to the delay and bureaucratic ineptitude in processing claims to downright chicanery and deceipt in the privatization process.
It it understandable that the present owners of the properties should resent having to give up what they have had for the last 40 years.
However, these properties were usurped.
My grandfather's factories were simply taken over by the Communists, as was our family home, our grounds and private possessions -- the labor of generations in our family, all gone.
Those of us who were thrown out had to start our lives over in alien places, with only a toothbrush.


All About Eaves


Perspectives: Housing the Dependent; Times Square Hotel as the Biggest S.R.O.
METAMORPHOSIS is under way once again at the Times Square Hotel, on the northeast corner of 43d Street and Eighth Avenue.
It has housed tourists and the poor, transients and low-income workers, welfare tenants and the frail elderly.
It has had problems.
Now the partially occupied hotel is in the midst of reconstruction into a permanent residence for low-income single adults, including many dependent on a high level of social services.
With 652 rooms, it is more than three times larger than any other project financed by the city's S.R.O.
Loan Fund.
A $16.1 million rehabilitation is under way.
Completion is scheduled for November 1993, but new tenants should start arriving by next September.


Q and A
Right to New Windows Question: I am one of several tenants who chose not to buy when our building was converted to a co-op.
Recently the apartment owners were offered an opportunity to buy double-glazed windows through one source at a discount.
New windows are badly needed to block the cold and decrease street noise.
Some of the rental tenants asked to be allowed to buy new windows but have been refused.
As rent-stabilized tenants, do we have the right to be able to buy new windows? . . .
Brian Glasser, Manhattan


BEST SELLERS: December 1, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
8
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
2
2
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the lives and fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
3
3
7
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
4
4
15
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
5
11
2
THE SAPPHIRE ROSE, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in "The Elenium," a fantasy saga.
6
5
5
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing may help save others.
7
7
9
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
8
6
5
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $22.50.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide. (LP)
9
9
12
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
10
8
6
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $22.) A lawyer returns to her estranged family to attend a funeral.
11
10
6
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) A new volume in the science fiction series "The Dragonriders of Pern."
12
13
38
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
13
15
88
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
14
14
3
LILA, by Robert M. Pirsig. (Bantam, $22.50.) On a sailboat cruise down the Hudson with a woman companion, a philosopher reflects on the nature of our society.
15
12
4
REUNION, by Michael Jan Friedman. (Pocket, $19.) The U.S.S.
Enterprise crew undertakes to stop a war in outer space; a "Star Trek" novel.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
3
4
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
2
2
11
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
3
1
7
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
4
5
14
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces. (LP)
5
7
5
PRAIRYERTH, by William Least Heat-Moon. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A close look at the people and mores, past and present, of Chase County, Kansas.
6
8
5
THE NEW WORLD ORDER, by Pat Robertson. (Word Publishing, $17.99.) A clergyman discusses the significance of global changes.
7
6
4
CHILDHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Putnam, $14.95.) The entertainer recalls his boyhood and reflects on the ways of today's kids.
8
10
24
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
9
12
54
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
10
11
3
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene by the Texas journalist.
11
9
7
CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) The ordeal of a North Carolina woman whose son was accused of planning the murder of herself and her husband.
12
28
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
13
4
4
DANCE WHILE YOU CAN, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress examines her feelings about relationships, aging and the future.
14
13
2
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media, the fashion and beauty industries and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
15
15
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
16
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness.
2
2
55
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
3
5
2
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Financial advice.
4 *
4
THE CARBOHYDRATE ADDICT'S DIET, by Rachael F. Heller and Richard F. Heller. (Dutton, $19.95.) Ways to cope with an addiction to carbohydrate-rich food.
5
4
38
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
6 *
3
96
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) Illustrated games.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
PASSAGE: A Work Record, by Irving Penn. (Callaway/Knopf, $100.) This beautifully produced book, the most complete and successful collection of Mr.
Penn's photography to date, embraces and honors a career vast in scope and more than 50 years long.
NIXON.
Volume Three: Ruin and Recovery, 1973-1990, by Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) From Mr.
Nixon triumphant after his landslide re-election, through disgrace and resignation to Mr.
Nixon redivivus as a foreign-policy wise man, Mr.
Ambrose fairly and steadily lays out the basic record.
WILDERNESS TIPS, by Margaret Atwood. (Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday, $20.) Most of the stories in Ms.
Atwood's third volume of short fiction uncannily superimpose past and present, trying to fill the gaps of lives made mysterious by missing information.
REBUILDING RUSSIA: Reflections and Tentative Proposals, by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $14.95.) This sometimes breathless essay suggests introducing democracy at the village level, with no secret ballot and no encysted minorities.
MALCOLM: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black America, by Bruce Perry. (Station Hill, $24.95.) Mr.
Perry places the man beside the myth -- including his autobiography -- to portray a figure who is still a compelling presence in black political life.
THE WEIGHT OF WINTER, by Cathie Pelletier. (Viking, $22.95.) Ms.
Pelletier's Maine natives live out ancient patterns and pay for the sins of their ancestors in her third snowbound novel.
THE DEVIL'S CANDY: "The Bonfire of the Vanities" Goes to Hollywood, by Julie Salamon. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) The film critic for The Wall Street Journal tells the story of a $50 million dog, bred and raised by experts in many arts and skills.


Gardening
I here confess that when I first heard a few years ago that Martha Stewart was writing MARTHA STEWART'S GARDENING: Month by Month (photographs by Elizabeth Zeschin, 360 pp., Clarkson Potter, $50), I reserved the option just to ignore it as one more in the long list of books on gardening best ignored.
Ms.
Stewart has made a successful career out of telling uncertain souls how to entertain or to stage a wedding without making fools of themselves.
But a party or a wedding do not outlast their own occasions, and a garden stretches far into both past and future.
I suspected that Ms.
Stewart's book on gardening would be beautifully illustrated but empty at the core.
Prejudice can be more fun than fairness, but truth has not been abolished as a virtue yet.
The truth about "Martha Stewart's Gardening: Month by Month" is that it is the real thing: a helpful, sensible, authentic guide to the chores and the joys of a gardener's life, written by someone who doesn't mind if her hands get dirty.
Ms.
Stewart writes with the authority that is won by long experience.
She also writes simply and clearly.
Her book, which met my expectations by being beautifully illustrated, has as its natural audience the large and increasing number of people in America who garden and who are interested in learning how to garden really well.


RECORD BRIEFS
Various artists: 'Two Rooms: Celebrating the Songs of Elton John and Bernie Taupin'
Polydor 845 750-2; all three formats.


Super Bowl Loss Raises Bills' Sights
Buffalo lost to the Giants in Super Bowl XXV when Scott Norwood missed a field goal.
There were no guarantees that either team would return to the Super Bowl the following year, but judging from the season and the closeness of the game, it looked as if both teams had the makings for a repeat.
With the playoffs fast approaching, it looks as if Buffalo (10-2), which can wrap up the American Conference East division title with a victory over the Jets today, has a better chance of getting back to the Super Bowl, than the Giants (7-5), who are fighting for a wild card into the playoffs.


Three 'Storytellers' Paint One Portrait Of the New York Scene
Garth Fagan's griot is a restless soul.
In Africa a griot is the keeper of the oral history of a people, which is passed along through poetry, song and dance.
In the choreographer's "Griot New York," to be performed Wednesday through Saturday as the concluding production of the Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the storytelling is accelerated.


Builders Betting on Riverboat Gambling
Betting people in the real estate community here think the odds are excellent that riverboat gambling, approved by the State Legislature in July, will spur development along the Mississippi River waterfront downtown.
The law stipulated that construction of the boats could not begin until January 1992, and the first boats are not expected to begin operating until late in 1993.
Nevertheless, real estate brokers and developers already have begun to prepare for what they think will be a daily influx of thousands of visitors.


Studying Crafts On Ecuador Tour
The rich art treasures and colorful handcrafts of Ecuador will be the focus of a one-week tour to Quito and other Ecuadorean market cities sponsored by the Craft and Folk Art Museum of Los Angeles.
The trip, starting next Feb. 25, begins with a stay in Quito, where La Compania de Jesus Church, renowned for its gold leaf decorations, is on the sightseeing itinerary along with nearby artisans' workshops in Calderon and San Antonio de Ibarra.
The tour also goes to Otavalo, known for its woolen goods, ponchos and jewelry, to market communities in the Latacunga-Ambato Valley, to the weaving center of Salasca and ceramic manufacturers at La Victoria.
The cost of $1,985 a person, double occupancy, includes air fare, accommodations, transportation, meals, escorts and lectures.
An optional five-day cruise to the Galapagos Islands is offered as an extension to the museum's Ecuador program.
The cruise cost of $1,200 a person includes additional air fare and all meals.
More information: Craft and Folk Art Museum, (213) 937-5544.


Correction
An article on Nov. 17 about Sam Waterston misstated the location of Groton School.
It is in Massachusetts.


Unwelcome Back
Many Cambodians who lost loved ones during the bloody regime of the Khmer Rouge in the 1970's were on hand last week to greet Khieu Samphan, a senior Khmer Rouge official who returned to Phnom Penh to take part in United Nations-sponsored peace talks.
The angry mob cursed him, beat him and very nearly strung him up from a ceiling fan before soldiers and police came to his rescue.
Mr.
Khieu Samphan, the chief negotiator for the Communist guerrilla group in talks aimed at ending the country's most recent civil war, was immediately hustled back to Thailand, where he has been in exile since Vietnam invaded and drove the Khmer Rouge out of power in 1978.
Some diplomats expressed fear that the incident, in which Mr.
Khieu Samphan did not appear to be seriously hurt, might jeopardize coming free elections in which the Khmer Rouge will be allowed to participate.
Cambodian leaders and U.N. officials are to meet this week in Bangkok to discuss the situation.


Movie Palaces in Stamford Exhibit
SOME people have all the fun like John Margolies, who gets to drive from one end of the country to the other, photographing 20th-century Americana.
Sponsored by foundations and individuals like Philip Johnson, Mr.
Margolies has been doing this since the mid-1970's, marking his forays with books and exhibitions.
The photographer's subject is popular architecture, but his pictures seldom if ever include people.
The effect, therefore, is of a civilization abandoned yet preserved, Pop bright in the morning sunshine.
The formula works equally well for hotels, diners, gas stations and miniature golf courses designed by Morris Lapidus, but it has never seemed more appropriate than in "Ticket to Paradise." This is the coast-to-coast survey of movie houses that is now at the Stamford Museum and Nature Center.


Monica Scharf To Wed in April
Evans and Linda Scharf of Stamford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Monica Bonnie Scharf, to Christopher George DeMoulin, a son of Raymond H. DeMoulin of Camden, Me., and Kathryn S. DeMoulin of Mountain View, Calif.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Scharf, 25 years old, is an account executive at DDB Needham Worldwide in New York.
She graduated from the University of Connecticut.
Her parents own Judlind Associates, an employment service in Stamford.


Miss Runnels Is to Marry in May
Winifred Trimble Carter and Clive Runnells, both of Houston, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Helen Rutherford Runnells, to Raymond Francis DuBois Jr., the son of Rear Admiral DuBois, U.S.N., retired, and Mrs.
DuBois of McLean, Va.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Runnells, 35 years old, is the coordinator of the fisheries program at the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation in Washington.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a businessman with interests in ranching and cable television.


Sports Authority Draws Criticism On Bond Proposal
A PLAN by the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority to ask the state to issue $416 million in bonds to build a convention center in Atlantic City, upgrade Rutgers University's football stadium and pay off millions of dollars of authority debt is drawing harsh criticism from legislators, taxpayer groups and local officials.
Critics see the plan as an attempt to have taxpayers subsidize the 20-year-old authority, which has been suffering from declining revenue at the Meadowlands Racetrack, its chief moneymaking operation.
Others say the plan is a move by authority officials to expand the authority's operations.
The expansion is unnecessary and ill advised, they say, in light of the state's precarious financial condition and the potential for a $1 billion deficit in next year's budget.


Reality Comes With the Popcorn
As Macaulay Culkin entered a theater for a preview of his new film, "My Girl," an "Entertainment Tonight" reporter asked the 11-year-old a very adult question.
Should children see a film in which the beloved Macaulay Culkin dies?
His predictable answer was yes, but his reason unusually commonsensical.
"They ought to know it's a movie," he said with a shrug, as if only a grown-up could possibly have asked such a dimwitted question.
Macaulay Culkin's is not an objective opinion, but his unaffected answer explains a lot about the popularity of the "Home Alone" hero: he reflects the attitudes of savvy 90's children.
Inside that theater, though, parents and children might have squirmed and sniffled at the funeral scene, the most upsetting in this dark, sentimental comedy about a girl's coming-of-age and her best friend's death.
The Culkin character, Thomas J., was allergic to bees.
He is laid out in his coffin with bee stings covering his dead little face.
His friend, an 11-year-old named Vada (Anna Chlumsky), throws herself on the coffin, crying and wailing: "Where are his glasses? He can't see without his glasses."


Japan and the U.S. Share an Uneasy Artistic Peace
From the bombing of Pearl Harbor to the purchase of Rockefeller Center, the relationship between the United States and Japan has been burdened with seminal moments.
But one of the most revealing encounters took place not during combat or in a boardroom but on film.
The moment came in Ron Howard's 1986 movie, "Gung Ho," in which a Japanese car maker reopens an abandoned American plant.
The Americans, unable to impress their Japanese employers, offer a deal: they will match the production record of their Japanese counterparts to keep the plant open.
As they fairly kill themselves just to stay even, it becomes clear that nothing short of chicanery will help.
Their shop steward confronts the austere company president, trying to make up for the missing cars with sheer enthusiasm.


Who the Rich Are and What They Should Pay
To the Editor:
Gideon Fountain, criticizing the slogan "tax the rich" (letter, Nov. 17), asks what income level defines rich, "so we can all laugh."


Mystery Object Is Just Asteroid
A mysterious object that was discovered this month hurtling toward Earth has turned out to be a tiny asteroid.
Only 30 feet in diameter, it is one of the smallest asteroids ever detected, Prof.
Tom Gehrels, a prominent planetary scientist at the University of Arizona, said Friday.


Reservations
To the Editor: In connection with "guaranteed" hotel reservations, I would like to relate an experience with a different twist.
I made reservations at the Marriott Inn at the Toronto Airport for two nights on a weekend in June 1990.
I guaranteed the room for late arrival on my American Express card.
I didn't arrive until 6 A.M., but found my room was not available.
I was immediately given a letter which provided a room (at no cost) at an adjacent motel.
Later that day I registered at the Marriott for the following night and attended a conference there.
On checking out the next day I pointed out to the cashier that the only charge on my bill was for my room service breakfast.
He replied that since I had been turned away one night, I rode for free the next.
I paid my bill without further protest.
RICHARD T. TURNER Cincinnati


Rural China Reaps Fruits of Capitalism
The nice thing about being a young man in this hamlet of 153 people -- or so they say here -- is that it's pretty easy to find a wife.
What young woman in these hardscrabble hills wouldn't want to move into one of the new brick houses here in Xiongjia, get water from a tap, even one tap that serves the entire village, and dine on such delicacies as stir-fried dog, instead of having to eat cabbage in a mud hut?


Topics of The Times; Where Customers Count
Manhattan grocery shoppers who venture into suburban supermarkets are surprised to find that it's possible to buy food without enduring narrow aisles, overcrowded shelves, long lines and surly clerks.
Lately, they've also discovered some up-to-date improvements that city stores might emulate.
On the handle of each new shopping cart at, for instance, Acme supermarket in Chestertown, Md., and Wegman's in Ithaca, N.Y., is a solar calculator.
It can be used, the Acme shopper is advised, to "estimate purchases, deduct coupons, compare values." It's a neat way to prevent embarrassment at the check-out counter when appetite exceeds cash.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The raised hearth in front of my fireplace is made of masonry that has never been sealed.
Candle wax has dripped on the masonry and left several stains.
How can I remove the stains, and how can the hearth be treated to prevent future problems of this kind?
A.
The candle wax has apparently soaked in.
You will have to soften or liquefy it and then draw it out.
One way to do thaat is to cover the stains with dry powdered cement and then pour a solvent like paint thinner to saturate the powder.
Cover with a piece of plastic kitchen wrap for a couple of hours, and then sweep up or remove the powder.
Another way is to warm the concrete with mild heat, like that from a hair dryer, to melt the wax.
Promptly cover the area with powdered cement and apply more heat while the absorbent powder draws out the melted wax.
To minimize the chances of staining recurring, apply two coats of a clear masonry sealer.


Miss Friedberg To Wed in May
Dr. and Mrs.
Eugene A. Friedberg of Alpine, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alanna Dawn Friedberg, to Greg M. Stephen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip L. Stephen of Woodmere, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Friedberg, 26 years old, graduated from American University, as did her fiance.
She is a real-estate broker with Lenk-Friedberg Properties in Englewood Cliffs and Cresskill, N.J.
Her mother, Marlyn Soss Friedberg, is the president and a founder of the company.
The bride's father is a psychiatrist in Englewood, N.J., and an assistant clinical professor at Columbia University.


Mutual Funds; Picking a Path in the Rate Fall
As the Federal Reserve has cut rates sharply this year, the results have varied widely in three types of money-market funds: taxable funds; United States Government funds, which are exempt from state taxes, and tax-exempt money funds, which are exempt from Federal taxes and in some cases state and local taxes as well.
Since March, the yields on taxable money funds have fallen twice as far as yields on tax-exempts -- to a level where they offer very little more than a United States Government fund.
On the other hand, the tax-exempts took a big tumble several months ago, while the other two categories have moved down in more sedate steps.


Susan Altsher Has Wedding
Susan Altsher, the business manager for Modern Bride magazine in New York, was married last evening to Hugh Garris Jasne, an assistant district attorney in the Bronx.
Rabbi David L. Jacobs officiated at Temple Shalom in Milton, Mass.
Mrs.
Jasne graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray I. Altsher of Milton.
Her father is a senior partner in the accounting firm of Landa &amp; Altsher in Randolph, Mass.
The bridegroom, known as Garry, graduated from New York University and received a law degree from New York Law School.
He is the son of Adeline Garris Jasne of White Plains and the late Jouis J. Jasne.
His father was a lawyer and accountant in New York.


Up From Millinery
SIMPLY HALSTON
The Untold Story.
By Steven Gaines.
Illustrated. 320 pp.
New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons. $22.95.


Israelis Say U.N. Might Reverse Zionism Vote
For Israeli leaders, progress in the Middle East peace negotiations that are about to resume could offer a dividend that is not discussed much openly: a chance to repeal the 1975 United Nations resolution equating Zionism with racism.
Efforts to undo an action considered repugnant by Israel and its supporters have been tied to the peace process by Egypt and Syria, both of which say the Israelis must first prove that they are bargaining in good faith with their Arab neighbors.


Ms. Dubin to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Dubin of Great Neck, L.I., have announced April wedding plans for their daughter, Madeline Sue Dubin, and Dr.
Leslie Elliot Strong, a son of Esther Strong of Brooklyn and the late Dr.
Nathan Strong.
Ms.
Dubin is a senior speech pathologist at Methodist Hospital in Brooklyn.
Dr.
Strong is a surgeon in New York.


Protecting Against Shock
FOR safety and to satisfy virtually all electric codes, ordinary receptacles, or outlets, in damp or potentially damp locations, including kitchens, bathrooms, basements and garages, should be protected by ground-fault circuit interrupters.
The device interrupts power to a circuit, protecting against shock, when it detects a leak in the flow of electricity, as when a faulty appliance or cord touches a wet floor.


Do I Hear $28 Million?
The Mets said yesterday that they had amended their multimillion-dollar offer to free agent Bobby Bonilla and withdrawn a lesser offer to a second free agent, pitcher Rick Sutcliffe.
The team's spokesman, Jay Horwitz, would not characterize the change in the Bonilla offer, but it presumably improved the five-year, $25 million deal the Mets offered to the 28-year-old Pirate outfielder a week ago.


What the Cover Story Said
To the Editor:
As an assistant managing editor of Fortune magazine, I must respond to Ellen Goodman's review of "Backlash" by Susan Faludi (Oct. 27).
Ms.
Goodman cites an "infamous" cover story in Fortune that, she says, pinned its conclusion that women were bailing out of the corporate work force on a single solid fact -- that 30 percent of women M.B.A.'s from the Harvard Business School class of 1976 listed themselves as self-employed, unemployed or without an occupation.
Ms.
Goodman goes on to say that we "didn't mention that 21 percent of the men also listed themselves as self-employed or unemployed."


Business Diary/November 24-29
ECONOMY At I.B.M., Decentralization or Fragmentation?


Nostalgia With a Look That's Now
Anna Sui's inspiration may come from a Balenciaga suit in an old magazine, from a Barbie doll's traveling costume, from a photograph of Lady Diana Cooper working in her garden or from a length of vintage fabric.
Then her imagination soars.
The Balenciaga suit ends up with raffia fringe and ruffled shorts.
Barbie's straw hat and cork-soled sandals become accessories for striped denim sportswear, along with Lady Diana's gardening gloves and a mammoth bumblebee pin.
The vintage fabric, a bold print from the 1960's, leads to a revival of palazzo pants.


Data Bank/December 1, 1991
New Orders for Durable Goods
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Monthly percent change
3.0
-4.2
-4.1
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.4
0.5
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
-0.3
0.7
-0.1
Weekly Jobless Claims
Nov. 22
Nov. 15
Nov. 8
In thousands
413
493
454
3-Month Treasury Bills
Nov. 29
Nov. 22
Nov. 15
Rate in percent
4.36
4.43
4.57
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
4.40
4.51
4.60
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
7.93
7.97
7.81
Municipal Bonds
Yield in percent (Bond Buyer Index)
6.90
6.90
6.81


Rescuing Michael's Teeth
"
Ahora, abre tu boca, Michael, como el dinosaureo.
"
The dental hygienist wants Michael to open his mouth wide, just like the gaping toy dinosaur she's wiggling.
This is no ordinary dentist's office.
It's a clinic on wheels, and every week it comes to Washington Heights on a rescue mission aided by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Shaky but Resolute, France Is Gambling on European Unity
Troubled by doubts at home and shaken by its loss of influence abroad, France is gambling that it can find a new role for itself in a strong united Europe that can both compete with the United States and Japan and control Germany's expanding might.
More than any other member of the 12-nation European Community, France has emerged as the driving force behind the campaign for greater economic and political unity, which will be the focus of discussion when European leaders meet on Dec. 9 and 10 in the Dutch city of Maastricht.


Emily Haft Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Haft of Old Westbury, L.I., have announced April wedding plans for their daughter, Emily S. Haft, and Donald S. Bloom, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
D.
Dudley Bloom of Penn Valley, Pa.
Miss Haft, 28 years old, is a bond trader at CS First Boston in New York.
She graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y.
Mr.
Bloom, 34, is an equities trader at Sanford C. Bernstein in New York.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.


CAMPUS LIFE: Iowa State; School Collecting Royalty Payments On Fax Machines
After a yearlong letter-writing campaign, Iowa State University is starting to collect royalties on a facsimile machine patent it has had since 1973.
More than $800,000 has been collected since the university's Research Foundation sent letters to 76 companies in October 1990, said Steven Price, director of the Iowa State University Research Foundation.
The school contended that the fax manufacturers were using technology that was patented by a former Iowa State doctoral student.


THE REGION/Q.&amp; A.: Jeffries and Beyond; Turmoil and Tradition At City College
DR.
BERNARD HARLESTON, a soft-spoken experimental psychologist, has been president of the City University of New York's City College campus for 10 1/2 years.
It has been a time of controversy for the college, founded in 1847 and famous both for its eight Nobel laureates and its volatile politics.
With 14,000 students, it is the nation's largest producer of black and Hispanic engineers and among the half-dozen greatest sources of black medical school students.
But it has presented Dr.
Harleston with thorny challenges, most recently the turmoil surrounding Dr.
Leonard Jeffries, chairman of the black studies department, who has charged that Jews helped finance the slave trade and joined with the Mafia to portray blacks in a demeaning way in the movies, and Dr.
Michael Levin, a philosophy professor who contends that blacks are, on average, less intelligent than whites.
In an interview, the 61-year-old Dr.
Harleston reflected on how City College has changed and how the most recent Jeffries flareup has affected the college.
He also discussed how budget cuts are chipping away at a school long known as the "Harvard of the poor."
Q. What kind of place is City College today?


Contract Bridge Event Nears Autumn Finals
The American Contract Bridge League's Fall National Championships neared the finishing line here today with 21 teams surviving to compete in the semifinal stage of the Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams.
The field will be cut to 10 at the end of the day.
A father-and-son combination headed the qualifying standings.
Mike Cappelletti Sr. of Alexandria, Va. and Mike Cappelletti Jr. of Knoxville, Tenn. were teamed with Lawrence Hicks of New Westminster, British Columbia, and Rob Crawford of Vancouver, British Columbia.
Close behind them were the defending champions, Edgar Kaplan and Brian Glubok, both of Manhattan, Norman Kay of Narberth, Pa., Bill Root of Boca Raton, Fla., and Richard Pavlicek Sr. of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


After Thanksgiving, Cranberries Linger
THANKSGIVING is over, but that's no reason to stop using cranberries.
Bags of cranberries will continue to be on supermarket shelves for a few weeks.
And there are dozens of dishes, beyond condiments for turkey, in which cranberries can be used.
The tart berries cook quickly in a little liquid.
Their astringency makes them an excellent foil for fish and rich game meats.
They can be added to pan juices at the last minute.
Cranberries are good to include in vegetable dishes, especially those made with beets, carrots, winter squash or onions, all of which have a good amount of natural sweetness to contrast with the cranberries.
Still, it may be necessary to add a little sugar, honey or other sweetening to counteract their tartness.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Clifton 155,000
12 Windsor Road
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old Tudor; full basement, large rooms, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,239.
Freehold 119,000
15 Irving Court
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old condominium town house; 1-car garage, den, c/a; monthly maintenance $92; taxes $2,600.
Howell 160,000
51 Sweet Gum Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, c/a, family room, deck, w/w carpeting; taxes $4,636.
Jackson 135,900
10 Partree Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 15-year-old split level; den, c/a, 1-car garage, fireplace, pool; taxes $3,578.
Marlboro 165,000
30 Amhurst Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; fireplace, den, c/a, deck, family room; taxes $3,333.
Maywood 145,000
159 Fairmount Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 62-year-old colonial; large rear yard, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,589.
OTHER AREAS Branford, Conn. 219,250
14 Waterside Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 130-year-old colonial; large screened porch, pine floors, water views; taxes $2,112.
New Rochelle, N.Y. 265,000
14 Farragut Circle  5-bedroom, 2 full- and 2 half-bath, 31-year-old Cape Cod colonial; fireplace, screened porch, breakfast room; taxes $5,551.
Syosset, L.I. 160,000
44 Candy Lane
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, skylights, carport; taxes $2,200.


TV's Beginning to Look A Lot Like Christmas
Yes, Virginia, there is a Santa Claus, at least on TV.
In fact, this month it's hard for a channel-hopper to miss him.
Here is just a sampling of holiday programming, old and new, in the coming weeks.
New Programs
"Yes, Virginia, There Is a Santa Claus." Charles Bronson portrays Frank P. Church, a reporter assigned the task of responding to a child's query.
Also starring Edward Asner, Richard Thomas and Katharine Isobel. (ABC, Dec. 8 at 9 P.M.)


Tech Notes; Washing Out the Leftover Land Mines
Wars are messy affairs, leaving a lot of explosive materials behind them.
But Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, N.M., thinks it may have an answer: high-pressure water jets to uncover and destroy mines in places like Kuwait.
Sandia would mount a pump on a lightly armored truck equipped with a tank of water, salt or fresh.
The truck could be operated by remote control.


Help in Spain
To the Editor: Several articles and letters warning tourists to beware of thieves while traveling in Spain have appeared in The Times recently.
Here's a story with a different angle.
After motoring around Spain and Portugal without incident for 22 days, my husband and I stopped overnight in Salamanca last month before returning to Madrid.
When we arrived in Madrid, my husband discovered he no longer had his passport.
The concierge called the hotel in Salamanca and learned that the receptionist still had the passport.
Unfortunately, he had neglected to return it to my husband after the customary check.


Town's 'Crop' Is Marijuana, Wild and Free
Cannabis sativa has grown for decades along the South Branch of the Potomac River in and around this one-stoplight town.
Called hemp when it was planted here during World War I for the purpose of making rope, the resilient plant flourished long after cultivation ended.
To local residents, like Randall Dyke, it was just another weed.


CHINA: The End of the Golden Road
A SENIOR GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL WAS TRYING TO GET HIS grandson into one of Beijing's best elementary schools.
First, he arranged for a friend who lived near the school to claim that she was the boy's aunt and that the child was living in her home, which was within the school district.
But this was not enough.
The principal demanded a "fee" equivalent to $400, but the official happened to be relatively honest and did not have that much money.
"Well, you've got an important job," the principal said.
"Get us a van." The official, being only relatively honest, agreed.
He figured he could use his
guanxi,
or connections, to get a van assigned to the school.
But the van could not be delivered by the first day of school, and the principal refused to accept a promise that it would arrive soon.
The grandson was turned away.
The school could afford to be choosy, for it was overwhelmed with other bribes, including a $4,000 gift from a cashmere factory (plus cashmere sweaters for all the teachers) in exchange for enrolling 10 of the factory employees' children.


Dollar Up In Europe
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
129.99
129.37
132.55
per Dollar
W.German Mark
1.6354
1.5845
1.4965
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1342
1.1391
1.1649
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7682
1.7935
1.9435
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$367.50
$368.50
$382.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


17 Die and 150 Are Hurt as Dust Storm Causes Highway Pileup


Lessons for Living, From the Lapsed Town of Mayberry
Michael A. Chambers used to spank his 7-year-old son.
But a year ago he changed his way of thinking as he watched reruns of his favorite program, "The Andy Griffith Show." "I saw that the character played by Andy Griffith never laid a hand on his boy but talked through their problems," he said.
"It made me realize that there was a better way." Mr.
Chambers, a 32-year-old graphics designer from Houston, is not the only fan who says he has gotten more than laughs from the show about the cozy Southern hamlet of Mayberry.
Among the roughly 5 million people who visit Sheriff Andy Taylor, his son Opie and Aunt Bee each day are parents who use the show to teach values, ministers who quote it in Sunday sermons and other viewers who use it as a moral compass in a sometimes frightening modern world.
"It's like religion to a lot of people," said James Clark, founder of the Andy Griffith Show Rerun Watchers Club, which he says has 20,000 members.
"Andy's very wise, he's the Solomon, the Abe Lincoln of Mayberry. And so many of us in real life will ask: 'What would Andy do? How would he handle this situation?' "


Social Events
A Film for the Forests
Dec. 3 -- A screening of "At Play in the Fields of the Lord," based on Peter Matthiessen's novel and starring Tom Berenger, John Lithgow and Daryl Hannah, will benefit the Rainforest Action Network.
The film, at 7:30 P.M., will be preceded by a 6 P.M. champagne reception.
At the Beekman Theater, 1254 Second Avenue (65th Street).
Tickets, $100, including an autographed copy of the book, or $50 for the movie alone, from (800) 989-7246.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; Creating an 'Architect' to Catch Research Pirates
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes.
Sacheverell Mongoose
Q.
What do you know about the life and work of Sacheverell Mongoose, to whom the 1978 A.I.A.
Guide to New York City attributes the rowhouses at the northwest corner of 84th Street and Madison Avenue? . . .
Prof.
David Bady, director, the City and the Humanities Program, City University of New York.
A.
The late Elliott Willensky, co-author of the guide, said about 10 years ago that the name was a fiction, inserted in the second edition to catch those who pirated its research -- of whom there were many.
In fact, this unusual row of buildings was designed in 1891 by John H. Duncan, who had won the competition for Grant's Tomb three years before.
These houses seem to combine elements of Greek, prairie and Renaissance styling.
There were originally six houses with an apartment house at the north end of the row.
In 1977 the Landmarks Preservation Commission proposed a Metropolitan Museum Historic District that included all six houses, but the northern three were exempted from designation because a developer, John J. Avlon, protested.
About eight years later they were replaced by the present apartment tower at 30 East 85th Street.
The current edition of the A.I.A.
Guide correctly credits the remaining houses.
No one seems to have appropriated the misleading Mongoose attribution.
The 'Chateau' on West End
Q.
What is the unusual building on the west side of West End Avenue, between 72d and 73d Streets?
It looks like a chateau, but has been very changed at the top. . . .
Richard Giglio, Manhattan.
A.
The limestone town house at 266 West End Avenue was built in 1896 for the family of Julius N. Jaros, an importer who occupied it only through 1906.
It appears that the peaked tile roof was removed to add a modernistic fifth floor in a 1944 alteration by the architect Harry Hurwit.
By that time it had already been converted into a multiple dwelling.
York Avenue History
Q.
My family owned a building at 1335 York Avenue for 100 years beginning in the 1860's.
When was it built? . . .
Charlotte Healy Whalen, Massapequa, L.I.
A.
William Glass bought the land in 1868 and the two-story brick house shows up on yearly property tax records for the first time in 1869, suggesting that your family may have built it.
But no Glasses occupied the house until 1883, when the widowed Margaret Glass is first listed there.
The 1890 census records 13 occupants at that address: Margaret Glass and two children, five members of the Varcasia family and five members of the Bissinger family.
Some of these probably occupied a building that stood at the rear of the lot.
A 1940 photograph shows the house with an awning reading Healy's Dining Room.
The Glass family -- by this time including Healy relatives -- sold the building to make way for the Mary Manning Walsh Home in 1966.
East 87th Brownstones
Q.
The south side of my block, East 87th Street between York and East End Avenues, is built up with brownstones, the north side with small apartment houses.
I have heard the plan was for the poorer people on the north side to serve the richer people on the south side.
True? . . .
Howard Davis, Manhattan.
A.
The brownstone rowhouses on the south side were all built between 1871 and 1875; the buildings on the north side were built in 1891 to 1893 as "flats" -- midway between tenements and luxury apartment houses.
All were built by different groups of professional developers and it is unlikely that there was any link between the two building episodes: The ideal of the 19th-century private householder was to live on a street restricted to like dwellings.
The shift in developers' choices in what to build also represents a change in the housing market in the area.
After the Civil War, Beekman Place, Sutton Place and East End Avenue were attractive locales for rowhouse construction.
But towards the end of the century they declined, in part because of the increasing age of their housing stock, in part because of the industrialization of such waterfront areas.
Land for flat and tenement construction usually brought lower prices than land suitable for private house construction.
During the revival of these areas after World War I the most attractive were those with a large existing private house stock.
Mount Morris Sanitorium
Q.
I was born in Harlem in the "Mount Morris Park Sanitorium" on Aug. 26, 1925.
Where was it? . . .
Janice Stern, West Hartford, Conn.
A.
The seven-story building was built in 1923 at the southwest corner of 121st Street and Mount Morris Park West (now Nathan L. Davis Place) by Hermann Reichmann, whose "Hydropathic Institute" was across the park on Madison Avenue.
Jeffrey Roualt, a neighborhood resident, said the building was once one of the few hospitals where black doctors could serve their residency.
It is now a women's prison.


In With the Old-Cum-New
Accessories can make a new dress out of an old one, a transformation that's welcome during the holidays when money may be tight and shopping time scarce.
Scarfs are one way to do it.
As Audrey Weaver, a scarf designer in New York, says, "They create an air of softness and femininity." Draping them over the shoulders or around the neck creates a different neckline for the "little black dress" or gives a romantic look to the sexy strapless number.
They can also be worn as a head wrap, camisole or around the waist of a cat suit.


All About/Marketing Travel to Kids; Younger Set Leads the Way on the Road
The right strategy for attracting the family vacation business used to be pretty obvious: Get the adults, and the kids will follow.
Not anymore.
These days, airlines, cruise ships and hotels are all wooing children directly.
They're giving them backpacks, playing cards and other items to take home.
They are sending them birthday cards and newsletters and enrolling them in clubs.
They are even advertising on Saturday morning television shows.


THE TOWN THAT CAN'T SIT STILL
Your article on Boulder was a real enticement to those who are into bungee jumping, rock climbing and rappelling.
But what about people like us who are heading that way because -- in addition to being a mecca for daredevils and a place of spectacular beauty -- it is one of the strongest fine arts centers in the country?


Marking Arrival Of Hanukkah
To mark the arrival of Hanukkah, the world's largest menorah will be lighted this evening, as it has been for more than a decade, by the Lubavitch Youth Organization at Fifth Avenue and 59th Street in Manhattan.
The 4,000-pound, 32-foot steel candelabrum will be lighted not only at the edge of Central Park but also in Jewish homes all over the world on each evening of Hanukkah, the Feast of Lights, until Dec. 8.
Specially designed glass chimneys protect the lights from the park winds.
To get access to the top of the menorah, a "cherry-picker" crane on loan from Consolidated Edison will lift members of the organization to the top of the menorah.
After the lighting ceremony next Sunday, members of the Lubavitch group will take part in singing and dancing; hot potato latkes (pancakes), a traditional Hanukkah food, will be distributed to spectators free of charge, and gifts will be presented to children.
The youth organization's Hanukkah menorah was designed by the artist Yaacov Agam, who was inspired by a hand drawing by Maimonides of the original menorah in the Holy Temple of Jerusalem.


Vacancies Take Toll on Shopping Malls
"FOR RENT" is a disturbing sign of the times on the many empty storefronts in towns and villages across the county.
A graphic reminder that the 1980's are over is an entirely vacant small shopping mall at 1100 East Boston Post Road in Mamaroneck, known for more than 25 years as Fashion Plaza.
The last of the eight stores in the plaza, a women's shoe and handbag store, moved out in August.
"It's happening all over the county," said Richard Hendey, the managing agent for the owner of the plaza, Lordae Realty in Briarcliff Manor.
"You see retail tenants in malls like the Galleria in White Plains and in shopping centers who have been hit hard by the recession.


After a Fast Start, Hialeah Has a Date With Destiny
It has been three weeks since 30,472 people thronged Hialeah Park and welcomed racing back to the elegant old track in Florida.
The crowds are still arriving in reasonable numbers, the flamingos are still flying past the clubhouse in mass formation and the local politicians are still predicting that the 60-year-old showplace has a future as well as a past.
But Hialeah faces a critical test Thursday when the Florida Racing Commission is expected to issue a policy statement aimed at breaking the stalemate that for years has embroiled the state's three thoroughbred tracks.
The issue is how to allot the choice racing dates during the tourist season in January, February and March.


INSIDE
White House Is Growing Fearful About the Economy
For both political and economic reasons, the Administration is gradually deciding that it cannot wait for the weak recovery to take wing and is admitting that tax cuts and other measures to encourage growth must be taken sooner or later.
Page 28.
Shuttle Is Ordered Down
The space agency cut short Atlantis's mission when one of its three navigational units failed.
It is to land in California today, instead of Florida on Wednesday.
Page 24.
His Word, and Hers
Eight months after their fateful evening together, William K. Smith and his accuser are about to meet again as a jury begins hearing evidence in their rape case.
Page 24.
Duke Entering the Race
David Duke plans to run in several Republican Presidential primaries, an adviser said.
Page 30.


Credibility Seen as Crux Of Celebrated Rape Trial
The ordeal began as a casual encounter between a local woman and a privileged son of America's most famous family.
It quickly evolved into one of the most highly publicized and minutely scrutinized rape cases in history.
Now eight months after their fateful evening together, William K. Smith and his accuser are about to meet again, as a Florida jury begins hearing evidence in the case.
On Monday, prosecutors and defense lawyers will winnow down a panel of 37 citizens to the 6 jurors and 3 alternates who will actually decide Mr.
Smith's guilt or innocence.
At 1:30 the prosecutor, Moira K. Lasch of the Palm Beach County State's Attorney's office, will give her opening statement, to be followed by Mr.
Smith's chief defense counsel, Roy E. Black of Miami.
Testimony in the case will then begin.


Betty Chen and Marc Bassin Marry
Betty Chen, the community development director of the Mosholu Preservation Corporation, and Marc Bassin, the vice president of human resources development for Montefiore Medical Center, both in the Bronx, were married yesterday in Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Shannon Bernard, a Unitarian minister, officiated at Wainwright House.
Ms.
Chen, 32 years old, is the founding editor of The Norwood News, the community newspaper published by the Mosholu Preservation Corporation, the community improvement organization of Montefiore Medical Center.
She graduated from Queens College and has a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of See Ying and Lan Jan Chen of Bayside, Queens.
Her parents are retired from the dry cleaning business.


FAMILY ISN'T EVERYTHING
What I question is not society's supposed devotion to the family -- it is certainly natural to have children.
But I question the attitude that keeps the family isolated, unsupported -- that says, in effect, be a family, but do it alone.
In our ancestors' day, the family offered a safety net -- grandparents, aunts and uncles, cousins to share the responsibility for raising children and to help ease the burden.
Nowadays, parents who are burned out from their own experience may be unwilling to be involved as grandparents.
NANCY WINTERNIGHT-SELKOWITZ
Rosendale, N.Y.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Sept. 91
Sept. 90
Change
Starts
1,021
1,106
-7.7%
Completions
1,144
1,314
-12.9%
Sales
446
504
-11.5%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES
(Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.86
8.85
10.17
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.51
6.53
8.17
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.75
8.77
9.97
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.40
6.42
7.90
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.72
8.72
10.04
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.44
6.42
8.09
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.99
9.00
10.36
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.03
7.06
8.44
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.82
4.96
7.05
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.78
8.93
9.67
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


11 Kinds of Pizza in Cheerful Atmosphere
A NEW restaurant, the Bricks, has opened in Norwalk -- and, surprise, it's Italian.
As far as we know, no law has been passed to prohibit restaurateurs from opening anything but Italian establishments, but there has been many a sip of chianti since we have seen any other kind of ethnic restaurant opening its doors.
You can tell what the Bricks is about the minute you enter.
In one corner of the dining room a brick pizza oven spouts flames from its wood fire; in front of it, behind a counter, three pizza bakers are tossing, catching and stretching dough.
White walls with hunter green trim; natural wood floors, chairs and tables, and green plants atop the room divider all add to the light, cheerful family atmosphere (as does the high decibel level).
As seating is on a first-come, first-served basis, there is a small bar in the rear, where diners can have a drink (and nibble some good garlic-marinated olives) while they wait.


Buying a Present? Choices Abound
Ever since music and electronics joined forces in the 1920's, sound equipment has ranked high among Christmas presents.
So, as in previous years, we turn a seasonal spotlight on standout designs and values, ranging from bottom dollar to blue chip.
With the slumbering economy ignoring official wake-up calls, demand nowadays is for low-priced items.
In response, the audio industry has come up with a new class of economy designs known as mini-systems or table-top stereos.
Small enough to fit on a table or sideboard, these systems consist of matched components of a single brand.


Burial Ground for Old Stone Church
AS the Rev.
Charles R. Colwell strolled the grounds outside St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church here one recent sunny afternoon, he paused in a small courtyard near the 132-year-old granite building to study the progress being made on a new memorial garden.
After much planning, budgeting and philosophical discussion, the concept of providing a burial ground for parishioners' ashes in the shadow of the church steeple is about to become a reality.


Firing Big Guns, the Navy Loses
The United States Navy didn't fight fair in an 18-year-long sex discrimination suit, a Federal judge said last week in ruling against the Navy.
In defending against charges brought by 67 civilian female employees the Navy and the Federal Government wasted time and money and were sometimes just plain mean, said the judge, Harold H. Greene.
The women, who were shown to have received smaller salaries and fewer promotions than men doing the same work, were awarded $670,000 in back pay.
In addition, Judge Greene gave the Navy and the Government 25 days to show why he should not punish them further with sanctions, which might include fines or the awarding of lawyer's fees and costs to the plaintiffs.


Women's Studies Group Seeks School Changes
WHILE teaching her English classes at the State University at Farmingdale, L.I., Dr.
Jerilyn Fisher is often confronted by wildly waving hands.
They belong to the male students in the class, who, she said, "speak up more quickly and loudly" than the women and are "even somewhat rude" in their efforts to be heard.
At times she tries to ignore the men to give the women a chance, Dr.
Fisher said.
But, she added, sometimes "you suddenly realize you haven't heard a female voice all day."


Holiday Events Abound in New York
THE sheer number of holiday activities -- for Hanukkah, Christmas, Kwanzaa or New Year's -- available to families in New York City this year makes orderly scheduling a gargantuan task.


THE REGION: New York Goes First; High Schools Hand Out Condoms
After nearly two years of fuss, it happened quite matter-of-factly.
Two 17-year-olds strolled into the health room at John Dewey High School in Brooklyn on Tuesday and asked a gym teacher for condoms.
They got two each, a manufacturer's instruction sheet and a small card warning that condoms can break and that abstinence is the only sure way to avoid AIDS.


Corrections
A map last Sunday showing an air-cargo center proposed for the Naval Weapons Industrial Reserve Plant in Calverton located the site incorrectly.
The center would be on the south side of Route 25, not the north side.


Tools Need Attention Before Storage
THERE is nothing quite so final for any outdoor gardening season as putting tools away, though rakes should remain handy, just in case straggly leaves or twigs need to be cleaned off.
And if tools are put away properly, they will be ready to be put to work in spring.
Hand tools such as trowels and cultivators should be put away clean.
An excellent way to get them clean is to put them into an old box or bucket full of sand -- beach sand or whatever sand is handy.


Lisa S. Elmes, Student, Weds
Lisa Suzanne Elmes, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
H.
Brown Elmes of Princeton, N.J., and Peter Howard Weinstock, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Weinstock of Scarsdale, N.Y., were married last evening at the Nassau Inn in Princeton.
Judge Philip S. Carchman, the presiding judge of the Family Part of the Superior Court of New Jersey, officiated.
Mrs.
Weinstock, 24 years old, graduated from Columbia University and is a candidate for a master's degree in education at New York University.
Her father is an orthodontist in Princeton.
Her mother, Ann Elmes, is the executive director of Princeton Capital Management, a financial investment firm.


THE HOUSE WE LIVED IN
Katie Hafner's informative and sensitive article "The House We Lived In" (Nov. 10) correctly focuses attention on the case of Germany, although the subtitle implies a larger compass.
The question of reclaiming family property is, in its legal, political and moral dimensions, symptomatic of the need for Germans to come to terms with the double burden of the past -- first the crimes of the Nazi regime and then those of the regime of the former German Democratic Republic.
The article does not mention, however, that the "original" Federal Republic (West Gemany), in contrast to the former G.D.R. (East Germany), made substantial financial restitution to the survivors of the Holocaust and paid reparations to the state of Israel, reflecting the determination of the West German Government to make at least financial restitution for crimes that were beyond material compensation.
The earlier phase of German restitutions, just as the current one, took place while the Federal Republic experienced economic dislocations.
In light of Hafner's fascinating account of the Wallich family, it is especially poignant to note that it was one of Henry C. Wallich's many achievements to have written the classic book on the Federal Republic's postwar reconstruction, "Mainsprings of the German Revival" (Yale University Press, 1955).
In that book, he found, within the German people, those redemptive qualities that ultimately created the democratic order that is now being extended to all of Germany.
WOLFRAM F. HANRIEDER
Santa Barbara, Calif.


Campus Concerts Increase As Holidays Approach
AS holiday recesses approach, concerts abound on campuses all over the state.
At 3:30 this afternoon the pianist Watson Morrison, a member of the faculty, plays three Mozart Sonatas in Millard Auditorium at the Hartt School of Music in West Hartford.
At 8 P.M. on Tuesday the auditorium will be the site of the school's third annual Messiah Sing-In, with Thomas Nerbonne leading soloists, chamber orchestra and the audience.
Also coming up in Millard Auditorium this week are free concerts by the Hartt Symphony Band under Neal Smith, on Wednesday evening at 8; the soprano Sonja Mae Guimond and the lutenist Alan Spriestersbach, at 8 P.M. on Thursday, and a showcase concert with Rosemary Small conducting the Hartt Percussion Ensemble, next Sunday at 8.
Filling up the busy schedule are two ticketed events ($5 each) with Gene Young conducting the Sinfonietta at 8 P.M. on Friday and Daniel d'Addio at the helm of the Greater Hartford Youth Ensemble at 3:30 next Sunday afternoon (243-4228).


R. M. Donaghy Dies; Neurosurgeon Was 81
Prof.
Raymond Madiford Peardon Donaghy, a neurosurgeon known for his work in microsurgery, died on Tuesday at the Heaton House nursing home in Montpelier, Vt.
A former resident of Burlington, he was 81 years old.
His family said he died of complications from Alzheimer's disease.


Shopping Where Gifts Are Handmade
IN this time of squeezed budgets, crafts can be a creative solution to holiday gift shopping.
Craft galleries around New Jersey are filled with jewelry, small pots and other accessories priced under $100; many are $25 or less.
The items may be elegant, amusing or very practical, but skillful craftsmanship gives them all a value that cannot be measured in dollar signs.


PRETORIA RIVALS HAIL NEGOTIATIONS
Negotiations to dismantle white rule were hailed as imminent today as representatives of 20 political organizations concluded preparations for a formal convention to debate the future of South Africa.
"More than ever, we are convinced that we are walking the last mile," said Cyril Ramaphosa, Secretary General of the African National Congress, speaking to journalists at the end of the two-day meeting outside Johannesburg.


Tools Need Attention Before Storage
THERE is nothing quite so final for any outdoor gardening season as putting tools away, though rakes should remain handy, just in case straggly leaves or twigs need to be cleaned off.
And if tools are put away properly, they will be ready to be put to work in spring.
Hand tools such as trowels and cultivators should be put away clean.
An excellent way to get them clean is to put them into an old box or bucket full of sand -- beach sand or whatever sand is handy.


This Week: A Chance to Beat the Freeze
Continue planting prechilled paperwhite narcissus in shallow pots.
Cover bulbs with soil and set pots in a sunny, cool place.
The double-flowering variety, Constantinople, is a long-bloomer with a citrus scent.
Warm weather has kept the ground from freezing, so get those last hardy bulbs in the ground.
Prune raspberry bushes and fertilize with a few inches of aged manure and mulch.
Mulch strawberry plants, too.
If frost has killed asparagus foliage, cut it to the ground and mulch the beds.


Dina K. Miller, Physician, Wed
Dr.
Dina Kaye Miller, a daughter of Dr.
Albert Miller and Elaine Miller of Kings Point, L.I., and Terry Lee Emanuel, a son of the late Victor and Francine Emanuel, were married last evening at the Water's Edge in Long Island City, Queens.
Rabbi Ephraim Wolf officiated.
Dr.
Miller, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is the director of physical medicine and rehabilitation at Victoria Hospital in Miami.
She graduated from Cornell University and the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, where her father is the director of the pulmonary laboratory.
Her mother is a lawyer in Great Neck, L.I.


FAMILY ISN'T EVERYTHING
I am baffled by Henig's premise that the family is so revered in our society.
In my experience, women (and men) who spend time rearing children at the expense of their careers often are not admired, and are certainly not rewarded or respected in the business world.
Those who are universally admired, rewarded and respected are the superwomen who manage to pursue their careers and raise a family at the same time -- the women who "have it all." LEORA D. FREEDMAN
Los Angeles


Sounds of Faith


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Purchasing managers index
53.5
52.2
Construction spending, percent change
1.1
0.3
Tuesday
Leading indicators, percent change
-0.1
0.2
New home sales, percent change
-12.9
5.0
Wednesday
Gross national product, percent change
2.4
2.9
Thursday
Initial unemployment claims, thousands
413
445
Factory orders, percent change
-1.7
0.6
Friday
Unemployment rate, in percent
6.8
6.8
Monday: Finance ministers from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development meet in Brussels  Tuesday: European Community finance ministers meet  Wednesday: Federal Reserve releases its beige book  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Knicks Rally In Ewing's Glow
In the middle of a bruising, foul-marred game between the Knicks and the Detroit Pistons yesterday, Patrick Ewing looked like the Bulls' Scottie Pippen in the basketball-shoe commercial filmed in black and white with a 1950's motif.
Ewing stood out as if he were a man with futuristic skills.
Ewing also looked like a bargain at his salary of $33 million over six years, scoring 45 points, grabbing 10 rebounds and blocking 4 shots as the Knicks rallied from 18 points behind to beat the Pistons, 103-96, at Madison Square Garden.
It was Ewing's 22d 40-point game as a Knick, one behind the career leader, Bernard King.


Sunday Outing; Hunting the Wild Christmas Tree
Standing in a field of Christmas trees stretching out in straight lines almost as far as the eye could see, Tom Whalen pointed to a six-and-a-half-foot white spruce.
The price label attached to the tree read $29.
"It's a fine tree," he said, noting its neat conical shape.


Children's Books
THE JOLLY CHRISTMAS POSTMAN
Written and illustrated by Janet and Allan Ahlberg.
Unpaged.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $16.95. (Ages 3 and up)


Holiday Events Abound in the City
THE sheer number of holiday activities -- for Hanukkah, Christmas, Kwanzaa or New Year's -- available to families in New York City this year makes orderly scheduling a gargantuan task.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Nov. 16 MANHATTAN  Chelsea 115,000
254 West 25th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 600-sq.-ft. co-op; renovated kitchen, 2 exposures; maintenance $468, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Kingman Associates)  Fort Washington 132,000
100 Overlook Terrace  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, remodeled kitchen, terrace; maintenance $634, 47% tax-deductible (Broker: Stein-Perry Real Estate)  Greenwich Village 495,000
150 Waverly Place  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. duplex condo in brownstone; private entrance, eat-in kitchen, 2 fireplaces, 800-sq.-ft. rear garden; common charge $309, taxes $4,308 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Upper East Side 415,000
350 East 72d Street  (La Chambord)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. condo in 4-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, windowed kitchen, 2 exposures; common charge $1,019, taxes $2,844 (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper East Side 525,000
330 East 75th Street  (Saratoga)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. condo in 7-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, windowed kitchen and bath, 2 exposures; common charge $757, taxes $5,600 (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Upper West Side 257,500
245 West 107th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, windowed kitchen; maintenance $903, 55% tax-deductible (Brokers: Eden Realty - Klara Madlin Real Estate)  BRONX  Riverdale 165,000
2621 Palisades Avenue  (River Terrace)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, terrace, pool; maintenance $1,113, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  Soundview 243,000
742 Beach Avenue  2-family detached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; finished basement, 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Flatbush 192,500
3706 Avenue I  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 2-car garage, 27.6- by 97-ft. lot; taxes $1,250 (Broker: Fogarty Real Estate)  Windsor Terrace 260,000
237 Windsor Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family, 2-story attached brick house; dining room, remodeled kitchen, rear deck, enclosed front porch, 17- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,333 (Broker: Warren Lewis Real Estate)  QUEENS  College Point 165,000
4-25 121st Street  (Riverview)  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. condo; dining room, eat-in kitchen; common charge $106, taxes $700 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Elmhurst 155,000
95-14 43d Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, enclosed front porch, 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $870 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Graniteville 144,000
63 Eunice Place  2-bedroom, 3-bath, one-family semi-attached frame house with brick trim; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,574 (Broker: Century 21/Papp Realty)  Silver Lake 137,100
55 Austin Place  (Imperial Towers)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,268-sq.-ft. condo; dining area, terrace, Manhattan skyline view; common charge $253, taxes $1,908 (Broker: Key Realty)


November Surprise; Bush Takes Hits From All Sides, Including His Side
Maybe it was the series of open challenges to the White House from the ranks of House Republicans.
Maybe it was the panicky pleas from Republican political professionals to do something, anything, about the economy.
Maybe it was the signed op-ed pieces and the on-the-record quotes assailing White House political operations -- not from Democrats, but from Republicans.
Whatever the moment, something fundamental changed in Washington last month.
President Bush, who just eight months ago commanded the approval of 9 out of 10 Americans, suddenly seemed incapable of keeping his own party in line.
The stricken economy, and the President's fumbling response to it, exposed many of the strains in the Republican Party.
The coalition that drove politics in the 1980's seemed exhausted and frayed.


Scenes of Disaster in Pileup That Killed 17 in California
Scores of cars and trucks still lay in burned and tangled heaps on California's main north-south highway this afternoon, a day after colliding in a blinding dust storm.
The authorities said 17 people had been killed and as many as 150 injured in one of the worst chain-reaction accidents in the nation's history.
Occasional gusts of white dust continued to swirl across the highway here, midway between Los Angeles and San Francisco, as tow trucks triedto untangle the 93 cars and 11 tractor-trailer trucks.
Some were blackened and melted, with small pools of chrome on the roadway beside them.
Some had apparently exploded, with parts of vehicles lying here and there.


Betsy Beaven Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Beaven of Darien, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elisabeth Hope Beaven, to Christopher David Thorpe, a son of Rosemary G. Thorpe of Westfield, Surrey, England, and David Thorpe of Woking, Surrey.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Beaven, 23 years old, is known as Betsy.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College and is a candidate for a master's degree in English literature at King's College in London.
Her father is a managing director of E. S. Jacobs &amp; Company, an investment concern in New York.
Mr.
Thorpe, 27, is an engineer at Advanced Mechanics and Engineering in Guildford, Surrey.
He graduated from King's College, where he also received a master's degree in engineering.


In Some Courtrooms, Jurors Play Inquisitor
It is a gripping Manhattan murder trial.
The defense lawyer is cross-examining a star prosecution witness and is closing in for the kill.
Then out of the blue one of the jurors waves his hand to the judge and asks to question the witness himself.
Television viewers saw a similar scene in a recent episode of "L. A. Law."


Miss Azoy Wed To C. D. Rooke
Cynthia Margaret Azoy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Livingston Azoy of Morristown, N.J., was married there yesterday to Christopher Davis Rooke, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Rooke of Harding Township, N.J.
The Rev.
David Hegg performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Rooke, 36 years old, is an assistant vice president in the Morristown regional trust office of the First Fidelity Bank of New Jersey.
She graduated from Lafayette College.
Her father, a retired vice president of the Irving Trust Company in New York, is the recording secretary of the St.
Andrew's Society in New York.
Her mother, Elizabeth M. Fowler, is a financial news reporter for The New York Times.


An Uneven Spring
HOW DARING TO BE OR HOW CAUTIOUS TO REMAIN -- that is the question.
Clearly, economic uncertainties and the dismal retailing scene have deeply affected the fashion industry.
Designers are struggling to produce what they hope will stimulate women to buy something new.
It is no surprise that in such an atmosphere the fashion collections for next spring seemed flat.
Many designers chose the tried and proven.
Others mixed a few new ideas with the familiar, while still others -- particularly several of the new, younger talents -- cut disappointing clothes or took off on unfortunate novelty tangents.


Where, Oh Where, Is Educational Paradise?
TINKA TOPPING'S dream of academic paradise stands in a potato field in Bridgehampton.
"When my children were young, I envisioned them attending a country school," Ms.
Topping said.
"The school bus would pick them up every morning, and they would drive off to paradise."
Because the schools near where the Toppings lived in Sagaponack were not quite the educational Edens Ms.
Topping had in mind, she and other East End parents founded their own school, the Hampton Day School.
It was 1966, and in the Age of Aquarius everything seemed possible.


Brazil Steps Up Drive to Protect Indian Lands
Ignoring a backlash from Amazon politicians, President Fernando Collor de Mello stepped up his campaign to preserve the culture and sanctuaries of Brazilian Indians this week by reserving 19,000 square miles of virgin rain forest as a homeland for 500 Kaiapo Indians.
Slightly larger than Switzerland, the new reservation will be Brazil's second largest, surpassed only by a Yanomami reservation created two weeks ago.
With these and other decrees, Mr.
Collor has in one month protected Indian land equivalent to 57 percent of what was set aside over the preceding 80 years.


Holiday Events Abound in the City
THE sheer number of holiday activities -- for Hanukkah, Christmas, Kwanzaa or New Year's -- available to families in New York City this year makes orderly scheduling a gargantuan task.


A 'Borderland' Whose History Reflects That Troubled Role
Like much of Central Europe, the Ukraine has had a history of being swallowed by its neighbors, usually not in one piece.
But the Ukraine -- larger in size than most European countries, with almost as many people as France -- has had the added misfortune of having never experienced modern statehood, except for one brief chaotic period at the end of World War I, just before the Bolsheviks moved in to assert Soviet power.
Today, as they vote in a republic-wide referendum, Ukrainians for the first time in their history will have a direct say on the shape of their nation.
The most likely outcome is a vote for independence -- which could prove to be the last jolt to break up the already-crumbling Soviet Union.


Poetic Allusion Watch
Headline writers are the poets of the universe next door.
These eye strained wretches understand the restraints of space and meter that bind the writers of Shakespearean sonnets (three quatrains followed by a couplet) or of Japanese
haiku
(three lines, having five, seven and five syllables).
Like the poet, the headline writer tries to shoehorn great messages into a few words; some, to show an affinity to poetry, slip allusions to famous poems into their everyday headlines.
Most of us miss these allusions; they are private communications to the cognoscenti, phrases out of our literary past scribbled by our horseless headmen across a newspaper page, put in a bottle and thrown out to the sea of faces.
Thanks to the members of the Poetic Allusion Watch, these furtive expressions of our subliminal culture are spotted when washed up on the beach of this column.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
PEARL HARBOR, REVISTED
Saturday will mark the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
A film and commemorative program will take place at 8 P.M.
Saturday in Peekskill at the Paramount Center for the Arts, 1008 Brown Street.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Crime: Vote to end debate and bring a compromise anti-crime bill to the floor for a vote.
Failed, with 49 in favor and 38 opposed (60 votes were needed), Nov. 27.
2.
Banking: Vote to approve an additional $70 billion in borrowing power for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Approved 68 to 15, Nov. 27.
3.
Savings and Loan: Vote to provide up to $25 billion to finance the savings and loan bailout until April 1, 1992.
Approved 44 to 33, Nov. 27.
4.
Transportation: Vote on passage of a transportation bill that will provide $151 billion over six years and give states more flexibility in using the money.
Approved 79 to 8, Nov. 27.
1
2
3
4
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
Y
Y
N
Y
Lieberman (D)
Y
Y
N
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
Y
N
N
Y
Lautenberg (D)
Y
Y
N
Y
New York
D'Amato (R)
N
Y
N
Y
Moynihan (D)
Y
Y
Y
Y
House
1.
Campaign Finance: Vote on passage of a campaign finance bill that would set a voluntary spending limit of $600,000 for primary and general elections and put a cap of $200,000 on receipts from political action committees.
Approved 273 to 156, Nov. 23.
2.
Crime: Vote on passage of a compromise anti-crime bill.
Approved 205 to 203, Nov. 27.
3.
Transportation: Vote on passage of a transportation bill that will provide $151 billion over six years and give states more flexibility in using the money.
Approved 372 to 47, Nov. 27.
1
2
3
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Y
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D)
Y
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D)
Y
Y
Y
4. Shays (R)
Y
N
Y
5. Franks (R)
N
N
N
6. Johnson (R)
N
N
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Y
Y
N
2. Hughes (D)
Y
Y
Y
3. Pallone (D)
Y
Y
N
4. Smith (R)
Y
N
Y
5. Roukema (R)
N
N
Y
6. Dwyer (D)
Y
A
Y
7. Rinaldo (R)
Y
N
Y
8. Roe (D)
Y
A
Y
9. Torricelli (D)
Y
Y
Y
10. Payne (D)
Y
N
Y
11. Gallo (R)
N
N
Y
12. Zimmer (R)
N
N
N
13. Saxton (R)
N
N
Y
14. Guarini (D)
Y
Y
Y
New York
1. Hoch'ner(D)
Y
Y
Y
2. Downey (D)
Y
Y
Y
3. Mrazek (D)
A
Y
Y
4. Lent (R)
N
N
Y
5. McGrath (R)
N
N
Y
6. Flake (D)
Y
N
Y
7. Ackerman (D)
Y
Y
Y
8. Scheuer (D)
Y
Y
Y
9. Manton (D)
Y
Y
Y
10. Schumer (D)
Y
Y
Y
11. Towns (D)
Y
N
A
12. Owens (D)
Y
N
A
13. Solarz (D)
Y
Y
Y
14. Molinari (R)
N
N
Y
15. Green (R)
Y
Y
Y
16. Rangel (D)
Y
N
Y
17. Weiss (D)
Y
N
Y
18. Serrano (D)
Y
N
Y
19. Engel (D)
Y
Y
Y
20. Lowey (D)
Y
Y
Y
21. Fish (R)
Y
A
Y
22. Gilman (R)
Y
Y
Y
23. McNulty (D)
Y
Y
Y
24. Solomon (R)
N
N
N
25. Boehlert (R)
Y
N
Y
26. Martin (R)
N
N
Y
27. Walsh (R)
N
N
Y
28. McHugh (D)
Y
Y
Y
29. Horton (R)
N
Y
Y
30. Slaughter (D)
Y
Y
Y
31. Paxon (R)
N
N
Y
32. LaFalce (D)
Y
Y
Y
33. Nowak (D)
Y
Y
Y
34. Houghton (R)
N
N
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


CAMPUS LIFE: Chicago; Scholars Debate: Give Us Latkes! No, Hamentschen!
Four distinguished scholars at the University of Chicago put their appetites on hold and their reputations on the table last week in the 45th annual Latke-Hamentasch Symposium in which the virtues of the potato pancake are pitted against the merits of the prune- or poppy seed-filled pastry.
It was not a pretty sight.
More than 700 members of the university community crowded into Ida Noyes hall for the debate, sponsored by B'nai B'rith Hillel Foundation, cheering Wendy Doniger, the divinity school's Mircea Eliade professor of religion and translator of the recently published dictionary "Mythologies"; Philip Gossett, dean of the humanities; Hanna H. Gray, president of the university, and Francis Kinahan, professor of English language and literature, as they weighed in on the subject.


An Institute Embraces Hispanic Culture
Fifteen-year-old Rafael Fabian smiled broadly in the huge exhibit hall of what was once one of Brooklyn's most insular institutions.
He had just caught sight of something suited more to his native Santo Domingo than to the stately building he was in, the Brooklyn Historical Society.
"Mira!" he yelled, and the rest of the boys in his group, all recent immigrants from Latin America, did as he said: They looked as he picked up one of 10 glazed bottles atop a blue piragua cart, the traditional wooden boxes on wheels (topped with an umbrella) that Hispanic vendors use to dish out gooey snow cones on warm days.


POST-GAME MELEE AND NEW CONCERN
Officials from Lafayette College and Lehigh University are going back to the drawing board on efforts to prevent violence following football games after their latest move ended by turning students against the police.
Ten Bethlehem police officers were injured slightly in a melee after last weekend's football game that involved hundreds of students and scores of officers.
In the nation's oldest college football rivalry, Lehigh won the 127th game between the schools, 36-18.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 1, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
5
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) The experiences of a couple on a trek across Europe during the ice age.
2
2
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician's successful cloning of dinosaurs for use in a theme park leads to a global emergency.
3
1
PRISONER OF MY DESIRE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) The artifices of a 12th-century English belle to capture the heart of a handsome lord and produce an heir.
4
1
COLD FIRE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A despondent reporter finds hope and romance while she tracks the course of a good Samaritan.
5 *
6
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The coming of age of Irish women.
6
3
UNIFICATION, by Jeri Taylor. (Pocket, $4.99.) A new "Star Trek" novel.
7
5
HOCUS POCUS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Berkley, $5.99.) Life in the near future, as noted by a college professor and prison administrator.
8
12
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
9
14
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four tales of late-night horror.
10
5
THE EAGLE HAS FLOWN, by Jack Higgins. (Pocket, $5.99.) A German attempt to rescue a paratrooper who tried to assassinate Churchill.
11
1
THE RUBY KNIGHT, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The second volume in "The Elenium," a fantasy saga.
12
2
22 INDIGO PLACE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.50.) A bad boy from the wrong side of the tracks, now a millionaire tycoon, wants to buy an heiress's mansion and win her heart.
13 *
30
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
14
23
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
15
4
POSSESSION, by A. S. Byatt. (Vintage, $12.) A pair of British academics pursue the relationship between two Victorian poets.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
28
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
2
20
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman.
3
421
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
4 *
4
A LIFE ON THE ROAD, by Charles Kuralt. (Ivy, $5.99.) The memoirs of the television newscaster.
5
106
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
6
36
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspiration.
7
5
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
8 *
21
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
9
6
SEXUAL PERSONAE, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $15.) The case for regarding all art as a pagan battleground between male and female, form and chaos, civilization and demonic nature.
10 *
50
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
11 *
125
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions in treating serious illness.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
9
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
16
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
5
UNNATURAL SELECTIONS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
4
70
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
5
1
A SOUTHERN BELLE PRIMER, by Maryln Schwartz. (Doubleday, $10.) A guide to propriety and protocol below the Mason-Dixon line; humor.
6 *
50
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


A Rising Urgency for Neediest Cases
Even during the best times in the 1980's the streets of New York gave readier testimony to the spread of poverty than to the rise of wealth.
Now, suffering and want have seeped behind the doors of thousands of homes, cutting the distance between security and disaster to anxious margins.
The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund begins its 80th appeal today as the economy seems to be contracting into an angry fist and people only whisper "depression" as if saying it aloud would make it so.
For the seven charities it serves, the the appeal poses a simple but urgent question: Will New Yorkers who have less give more?


ISRAEL BEGINS PLAN FOR ARAB BUSINESS
After nearly 25 years of repressive economic measures in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, the Israeli military has begun a policy intended to allow more free enterprise and business opportunity.
In the last five months, even before the Middle East process got under way, military administrators have issued at least 150 licenses to Palestinian businessmen who applied to open new factories, and have given permits to many other businesses that had been operating illegally.


Baseball Needs Open-Door Policy
To the Sports Editor:
In "Plainly Speaking" (The Times, Nov. 3), Murray Chass seems to be saying that the hiring practices of major league baseball teams are still blatantly discriminatory.
He cites the recent hirings in the Cleveland Indians and New York Yankees organizations as evidence that whites are favored over blacks.
But he does not even mention the qualifications of the candidates in question.


Ms. Marchini, Anchor, Weds
Deborah Marchini, a television news anchor, and Randall William Forsyth, an editor of Barron's, were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
Brian Brennan officiated at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Ms.
Marchini, 32 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a host of two daily business programs on Cable News Network in New York.
She graduated with honors from George Washington University and is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond J. Marchini of Manhasset, L.I.
Her father is a supervising engineer at Ebasco Services Inc., a New York engineering and construction company.


Reading Tea Leaves, Lipton Style
To the Editor:
"When 'Truths' Become Traps" (Forum, Nov. 3) reminds me of my complaint several years ago to the Lipton Tea Company.
I decided to try loose tea instead of tea bags and purchased a package of Lipton loose tea.
The tea leaves were enclosed in an aluminum-foil-sheathed paper bag inside the box.
After using about half the tea, I noticed that the aluminum foil was cracking because of the opening and the resealing of the bag, and that some small aluminum flakes were mixed in with the tea leaves.


SUNY Prepares Tribute As Mozart Year Wanes
THE end of the Mozart year is approaching, with Dec. 5 marking the bicentennial of the great composer's death.
Perhaps the most ambitious observance in the county is the special Mozart Tribute being prepared for 7:30 P.M.
Thursday, the actual anniversary date, by six faculty artists, a half-dozen students and nearly 20 returning alumni of the State University of New York at Purchase's music division as well as the 50-voice Purchase College Chorus.
"As we both know, this bicentennial ought to inspire programs for the next 200 years," said Robert Fertitta, a SUNY professor who is one of the performers and the evening's artistic director.
"But this one is, indeed, very special, including solo and chamber works, leider for voice and piano, the Divertimento for Strings, K.138, and two great choral pieces, 'Sancta Maria' and the five-movement Mass in C. Combining faculty and alumni to form a chamber orchestra will also result in a unique and high-quality ensemble."


Kremlin Reportedly Gave $2 Million a Year to U.S. Communist Party
Gus Hall, the head of the American Communist Party, regularly received $2 million a year from the Kremlin for his party until last year, when the party here began to collapse and Mr.
Hall became a critic of Soviet reform, according to a Soviet editor working on a book about the Kremlin's underwriting of world Communism.
Aleksandr A. Drosdov, editor of the newspaper Rossiya, said at a news conference this week that party records showed that the Communist movement in the United States had been regularly supported by the annual stipend, with an occasional supplement of $1 million more.


THE TOWN THAT CAN'T SIT STILL
As someone who has never had any trouble sitting still and, in fact, would much rather sit and read than climb mountains, I'm glad I don't live in Boulder.
Last time I visited there, I thought I might get run out of town for the sin of being soft-muscled and sedentary.
FELICIA ACKERMAN
Providence, R.I.


Seasonal Tips In British Guide
Public transportation is curtailed and many shops and restaurants in London and other cities are closed during the Christmas and New Year periods in Britain, so tourist officials there have prepared a free guide to help visitors during the holidays.
The booklet, called "Celebrate Christmas and the New Year," gives information on hotels with packages that feature the traditions of the season.
Many of them are country house hotels and historic inns.
The booklet also has advice on traditional shows, concerts, events and sales.
It is available from the British Tourist Authority, (212) 581-4700.


Wall Street; A 'Specialist' on the Fly-by-Nights
Usually, the biggest mystery on Wall Street is what the Dow will do next.
But sometimes, the financial community encounters the real thing: A high-flying stock, an apparently prosperous company -- and a chief executive who suddenly vanishes, leaving behind legions of mystified investors.
There have been at least four such cases in the last two years.
The most recent centers on Victor G. Incendy, the Hungarian-born chairman of Cascade International, a fast-growing retailing chain based in Boca Raton, Fla.
On Nov. 20, the company reported that Mr.
Incendy had been missing for at least two days.
As Federal authorities search for him, Cascade International's stock has been suspended from Nasdaq trading until auditors can separate truth from hyperbole in the company's reports to its shareholders.


Sports of The Times; The Day Colonel Donovan Was Paged
THROUGH the years, the Giants have had several pro football rivals: the Redskins, the Eagles and the Cowboys in recent years, the Browns before that.
But half a century ago, the Giants' rival was the Brooklyn Dodgers, a hand-me-down from the baseball adversaries of that era.
Earlier that season the Dodgers had defeated the Giants, 16-13, at Ebbets Field.
But before each team's finale, the Giants' 8-2 record had clinched the Eastern Division championship.
Now, on the cold, cloudy afternoon of Dec. 7, 1941, they attracted 55,051 to the Polo Grounds where Alphonse (Tuffy) Leemans would be honored.
Before the 2 P.M. kickoff, Leemans, the Giants' single-wing tailback, received $1,500 in United States Defense bonds, a silver tray, a silver trophy and a gold wristwatch.
But not long after the game began, the voice of the public-address announcer pierced the 32-degree chill.
"Attention, please," the voice blared.
"Here is an urgent message: will Col. William J. Donovan call Operator 19 in Washington immediately."
Few wondered about the paging of Wild Bill Donovan, a World War I hero with New York City's Fighting 69th Regiment who was the chief of the new Office of Strategic Services (forerunner of the Central Intelligence Agency).
But anybody there with a new-fangled portable radio soon learned why, as did all those New Yorkers tuned in to their radios at home.
Not long before the kickoff, in Hawaii, Japanese planes had bombed the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor and the air base at Hickham Field.
As the game at the Polo Grounds progressed, other announcements instructed military personnel to return to their posts.
"I remember our team chaplain, Father Benedict Dudley, coming over to me on the sideline," recalled Wellington Mara, now the Giants' co-owner and then the 25-year-old son of the club's owner, Tim Mara.
"He told me what happened, but I didn't even know where Pearl Harbor was. I don't think most people knew."
When the two teams clomped up the wooden stairs to their locker rooms beyond the center-field end zone at halftime, the Dodgers were leading, 7-0.
"At halftime, our coach, Steve Owen, told us about Pearl Harbor," remembered Jim Poole, a Giants end who now lives in Oxford, Miss.
"He gave us such a bad account of all the bad things that happened there, it was like we didn't want to go back out on the field."
In the Dodgers' locker room, their traveling secretary, Frank Scott, informed Coach Jock Sutherland of the surprise attack.
"Don't mention this to the players, Scotty," said Sutherland, "They'll get upset. We've got another half to play."
According to Clarence (Ace) Parker, the Dodgers' star tailback, some of their players did learn about Pearl Harbor at halftime.
But it didn't deter the Dodgers, in their red-and-white jerseys, from a 21-7 victory.
Their husky fullback, Clarence (Pug) Manders, scored on a 3-yard run, a 65-yard interception return as a linebacker, and a 2-yard run as the Dodgers finished second in the East with 7-4 record.
Before the game ended, Mel Hein, the Giants center and linebacker who had never missed a game in 11 seasons, was hospitalized with a broken nose and a concussion.
Hein, now 82 and living in San Clemente, Calif., recalled getting "caught with an elbow" after snapping the ball.
Hein was one of five eventual Pro Football Hall of Fame members involved in that game; the others were Leemans, Parker and Frank (Bruiser) Kinard, the Dodgers' two-way lineman, along with Steve Owen.
Two weeks later, with Hein's nose protected by a face mask, the Giants lost the N.F.L. championship game to the Bears in Chicago, 37-9.
But the Dodgers' victory was their last hurrah.
World War II depleted the team.
After an 0-10 record in 1944, the franchise disbanded.
"That night of Dec. 7," Parker said, "we were supposed to go to a big party with Bob Topping, the brother of Dan Topping, who owned the team. But when Bob heard about Pearl Harbor, he canceled the party. I think he had a home in Honolulu."
In later years Parker, now 79 and still living in his hometown of Portsmouth, Va., scouted for the-now Phoenix Cardinals.
"I recommended a running back that the Cardinals drafted and later traded to the Giants," he said.
"Ottis Anderson."


Quotation of the Day
"People are going to be a little shocked if they come in to have a bunion removed and we start talking to them about resuscitation. But that's what's going to happen." -- DOE DUNN, a New Jersey nurse, on the new living-will law.  [ 1:3. ]


Credibility Seen as Crux Of Celebrated Rape Trial
The ordeal began as a casual encounter between a local woman and a privileged son of America's most famous family.
It quickly evolved into one of the most highly publicized and minutely scrutinized rape cases in history.
Now eight months after their fateful evening together, William K. Smith and his accuser are about to meet again, as a Florida jury begins hearing evidence in the case.
On Monday, prosecutors and defense lawyers will winnow down a panel of 37 citizens to the 6 jurors and 3 alternates who will actually decide Mr.
Smith's guilt or innocence.
At 1:30 the prosecutor, Moira K. Lasch of the Palm Beach County State's Attorney's office, will give her opening statement, to be followed by Mr.
Smith's chief defense counsel, Roy E. Black of Miami.
Testimony in the case will then begin.


Miss Wageman Has a Wedding
Melissa Wageman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Wageman of Princeton, N.J., was married yesterday to Stacy Lynn Rogers, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
L.
Rogers of Cloudcroft, N.M.
The Rev.
John R. Heidel, a United Church of Christ minister, officiated at a nondenominational ceremony at Thurston Memorial Chapel in Honolulu.
Mrs.
Rogers, 27 years old, is the studio manager for Russell Howry &amp; Associates, a San Francisco graphic design firm.
She is a graduate of the University of Hawaii, as is the bridegroom.
Her father is the art and design director of Stewart, Tabori &amp; Chang, the New York publisher.
Her mother, Virginia Wageman, is the publications manager of the College Art Association in New York.


Refuges Feel Strain as Wildlife and Commerce Collide
This is a desolate land of black mesas and sagebrush where ranchers grazed cattle for six decades on the Sheldon National Wildlife Refuge, a vast sanctuary for antelope and other wildlife.
But in October, Federal officials told ranchers to move their herds elsewhere so the Government could determine whether overgrazing had stripped away vegetation and eroded creeks needed by wild animals and fish.


The Wrong Location
To the Editor:  It seems to me that the caption for the picture accompanying your review of Peter Green's "Alexander of Macedon" (Sept. 22) is incorrect.
The picture is of  a fragment of a large mosaic depicting the Battle of Issus between Alexander the Great and Darius, King of Persia, in 333 B.C.
The mosaic is at the National Museum in Naples; it is not at Pompeii.
TAMARA PRISTIN New York


For the Hurricanes, a Delicate, 2-Part Assignment
Their challenge now reduced to a two-game season, the University of Miami Hurricanes hoped that an unofficial national championship could be secured in the raucous atmosphere of the Orange Bowl and not be subject to the dangers of the political arena.
Miami, its first-place lead over Washington reduced in The New York Times's computer rankings and the polls of reporters and coaches by its surprisingly narrow victory at Boston College last week, was left with a delicate assignment tonight.


Hate-Crime Law Is Focus of Case On Free Speech
Russ and Laura Jones smelled trouble when their tires were slashed just two weeks after they moved out of an inner-city neighborhood plagued by drugs, and, with their five children, became the first black family in Mounds Park, a working-class neighborhood in east St.
Paul.
But they weren't sure the trouble was racism until June 21, 1990, when they were awakened long after midnight by voices and footsteps, and looked out their window to find a cross burning in their small fenced-in yard.


In a Changed Pacific, U.S. Forces Remain
Why They're Still There
Half a century after Pearl Harbor, and more than 45 years after the end of the war that brought United States forces into the Pacific in large numbers for the first time, the United States Army, Navy, Marine Corps and Air Force remain a diminished but still visible presence from Japan to the South Pacific, and from Singapore to Hawaii.
Although Americans talk regularly of bringing home the troops from across the Atlantic, they make this demand less often for Asia, whose relative power is only growing and from which an increasing number of emigrants continue to arrive in America.


Mary Hartigan, Executive, Wed
Mary Ellen Hartigan, the divisional vice president of women's coats and suits at Lord &amp; Taylor, was married yesterday to David Dawson MacDowell, a vice president at Waldron Associates, a commercial real-estate consulting firm, both in New York.
The Rev.
Robert W. Ihloff officiated at Grace Episcopal Church in Madison, N.J.
Mrs.
MacDowell, 40 years old, is a daughter of the late Martin and Josephine Hartigan.
She graduated from the University of Rhode Island.
The bridegroom, 54, is the son of Dorothy MacDowell of Boonton, N.J., and the late Wallace MacDowell.
He graduated from Rutgers University.
His previous marriage ended in divorce.


New Pakistan Envoy's Blunt Message to U.S.
With its relations with the United States at their lowest point in decades, Pakistan has sent a new kind of ambassador to Washington to start rebuilding ties at a time when Islamabad is no longer a front-line nation helping to confront Soviet influence in Afghanistan.
The Ambassador, Abida Hussain, the first woman to represent the Islamic republic here, is a skilled politician with strong opinions and no diplomatic experience.
She says she does not plan to shy from controversy.


Editors' Choice
Two first novels and what appears at first glance to be a comic book are among the works of fiction in this year's list of best books, along with two volumes of stories.
On the nonfiction list are the first volume of a massive biography, a scientific and philosophical tour de force, a psychological meditation on the mutilation of memory by unspeakable experience, a lyrical and anguished record of a writer's life mined from his journals and a volume that began as a government report and turned into a passionate indictment of the incompetence that resulted in a nuclear disaster.


America, Illiterate in Investing
It's not surprising that Americans save less than people in other industrial countries.
Our society, after all, does a better job at selling the pleasures of consumption than it does at teaching the virtues of saving.
Although advertising may magnify the problem, it is not the cause.
Americans are undisciplined savers because our society not only tolerates, but encourages, investment illiteracy.
Unless we tackle this, many of us will find the American dream unaffordable.
At the root of the problem lies our habit of viewing economic and social issues in isolation, or, worse, in conflict.
In newspapers and televised news coverage, business matters are often relegated to their own section, as if they affected only a select audience.
And when financial issues do take the limelight, it's often when social or political forces are called in to check the excesses of the business world.
So many Americans consider economic and social goals to be inherently in conflict that the mutual-fund industry has launched "socially conscious funds" -- as if other funds pursue goals at odds with beneficial social behavior.


Q and A
Getting Super Bowl Tickets
Q.
I would like to attend the 1992 Super Bowl but am wondering how to get tickets.
Any help? -- Leonard Kudlack, Clifton, N.J.


A la Carte: Mardi Gras Spices a Bayou Menu
ALL of the cajun-creole restaurants on Long Island can be counted on the fingers of one hand.
When one opens, even a little one, like Gumbo Alley in Rockville Centre, it is news.
Because Louisiana-style spots are a rarity, some diners no doubt consider them rather exotic.
But the owners of Gumbo Alley, a 30-year-old chef and her younger brother, an architect, are anything but a mystery.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Hills 475,000
5 Cotillion Court  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 30-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, patio, 2-car garage; taxes $6,800.
Lattingtown 625,000
4 Wildwood Court  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 18-year-old colonial; finished basement with sauna, 2 fireplaces, inground pool, 2.2 acres; taxes $7,700.
Muttontown 600,000
113 Sterling Court  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 17-year-old colonial; family room w/fireplace, inground pool, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $8,900.
North Patchogue 95,000
11 Engeleke Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, deck; taxes $1,900.
Seaford 185,000
2406 Riverside Avenue  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old high ranch; dining room, den, deck, new windows; taxes $4,800.
Syosset 160,000
44 Candy Lane
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, skylights, carport; taxes $2,200.
OTHER AREAS Branford, Conn. 219,250
14 Waterside Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 130-year-old colonial; large screened porch, pine floors, water views; taxes $2,112.
New Rochelle, N.Y. 265,000
14 Farragut Circle  5-bedroom, 2 full-and 2 half-bath, 31-year-old Cape Cod colonial; fireplace, screened porch, breakfast room; taxes $5,551.
Marlboro, N.J. 165,000
30 Amhurst Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; fireplace, den, c/a, deck, family room; taxes $3,333.


Karen Maiolo Weds
Karen Helene Maiolo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Al Maiolo of Mount Kisco, N.Y., was married yesterday to Patrick Matthew McCarthy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Mark McCarthy of Syracuse.
The Rev.
Joseph Faraone, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Patrick's Old Stone Church in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
Mrs.
McCarthy, 26 years old, is a media planner at the BBDO Worldwide Inc. advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from the University of New Hampshire.
Mr.
McCarthy, 28, is an administration manager for CBS in New York, and is a former lieutenant in the United States Marine Corps.
He graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.


Jets Gaze Into Crystal Ball in Buffalo
Shortly after the Jets beat San Diego last week, improving their record to 7-5 and joining four other American Football Conference teams in a race for a wild-card playoff spot, defensive tackle Dennis Byrd was asked if the team was finally hitting its stride at the right time.
"I think we are," he said.
"I think that awareness of 'Hey, we're really in this thing. Let's go. Let's go' is taking hold. It's something we can feel. We're so close.


Jerome Kapelus Weds Jolie Epstein
Jolie Rachel Epstein, a lawyer, and Jerome Vaughan Kapelus, a financial analyst, were married last evening by Rabbi Aaron Panken at the Inwood (L.I.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Kapelus, 28 years old, is an associate in Los Angeles with the New York law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and has a law degree from New York University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey I. Epstein of Atlantic Beach, L.I.
Her father is the president of the Pace Management Service Corporation, a hotel management company in New York.
Her mother, Arlene Epstein, is the theater critic of The South Shore Record, a Long Island weekly newspaper.
Mr.
Kapelus, 27, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Until recently, he was a senior credit analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Kapelus of Larchmont, N.Y.
His mother, Denyse Kapelus, is the president of the Professional Nannies Institute, a New York training and placement firm.
His father is the president of Kapelus &amp; Cipriano, a Mamaroneck, N.Y., advertising agency.


ART
In the 1990's, as in the 1980's, the most conspicuous art book is the monumental catalogue that comes with an exhibition devoted to a single indisputably great artist.
Such a catalogue has everything in its favor.
It is a compendium of all that is newest and brightest (and sometimes most tendentious) in art scholarship.
Thanks in particular to the
entente cordiale
that now links the museums of France with the museums of Britain and the United States, it may well be backed by two, three and sometimes four major institutions.
It has in those museums an audience that may total 500,000 people, not to mention those who cannot get to the show but who will treasure the catalogue for a lifetime.
That is the context in which people have lately cherished the catalogues of exhibitions of Seurat (at the Metropolitan Museum in New York), Rembrandt (lately in Berlin, and due to open in Amsterdam this week), Gericault (now at the Grand Palais in Paris), Constable (at the Tate Gallery in London not long ago) and Toulouse-Lautrec (now at the Hayward Gallery in London, and later at the Grand Palais in Paris.)


Giants Seeking a Nice, Quiet Sunday
The Giants' game last Sunday against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who had won only twice all season, loomed as a prospective runaway, but the Giants did not pull it out until the final seconds.
Today, at Cincinnati, the Giants play the Bengals, who have won only once all season, and no one seems to be talking of a rout.
For one thing, the Bengals have a potentially explosive offense.
For another, the Giants are banged up.


Renee Elaine George Is Married
Renee Elaine George, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond E. George Jr. of Winnetka, Ill., was married yesterday to Hugh Leon McColl 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
McColl of Charlotte, N.C.
Dr.
Gilbert Bowen performed the Protestant ceremony at the Kenilworth (Ill.) Union Church.
Mrs.
McColl is an associate at Morgan Stanley in New York.
She graduated from Williams College and has an M.B.A. from Dartmouth College.
Her father is the senior fiduciary officer with the Northern Trust Company of Chicago.


Washington Journal; In Capital, No. 2 River Is a Cause
The low winter sun gave scant warmth early this week and enticed no one to fish from the banks of the Anacostia River.
Before warm weather returned, frost had been tipping the grass on the bank, the mud that coats half-submerged tires had begun to freeze and Washington's other river was left alone with its gulls and its garbage.
Perhaps it was a blessing: not so much the absence of people who come here to fish and who take little more than catfish, carp and a sense of peace from the tidal waterway that flows a mile to the east of the Capitol, but rather the absence of people in general.


After Thanksgiving, Cranberries Linger
THANKSGIVING is over, but that's no reason to stop using cranberries.
Bags of cranberries will continue to be on supermarket shelves for a few weeks.
And there are dozens of dishes, beyond condiments for turkey, in which cranberries can be used.
The tart berries cook quickly in a little liquid.
Their astringency makes them an excellent foil for fish and rich game meats.
They can be added to pan juices at the last minute.
Cranberries are good to include in vegetable dishes, especially those made with beets, carrots, winter squash or onions, all of which have a good amount of natural sweetness to contrast with the cranberries.
Still, it may be necessary to add a little sugar, honey or other sweetening to counteract their tartness.


CAMPUS LIFE: Cornell; Police on Campus Increase Security On Its Bus System
Campus police officers are stepping up patrols during the weekend on the Cornell University bus system after a student passenger reported that she had been sexually harassed.
Bus drivers are also reporting an increase in the number of student riders who are drunk and subsequently become ill on their return from Collegetown, a section of Ithaca adjoining campus that is home to most students living off campus and to the bars, restaurants, shops and convenience stores that they patronize.


Thriller Writers Are Quick to Find New Orders of Evil
Now that the statue of Feliks Dzerzhinsky, the original Soviet secret police bogeyman, has been toppled and the good old Lubyanka, the K.G.B. headquarters in Dzerzhinsky Square, is no longer a symbol of the evil Other Side, the cold war espionage novel is giving way to what might be called the New World Order political thriller.
As John Le Carre, the master of the old genre, observed after retiring his hero George Smiley in "The Secret Pilgrim," his most recent suspense novel, "Anybody writing now will have to work a little harder and think a little harder, but the world's his oyster."


Toward the Stars


U.S. Reveals Sum of Aid It Withheld From Kenya
In an unusually blunt statement, the American Embassy has announced here how much Washington penalized Kenya this week when the United States and other aid donors held up new aid because of Kenya's poor political and economic performance.
The statement on Friday appeared to be an attempt to drive home the point that there was abundant American aid available for Africa but Kenya could not expect to benefit from it unless the Government curbed corruption and opened up the political system.


Capturing History: From Coup to Stage
It was only a matter of time before the epochal events of Eastern Europe became the stuff of theatrical imagination.
But in the case of Caryl Churchill's "Mad Forest," a drama of the Romanian revolution, events there were more than mere inspiration: they were the objects of an on-the-scene journalistic exploration.
What emerged was a reconstruction of the interior spirit of recent Romanian history.
When the play begins, before the revolution, the characters talk softly while the radio blares; by the end, they are talking loudly and not listening to one another.
"Mad Forest," a production of the New York Theater Workshop, which opens with an American cast on Wednesday at the Perry Street Theater, emerged from an unusual project engineered by Mark Wing-Davey, the play's director.
Mr.
Wing-Davey is a former actor with the Joint Stock Theater Company, a British troupe whose performers sometimes try to live a slice of real life before fictionalizing it on stage. ("Mad Forest" was ultimately mounted by the Royal Court Theater in London.)
In March 1990, just three months after the fall and execution of the Communist leader Nicolae Ceausescu, Mr.
Wing-Davey traveled to Romania with Ms.
Churchill and 10 acting students from the Central School of Speech and Drama, where he was then artistic director.
In Romania, working with about 40 local counterparts, the British troupe fanned out to find the ordinary people caught up in events.
They interviewed them and then portrayed them as characters in front of the group, while Ms.
Churchill took notes.


Protecting Against Shock
FOR safety and to satisfy virtually all electric codes, ordinary receptacles, or outlets, in damp or potentially damp locations, including kitchens, bathrooms, basements and garages, should be protected by ground-fault circuit interrupters.
The device interrupts power to a circuit, protecting against shock, when it detects a leak in the flow of electricity, as when a faulty appliance or cord touches a wet floor.


Florida State Tumbles To No. 3 in Its State
Florida State, the preseason favorite to win the unofficial national championship and the nation's top team in the polls for nearly three months, today became only the third best in its state.
Florida, No. 4 in The New York Times's computer ranking and No. 5 in the Associated Press poll of broadcasters and writers, handed the Seminoles their second consecutive loss by harassing Casey Weldon into a subpar performance and riding the passing of Shane Matthews to a 14-9 victory.
That ended a four-game losing streak in the rivalry.


Sunday Menu; Salmon: Contrast of Flavors
This combination of lentils and salmon provides pleasing results.
Combining smoked salmon with fresh salmon provides a burst of flavor and interesting textures that neither provides alone.


U.S. Women Beat Norway To Capture World Cup
America won its first international soccer championship tonight when the United States defeated Norway, 2-1, to take the first World Cup trophy for women.
At the end of the game, 12 Chinese motorcyclists carrying the flags of the tournament's 12 competing nations zoomed onto the field, and a float draped in tinsel and flashing lights with a model of the trophy set in a lotus flower was moved to the center of the field.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The raised hearth in front of my fireplace is made of masonry that has never been sealed.
Candle wax has dripped on the masonry and left several stains.
How can I remove the stains, and how can the hearth be treated to prevent future problems of this kind?
A.
The candle wax has apparently soaked in.
You will have to soften or liquefy it and then draw it out.
One way to do thaat is to cover the stains with dry powdered cement and then pour a solvent like paint thinner to saturate the powder.
Cover with a piece of plastic kitchen wrap for a couple of hours, and then sweep up or remove the powder.
Another way is to warm the concrete with mild heat, like that from a hair dryer, to melt the wax.
Promptly cover the area with powdered cement and apply more heat while the absorbent powder draws out the melted wax.
To minimize the chances of staining recurring, apply two coats of a clear masonry sealer.


Daly Seems To Breeze In Skins
With a trademark burst of power golf, John Daly dominated the opening day of the Skins Game by winning a record-tying $120,000 for the first nine holes.
On a cold, blustery day on which 45 mile-an-hour gusts made the notoriously difficult T.P.C.
Stadium Course at PGA West play its hardest, the 25-year-old long-hitting sensation won six skins and two new cars, while Jack Nicklaus, Curtis Strange and Payne Stewart all came up empty.


'Silencing the Self'
To the Editor:
What is really depressing is to read of yet another book that perpetuates old myths about why so many more women than men are depressed.
According to Deborah Tannen's review of "Silencing the Self" by Dana Crowley Jack (Oct. 20), the author locates the problem in the double-bind situation of the married woman: if she expresses herself in her marriage, she risks losing it; if she shuts up, she becomes isolated and depressed.
Ms.
Jack says this very dilemma is the reason why twice as many women as men are depressed, and bases her startling and unsupported claim on interviews with 12 white rural women.


Lisa Ammirati Marries John Curran
Lisa Ammirati, until recently the public-relations director for the New York fashion designer Mary McFadden, and John Curran, a commodities trader with the Caxton Corporation of New York, were married yesterday in New York at St.
Vincent Ferrer Church.
The Rev.
Sam Matarazzo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
Mrs.
Curran, 27 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Ammirati of New York and Southampton, L.I.
She graduated from Assumption College.
Her father is the chairman and creative director of the Ammirati &amp; Puris advertising agency in New York.


Casey's People
For old-time Central Intelligence Agency fans, the Iran-contra indictment of Duane R. Clarridge last week must have been like seeing James Bond brought to brook for littering.
In his three decades at the C.I.A., Mr.
Clarridge built a reputation as a man to rely on when the doing called for daring.
As a specialist in covert anti-terrorist operations in the Mideast and Europe, he dined and dressed in stylish flamboyance and sometimes sank into pseudonyms and shadows to do things that his admirers say may have saved many lives.
In the early 1980's, William J. Casey picked him to run the agency's clandestine operations against the Sandinista Government, and in 1985 he helped Oliver L. North arrange an aircraft flight that carried American-made missiles to Iran.
Now he stands charged with lying to Congress about knowing at the time what was on that plane.
Mr.
Clarridge's lawyer said that the former spy had done no wrong and looked forward to establishing as much at his trial.


A Noteworthy Collection
This selection of paperbacks is from the New &amp; Noteworthy column since the 1991 summer reading issue.
It includes novels, stories, biography, memoirs, history, essays and science.
A HOLE IN THE WORLD: An American Boyhood, by Richard Rhodes. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $10.) Memoirs of redemption from the survivor of a terrible childhood.


Topics of The Times; Recycling for Warmth
A striking poster now on display on New York City buses, subways and commuter rail lines shows a curled- up Statue of Liberty shivering against the cold.
The poster urges New Yorkers to donate used but wearable coats to the homeless, the elderly poor and needy kids.
Last year, the coat drive -- now in its third year -- collected 20,000 secondhand overcoats, jackets and parkas.
This year, the drive's sponsors, New York Cares and the J. M. Kaplan Fund, hope to collect 30,000 adult and children-sized coats.
The 12-day drive starts tomorrow.
The clothes can be dropped off at 17 police stations in the five boroughs, and at a variety of other convenient locations, including (from 7 A.M. to 10 A.M. on weekdays) Penn Station, Grand Central Terminal, the Port Authority Bus Terminal and the World Trade Center.
For more information, call (212) 566-0800.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
HOLIDAY HOUSES
Christmas celebrations begin this week at historic sites around the state.
The Butler-McCook Homestead, 396 Main Street in Hartford, will be open tomorrow through Dec. 15, from noon to 4 P.M., with a display of family artifacts, toys, cooking preparations, Christmas decorations and a tree.
Admission is $2, children $1.


Reservations
To the Editor: As the owner of a bed and breakfast inn, I found the Practical Traveler column on "guaranteed" hotel reservations" (Oct. 27) more than of passing interest. However, it didn't cover the cancellation concerns of a growing segment of the industry, the small inn.
Small inns have distinct reservation problems.
At Ashley Manor, we protect our guests but, to do this, we must protect ourselves as well.
First, we do not overbook.
We have six accommodations, and when we take a reservation we guarantee a specific room regardless of arrival time.
We have evolved a policy -- and we think we are more or less typical of other fine inns in our area -- that also protects us from "frivolous" reservations, late cancellations and/or no-shows.
It is:


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-23  YELTSIN BAILS OUT THE KREMLIN
Faced with the imminent bankruptcy of the Soviet Government, President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic agreed to provide credits and finance the central payroll.  1  American experts and officials were encouraged by Russia's move.  20  The American Communist Party got Kremlin funds until last year.  17  UKRAINE SCALES DOWN ARMY PLAN
On the eve of the Ukraine's referendum to declare independence from the Soviet Union, officials of the republic have significantly scaled down their plans to create a powerful Ukrainian army.  1  The Bush Administration plans to name an envoy to the Ukraine.  19  DEBATING SOUTH AFRICA'S FUTURE
Negotiations to dismantle white minority rule were hailed as imminent as representatives of 20 political organizations concluded preparations for a formal convention to debate the future of South Africa.  3  PARTY REJECTS AQUINO CANDIDATE
Rejecting the candidate backed by President Corazon C. Aquino, her political coalition nominated the speaker of the Philippine Parliament to succeed her.  3  PROMOTING WEST BANK BUSINESS
Israel has begun a policy intended to allow more free enterprise and business opportunity in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.  7  Repeal of an anti-Israeli U.N. action has been tied to peace talks.  6  A ONCE-POOR VILLAGE PROSPERS
The village of Xiongjia has attained affluence in the terms of its part of China: two bicycles in every courtyard and a dog in every pot.  15  The United States detailed how much it was penalizing Kenya.  10  France is gambling that it will gain from a strong united Europe.  16  Yugoslavia's violence pervades civilian life in Belgrade.  21  National 24-38  ARE CROSS BURNINGS FREE SPEECH?
The Supreme Court will hear arguments this week on whether hate-motivated activity is protected by the Constitution.  1  WHETHER TO ACT, AND WHEN
Despite President Bush's decision to cling to a go-slow strategy for economic revival, White House advisers are increasingly concerned about the risks -- to the economy as well as to 1992 campaign prospects -- of simply waiting for the recovery to take wing.  28  A KINDER, GENTLER PRESIDENT
White House Memo: Anxious about polls that show a severe erosion of middle-income voters' support for the President, his associates are searching for ways to demonstrate greater sensitivity.  28  Duke will run in several Presidential primaries, an adviser said.  31  SHUTTLE MISSION IS CUT SHORT
After one of three navigational units aboard Atlantis failed, NASA decided to shorten the spacecraft's mission and attempt a landing today.
The episode marked only the second time in the history of the shuttle program that equipment failure forced an early return.  24  A PALM BEACH DRAMA
Eight months after their fateful evening together, William K. Smith and the woman who accuses him of rape are about to meet again, as a Florida jury begins hearing evidence in the case.  24  TOLL MOUNTS IN HIGHWAY PILEUP
Seventeen people were killed and perhaps 150 injured along Interstate 5 in central California as a dust storm blinded drivers and caused one of the worst road accidents in the nation's history.  34  A battle is developing over the nation's wildlife refuges.  38  Washington Journal: In the capital, a much-polluted waterway.  24  Regional 41-56  GRIM CITY, WARY REGION
The ties that link New York City and the region around it are weakening, a survey by The New York Times of residents of the five boroughs and 14 surrounding counties finds.  1  POSING TOUGH QUESTIONS
At Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J., staff members are preparing to talk about death.
A new Federal regulation requires that all new patients be asked if they would like a "living will." 1  AT HOME WITH RELIGION
A growing number of Christians and Jews are organizing informal home worship sessions as alternatives to church or synagogue.  1 REMEMBER THE NEEDIEST
Against a backdrop of hard times and high caseloads for charities, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund begins its annual appeal.  44  Obituaries 52  Raymond Madiford Peardon Donaghy, a neurosurgeon  Campus Life 59-64  Fashion 68-69  Life Style 65  Pastimes 76-77  Weddings 70-74


Europe's Growing Debate Over Whom to Let Inside
Recent attacks by skinheads and neo-Nazis on immigrant hostels in Berlin, Dresden and other German cities promptly awakened fears in Western Europe of a resurgence of Germany's dark past and brought a spate of bitter cartoons and articles suggesting that Germany's instincts should never be trusted.
Yet few of its neighbors could claim moral purity on the question of foreigners.
Elsewhere in Europe, with immigration fast becoming the dominant political issue, xenophobia is also on the rise -- but with a difference.
In several countries, racism directed at non-white foreigners is gaining respectability at the polls.


Wondering About Putnam
WALLACE PUTNAM died in 1989 at the age of 90.
He was a painter that many people have heard of, but seemingly few know much about him.
After a 1987 retrospective at the Somerstown Gallery and a recent display at the Luise Ross Gallery in Manhattan, the 17 canvases assembled by Kristina Amadeus at the Public Library here provide an opportunity to wonder again about the artist.
Putnam, born in Massachusetts, attended the department of fine arts at Harvard Art School, the Boston Museum School, the Boston Normal Art School and the Hartford School of Art, spending no more than a year at each.
It is a record that suggests at the very least a temperament ready for the Modernist rebellion.
And in fact, Putnam was only three years out of school when he was selected for the "Societe Anonyme International Exhibition" at the Brooklyn Museum (1926).
It was the biggest avant-garde event since the Armory Show of 1913, and it was followed a decade later by one even bigger, the Museum of Modern Art's "Fantastic Art, Dada, Surrealism."


N.F.L. Has Made Life a Little Simpler (Supposedly) for Its Referees
There have been some especially bad weekends for the National Football League's men in stripes this season.
But, chastened and, perhaps, improved, the referees and linesmen and replay officials go back to work today.
Weeks of replays of their mistaken calls make it hard to believe that their leadership took several initiatives before the season in an attempt to avoid the pitfalls that tripped them up on recent Sundays.
But it's true.


Revamped Islanders Sending A Message
Are the Islanders emerging as an improved, rebuilt contender for the playoffs, or are they still just bottom feeders who get lucky when a good team underestimates them?
There was an opportunity for a clear indication tonight as they played host to the Washington Capitals at Nassau Coliseum in the second of a two-night, home-and-home series.


Protecting Against Shock
FOR safety and to satisfy virtually all electric codes, ordinary receptacles, or outlets, in damp or potentially damp locations, including kitchens, bathrooms, basements and garages, should be protected by ground-fault circuit interrupters.
The device interrupts power to a circuit, protecting against shock, when it detects a leak in the flow of electricity, as when a faulty appliance or cord touches a wet floor.


Inventing Argentina
To the Editor:
I thank David Brading for his favorable review of my book "The Invention of Argentina" (Oct. 13).
Yet, while not wanting to seem ungrateful, I must make a correction.


CAMPUS LIFE: Lycoming; Now, Party Givers Need a Monitor If Alcohol Flows
A new policy at Lycoming College, a 1,400-student Methodist-affiliated college, requires organizations wishing to have alcohol at parties to hire a monitor at the rate of $10 an hour.
Liability insurance costs and the fear of civil litigation are the primary reasons for the new policy, said James E. Douthat, the college's president.
"The liability is substantially greater than it was in the past," he said.
"The fraternities were saying they were only serving 21-year-olds at parties, and the residence-life staff found that was not happening."


Memories


Ithaca Beats Back Union Rally and Wins Playoff
High on a hill overlooking Lake Cayuga's waters, 45 players representing Ithaca College sang "Happy Birthday" today to their 64-year-old coach, Jim Butterfield, and everyone was happy with good reason.
The Bombers, a small college power, had defeated Union, but not as easily as the 35-23 score suggested, in a Division III quarterfinal playoff game before a crowd of 2,428 at South Field.


Miss Loughran To Wed in May
Judge and Mrs.
Charles H. Loughran of Greensburg, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Aimee Cushwa Loughran to George Graydon Bower, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruce F. Bower of West Hartford, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Loughran, 25 years old, is a personal banking representative at the Connecticut National Bank in Farmington, Conn.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father is a judge in the Court of Common Pleas of Westmoreland County, Pa.
Mr.
Bower, 28, graduated from Denison University and is pursuing an M.B.A. at Washington University.
Until recently, he was a trust officer at the Connecticut National Bank in Hartford.
His father is an endocrinologist in Hartford.


Theater; Have You Heard the One About ...?
The borscht belt used to be wide enough to encircle more than 400 resort hotels complete with seven varieties of herring plus after-dinner entertainment.
Set in the Catskills - 90 minutes from Broadway and catering to a Jewish clientele - they were a kind of bumpy Yucca Flats for perfomers, many of them comedians.
Today, only about a dozen resorts remain.
"Catskills on Broadway," a tribute to that world, opens on Thursday at the Lunt Fontanne.
Conceived by Freddie Roman, who started in the Catskills in the 50's, it stars Marilyn Michaels, Mal Z. Lawrence, Dick Capri and Mr.
Roman under the direction of Larry Arrick.


Japanese Surprise! The Portions Are Big
IT is Japanese now, but the wood-and-brick restaurant on Route 25A in Northport has housed a "United Nations" of cuisines over the years.
The name Mount Fuji and the outdoor Oriental lanterns proclaim the nationality of this latest delegate loudly and clearly.
It is a sister to Mount Fuji on Montauk Highway in Amagansett.
The Northport newcomer is a serendipitous blending of the expected and the unexpected.
The interior looks exactly as one might imagine, simple, serene and authentic, with pale wood furnishings, sushi bar and both Western and tatami seating.


FAMILY ISN'T EVERYTHING
Norwalk, Conn.


In Brazil, Pessimism Starts to Keep Pace With Inflation Rate
Night after night, crowds troop across the marble and parquet floors of Brazil's former presidential palace here to watch a re-enactment of the suicide of President Getulio Vargas in 1954.
Written for history buffs, the gloomy play unexpectedly hit a wide vein of pessimism in modern Brazil.
An initial run of three days stretched into three months as Brazilians watched their current President, Fernando Collor de Mello, struggle in vain with soaring inflation and a rebellious Congress.


The Mystery of New England's Walls
To the Editor:
The geologist Robert Thorson ("Scholar Looks at Quaint Stone Walls and Sees Pioneers' Garbage Heaps," Nov. 17) believes that deforestation and plowing bring to the surface rocks that might otherwise remain buried.
This has long been understood by farmers and geologists alike.
How much agricultural techniques contributed to the rockiness of New England's soils and to the area's stone walls is a question that has never been adequately addressed.


Pursuing Quality
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein's essay "A Conflict of Cultures at Steinway"  [ Nov. 3 ]  invites comment.


Julia Callahan Has Wedding
Julia Gloor Callahan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey E. Callahan of Mystic, Conn., was married yesterday to James David Streit, the son of Mrs.
Edgerton G. North Jr. of New York and the late Arnold R. Streit.
Roger LeCompte, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Copper Beech Inn in Ivoryton, Conn.
Mrs.
Streit, 23 years old, is a development officer at Fordham University in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is a manager at PRB Associates Inc., a defense contractor in Hollywood, Md.


Queens Jeweler Is Shot In a Robbery Attempt
The owner of a jewelry store in Queens was shot and critically wounded yesterday afternoon in an attempted robbery, the police said.
The incident began when three men and a woman entered the Jasmine Plus Company, a jewelry store at 30-04 Broadway in Long Island City, about 2:30 P.M., locked a store clerk in a back room and demanded money from the store's owner, a police spokesman said.


What's Brewing
ASK FOR YOUR FAVORITE BEER at Berghoff's restaurant on Ontario Street in Chicago and you might hear something like, "That was last week," or "We won't do that until February."
Berghoff's doesn't get its beer off a delivery truck; it makes it fresh every day right on the premises.
Berghoff's is more than a restaurant; it's also a brewery, one of a number of microbreweries springing up all around the country.
Micro breweries and their smaller cousins, brewpubs, cater to a new breed of beer drinker, the demanding customer who is tired of what he considers the tasteless pale potions served up by the beer-business giants.


3d in Ayckbourn Trilogy By the Coyote Theater
THE renaissance of Alan Ayckbourn in America may be just beginning.
Never mind the middling Broadway successes over the last couple of decades of "Absurd Person Singular" (1972), "The Norman Conquests" (1973) and "Bedroom Farce" (1975) -- all predicated on some sort of gimmick or novelty.
The prolific English playwright, whose 38th play recently opened in London, has suffered such labels as Neil Simon's English counterpart, Chekhov's disciple and Feydeau's modern-day incarnation.
The Chekovian connection may strike deepest, and those who have consigned to Ayckbourn the tag "comic laureate of Britain's middle class" are not too far off the mark.
Now it seems that the undercurrent of darkness and desperation in Ayckbourn's most ostensibly farcical or frivolous work bolts to the surface quicker the more one sees it.


American Skier Is Injured Again
KRISTI TERZIAN, the United States Ski Team racer attempting a comeback from surgery on her right knee that wiped out her 1991 season, injured her left knee yesterday in a women's World Cup slalom at Lech, Austria.
Terzian, 24 years old, of Salt Lake City, was examined by a Ski Team physician at the scene, who recommended that she return to Vail, Colo., to be examined further by Dr.
RICHARD STEADMAN, a surgeon. (AP)


Where the Yule Things Are; What's Wrong With This Picture?


West Sees Russia's Moves as Good
A move by the Russian Republic today to bail out the Kremlin after the main central Government bank ran out of money might be an encouraging sign for Western governments, bankers and investors, American experts and officials said.
The accelerating takeover of economic authority by the Russian republic might halt rising economic chaos, they said, adding that it will not disrupt Western food credits and debt assistance.


Police Tactics at Issue in Watkins Murder Trial
Defense lawyers for four young men accused of murdering a tourist from Utah contended in court last week that the police had repeatedly violated the rights of the defendants by using tricks and deception to obtain incriminating statements from them.
Since the trial began in October, the police have been hammered by the lawyers, who are preparing to end their cases this week.
They have tried to elicit information that might prove that the police violated the defendants' rights in obtaining their written and videotaped statements, which form the thrust of the prosecution's case.


Ms. Nakajima Has Wedding
Midoriko Nakajima, the daughter of Saburu Ono of Toyko and Sayako Nakajima Ono of Kobe, Japan, was married in New York yesterday to Martin Lynch O'Neil, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. O'Neil of New York.
The Rev.
John E. Halborg performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More.
Mrs.
Nakajima-O'Neil was until recently an economist with the Nomura Research Institute in Hong Kong.
She graduated and received a master's degree in law from Aoyama Gakuin University in Tokyo and also has a master's in law and diplomacy at Tufts University.


The Wrong Location
To the Editor:  It seems to me that the caption for the picture accompanying your review of Peter Green's "Alexander of Macedon" (Sept. 22) is incorrect.
The picture is of  a fragment of a large mosaic depicting the Battle of Issus between Alexander the Great and Darius, King of Persia, in 333 B.C.
The mosaic is at the National Museum in Naples; it is not at Pompeii.
TAMARA PRISTIN New York


In Yugoslavia, There's No Escape From War
The large poster announcing a cartoon contest at the Kolarac Gallery shows a red-nosed clown in an ill-fitting camouflage uniform.
It is a commentary on the preoccupation of Yugoslavs with the civil war that has scourged their land since June.
Let alone the thousands killed and wounded, war-mindedness and incidents of violence have pervaded civilian life here.


Flu: Some Answers, But Not THE Answer
Despite the remarkably sophisticated epidemiology and molecular biology that is brought to bear on the lowly influenza virus, it has kept many of its mysteries.
As the national stockpile of influenza vaccine is being taxed by what some epidemiologists say is the earliest flu season in memory, scientists scratch their heads when asked such seemingly basic questions as why the virus strikes in winter and how long it will be before a particular strain comes back.
They are not even certain whether an early start to the season means that the flu will go away sooner or whether we are in for a long siege.
Dr.
Walter Gunn, a flu expert at the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, said it is unusual for the flu season to start in November.
"In a typical year, it starts in December, peaks in early February, and is gone by March," he said.
"I don't know why it started earlier. It is very, very difficult to predict what the flu will do."


The Seven Days of Kwanzaa
ON the day after Christmas 25 years ago, a small group of black Americans in Los Angeles began a nonreligious seven-day celebration commemorating black culture worldwide, particularly the importance of the black community and family.
Since that first unassuming observance, Kwanzaa, which means "first fruits of the harvest" in Swahili, has been adapted into the holiday celebrations in some manner by more than five million African-Americans.
And with increasing frequency small, community-oriented events have been paralleled by lavish festivals held at colleges and universities, museums and public institutions across the United States.


Albania Elections Promised By Rulers in Three Months
Albania's caretaker coalition Government, dominated by former Communists, has agreed to hold general elections within three months and vowed to speed up economic reforms.
The decision to bring forward the voting originally set for May or June was made on Friday night, four days after the opposition Democratic Party threatened to quit the Government unless the former Communists agreed to early elections and purge old-style loyalists from power.


PEARL HARBOR IN THE MIND OF JAPAN
It struck me as odd that Weisman says Pearl Harbor evoked ". . . the moment the nation awoke from isolationism to global responsibilities that continue to this day." I thought it peculiar that he used the word "isolationism" to describe the United States' economic and political disposition toward the war.
"Neutrality" would have been the better term, considering that the United States has never, even going back to Washington's farewell address, been an isolationist nation in the true sense of the word and the fact that President Roosevelt issued three proclamations of
neutrality
before entering the United States into the war.
If anything, Pearl Harbor provided the legitimate rationale the United States needed in order to enter World War II without appearing aggressive, the main concern of almost every political and military thinker at the time.
DAVID PODGURSKI
Medford, Mass.


Cruise Company Seeks Cash Flow
Society Expeditions Cruises hopes to solve its cash flow problem in order to make refunds to customers who canceled cruises to Antarctica aboard the Society Adventurer, which the company was to have started operating earlier this year.
Delivery of the ship was refused on June 28, 10 days before she was to have been finished at the Rauma Yards in Finland.
Peter Cox, director of operations at the adventure cruise line's offices in Seattle, said late last month that negotiations were continuing with Discoverer Reederei of Germany, the line's parent company.
He said that Heiko Klein, owner of Society Expeditions, and Glenn McQuiston, senior vice president, were both in Germany trying to arrange for bank loans to repay about $200,000 in deposits that had been received from travelers.


In the Nation; Where the Ducks Are
In 1988, many Democrats raised a hard question about their party's electoral objectives: Should it try to win back all or part of its former stronghold in the old "Solid South," or should it develop instead a strategy centered on carrying California and other non-Southern states?
Michael Dukakis, the Presidential nominee, apparently chose the Southern route when he picked Lloyd Bentsen of Texas as his running mate.
But Mr.
Dukakis's abysmal campaign obscured the question; no changes in electoral objectives could have rescued him or the Democrats he led to such overwhelming defeat.


The Imprints of Pearl Harbor
Fifty years ago next Saturday, America's world turned upside down.
In a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor, Japanese warplanes destroyed or damaged 21 ships and killed 2,403 Americans.
Shocked and unified by a calculated act of treachery, Americans within a week were at war across the globe.
Pearl Harbor has left its imprint on all that has followed.
Most obviously, Pearl Harbor is shorthand for the direct sacrifice of the thousands of Americans who died, the millions who fought and the millions more at home who armed and fed a triumphant alliance.
Yet beyond respect, this anniversary prompts reflection over what Pearl Harbor has meant for America, Japan and the world.


Ellen Molotsky, Coach, Marries
Ellen Judith Molotsky, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irvin D. Molotsky of Washington, was married yesterday to Charles Troy Carpenter 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carpenter Jr. of Kings Mountain, N.C.
Magistrate Donald L. Hughes officiated at the Willow Grove Inn in Orange, Va.
Mrs.
Carpenter, 26 years old, is an assistant track coach at Central Michigan University in Mount Pleasant.
She graduated from Oberlin College and received a master's degree in sport psychology from the University of North Carolina.
Her father is an editor in the Washington bureau of The New York Times.
Her mother, Iris F. Molotsky, is the membership development director of the American Association of University Professors in Washington.


Polish Airline Offers Credits
LOT Polish Airlines has introduced a frequent flier program for passengers on LOT trans-Atlantic flights originating in North America.
Under the program, passengers accrue mileage points that can be credited toward travel on any international airline but are worth double if used on LOT flights.
The points may also be used in exchange for other services in Poland, including car rentals, hotel accommodations and ground tours, reserved through the airline.
Once passengers have flown a minimum of 8,000 miles (full-fare business class) or 16,000 miles (special-fare business or full-fare economy) they may redeem credits for their dollar value in air or other services.
Customers redeeming their credits toward the purchase of full-fare business class tickets on LOT flights earn 4 cents a mile for every mile flown, one way or round trip.
Full-fare economy class passengers earn 2 cents a mile when used for LOT flights.
Full-fare business class passengers who apply their credits to other international airlines will earn 2 cents a mile, and special-fare business class passengers will earn 1 cent per mile.
If credits earned do not cover the fare, passengers may pay the balance in cash.


Focus: New Orleans; Builders Betting on Riverboat Gambling
BETTING people in the real estate community here think the odds are excellent that riverboat gambling, approved by the State Legislature in July, will spur development along the Mississippi River waterfront downtown.
The law stipulated that construction of the boats could not begin until January 1992, and the first boats are not expected to begin operating until late in 1993.
Nevertheless, real estate brokers and developers already have begun to prepare for what they think will be a daily influx of thousands of visitors.


Mozart's Bicentennial: Too Much, Too Late
The pianist Glenn Gould, in a typically iconoclastic moment, said the problem with Mozart was that he died not too early but too late.
To paraphrase Gould (who didn't much care for the composer): the bicentennial anniversary of Mozart's death, which finally arrives on Thursday, is coming not too soon to allow us time for sufficient celebrations, but too late -- the celebrations should have ended long ago.
It is astonishing, after a year of relentless exposure to the composer, how little our understanding of him has grown.
The close of the bicentennial year seems a welcome prospect.
It may even bring respite from the music's constantly twirling figuration, elegant sighs and piously phrased expressions of deep feeling.
In the spirit of cranky confession: I find much of the music boring, and much that is beautiful boringly played.
I have wished, at times, that the year were 2009, so we could celebrate the bicentennial of the death of the brilliantly eccentric Papa Haydn.


The Importance of Being Hirschfeld
HIRSCHFELD
Art and Recollections From Eight Decades.
By Al Hirschfeld.
Introduction by Alistair Cooke.
Illustrated. 306 pp.
New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. $50.


THE HOUSE WE LIVED IN
The re-establishment of old property rights amounts to a futile effort by post-Communist countries to eliminate their connections with the immediate past.
Those nations could more readily leave the horrors of recent regimes behind by directing energy toward the constructive project of self-definition, rather then by resurrecting a bygone era.
ETHAN A. KLINGSBERG
New York, N.Y.


Singular Sleuths


Notable Books of the Year 1991
This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas Books issue of December 1990.
It suggests only high points in the main fields of reader interest, and it does not include the titles chosen by the editors of The Book Review as the Best Books of 1991.
Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings.
Autobiography and Biography
ADAM CLAYTON POWELL, JR.: The Political Biography of an American Dilemma.
By Charles V. Hamilton. (Atheneum, $24.95.) Mr.
Hamilton's diligent scholarship captures the full life of an exciting man, at once a civil rights pioneer and a buccaneer.


Jennifer Jahrling Weds James Forese
Jennifer Jahrling, a second vice president at the Chase Manhattan Bank, and James Anthony Forese, a vice president at Salomon Brothers Inc., both in New York, were married yesterday in Ridgewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard Andersen officiated at St.
Elizabeth's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Forese, 26 years old, works in the private banking division at Chase and graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert V. W. Jahrling of Ridgewood.
Her father retired as a partner of Price Waterhouse.


Apology in Order For Lonnie Smith
To the Sports Editor:
"Actions Tell a Story, Too" by Murray Chass, (The Times, Nov. 3) raises the question that maybe the baserunning actions of Atlanta's Lonnie Smith in the seventh game of the World Series should be re-examined.
Smith was stealing on the pitch; thus, his focus was on second base not on the ball.
If the fake by the two Minnesota players worked, he would have slid into second base to break up the double play as Chass discloses.
But instead of sliding, he slowed up so as not to overrun the bag and looked toward third as he rounded the bag.


POSTINGS: Albany Project in Abeyance; Looking for a Large Tenant
Having acquired a 6.6-acre site five blocks south of the New York State Capitol and won approvals from regulatory agencies, developers in Albany are planning the largest private office project in the city's history, with four high-rises, a 100-room hotel and parking for 1,350 cars.
But wait.
Even in Albany, the real estate slump must be reckoned with.
The developers, the Mercer Companies of Albany, said last week that they cannot get bank financing for the project until a large tenant is committed.


The Embassy's Record
To the Editor:
Tina Rosenberg, in reviewing Sam Dillon's "Comandos: The CIA and Nicaragua's Contra Rebels" (Sept. 29), says that as the United States Ambassador in Tegucigalpa I "blocked the State Department's man charged with running a contra human rights program from entering Honduras."


Redmen, Waiting for Duke, Are Grateful for the Lapchick
St.
John's disposed of yet another helpless sparring partner with an81-61 victory over Drexel yesterday in the championship game of the Joe Lapchick Memorial Tournament at Alumni Hall in Jamaica, Queens.
The Redmen then looked ahead to Thursday night's battle with college basketball's defending champion, the Duke Blue Devils.
"I heard they're even better than last year," said Coach Lou Carnesecca, whose team was eliminated by Duke from the National Collegiate Athletic Association Tournament the last two seasons.
"That can be an adrenaline game for us. It could really open up your arteries."


Ithaca Beats Back Union Rally and Wins Playoff
High on a hill overlooking Lake Cayuga's waters, 45 players representing Ithaca College sang "Happy Birthday" today to their 64-year-old coach, Jim Butterfield, and everyone was happy with good reason.
The Bombers, a small college power, had defeated Union, but not as easily as the 35-23 score suggested, in a Division III quarterfinal playoff game before a crowd of 2,428 at South Field.


Westbury Drive-In Plan Is Assailed
RALPH WALDO EMERSON said, "If a man owns land, the land owns him."
In Jericho, a councilman from Oyster Bay Town is applying for a permit to build a 14-screen movie complex and wholesale store on the site of the U.A.
Westbury Drive-In.
Residents opposing the request say they fear that the decision on the permit may be biased, in part, because of the councilman's position on the Town Board.


The Executive Computer; In a Tough Year for the Industry, Dell Stands Out
Third-quarter profits rose 90 percent and sales increased 68 percent at the Dell Computer Corporation, and profits and sales were up in the first and second quarters, too.
All that during a year that some computer executives have characterized as one of the most brutal in the industry's relatively brief history.
Many other companies are bleeding red ink, slashing prices, eliminating jobs -- or in the case of I.B.M., desperately trying to strip away the ballast of the decades.
Industry growth is expected to register barely perceptible growth, after a decade of double-digit climbing.
Yet Dell's sales for the first nine months of the year are up 59 percent, and its sales last year, $546 million, were up 41 percent from the year before.


CAMPUS LIFE: Stetson; Change in Policy Shows Prevalence Of Alcohol Abuse
A change in the fraternity rush system at Stetson University has uncovered alcohol-related problems, including instances of under-age drinking and drivingwhile intoxicated, among the school's 2,000 students.
Fraternity and sorority rush, normally held during the first week of classes in the fall semester, was delayed this year by the administration in an attempt to introduce new students to other organizations and activities on campus before they decide to join a fraternity.


Managing; Listening to Women and Blacks
TO stem disproportionately high turnover among women in sales, S C Johnson Wax rejiggered territories to reduce travel time, arranged for the women to give each other advice and gave them -- and other salespeople -- more autonomy to negotiate prices.
"They're staying because we made the jobs more doable and more interesting," said Gayle P. Kosterman, a vice president of human resources.
When Corning Inc. discovered that blacks were quitting at three times the rate of white men, it strengthened its career development and coaching programs and its appraisal systems, to insure that blacks get accurate feedback.
It even helped beauticians expert in black hair styles to set up shop in town and arranged for the local cable system to carry Black Entertainment Television.
"We made Corning the company and Corning the city more hospitable places," said Dawn M. Cross, director of cultural diversity, who says the turnover gap has narrowed.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Branford, Conn. 219,250
14 Waterside Road  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 130-year-old colonial; large screened porch, pine floors, water views; taxes $2,112.
Darien, Conn. 668,000
7 Indian Trail. 5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 30-year-old contemporary; luxury kitchen, private beach association, 1 acre; taxes $5,840.
Weston, Conn. 650,000
187 Steephill Road  5-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; screened porch, hot tub, large windows, 2 acres; taxes $6,386.
Bronxville, N.Y. 725,000
36 Summit Avenue  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 70-year-old colonial; music room, beamed ceilings, porch, library, darkroom, sun room; taxes $11,422.
New Rochelle, N.Y. 265,000
14 Farragut Circle  5-bedroom, 2 full- and 2 half-bath, 31-year-old Cape Cod colonial; fireplace, screened porch, breakfast room; taxes $5,551.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 308,000
Rolling Meadow Lane
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 15-year-old contemporary; fireplace, beamed cathedral ceilings, deck, family room, workshop; taxes $5,034.
OTHER AREAS Jackson, N.J. 135,900
10 Partree Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 15-year-old split level; den, c/a, 1-car garage, fireplace, pool; taxes $3,578.
Marlboro, N.J. 165,000
30 Amhurst Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; den, c/a, deck, family room; taxes $3,333.
Syosset, L.I. 160,000
44 Candy Lane
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, skylights, carport; taxes $2,200.


Cash-for-Guns Customer Charged With Theft
A New Jersey man who was a big a customer of the cash-for-guns amenesty program in Brooklyn is under arrest -- charged with stealing guns he had handed over to the police.
The man, Stanley H. Cagle Jr. of Bradley Beach, had delivered at least two sacks of weapons as part of the amnesty program before his arrest Friday night, the police said.
He was charged with stealing weapons from a Belmar, N.J. gun dealer whose home was burglarized on Halloween.


Dr. Kipfer Is Affianced
Dr.
Barbara Ann Kipfer, a lexicographer and author, and Paul A. Magoulas, an insurance underwriter, plan to marry in February.
Dr.
Kipfer, 37 years old, is the author of "14,000 Things to Be Happy About" and "Workbook on Lexicography" and is the editor of "Roget's 21st Century Thesaurus," to be published in July by Dell.
She graduated from Valparaiso University and received a master's degree and a doctorate in linguistics from the University of Exeter in England.


Herbert J. Deitz, Lawyer, 82
Herbert J. Deitz, a New York City lawyer, died on Wednesday in the Jacob Perlow Hospice of Beth Israel Medical Center.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, his wife, Suzanne, said.


Samuel Reid to Wed Juliet Weber
Dr. and Mrs.
John C. Weber of New York and Ocala and Hobe Sound, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Juliet Colket Weber to Samuel Seabury Reid, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Reid of York Harbor, Me.
The wedding is to be next fall.
Miss Weber, 21 years old, graduated from the Chapin School and is a student at Brown University.
Her father is an associate professor of cell biology and anatomy at Cornell University Medical College-New York Hospital and the president of the Florida Thoroughbred Breeders Association.
Her mother, Charlotte Colket Weber, is on the board of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the China Institute in America and the New York Women's Foundation.
The prospective bride's great-grandfather John T. Dorrance founded the Campbell Soup Company.


Catholic Schools Face Financial Strain
THE barbed wire on top of the fence is the only sign that this is an inner-city school.
Inside, Our Lady of Good Counsel elementary and high schools are models of the Roman Catholic school system, spotless and brightly decorated.
More than 1,000 scrubbed, uniformed students listen quietly to teachers who have spent decades instructing the children of immigrants.
The cheerful confidence that a visitor senses among the staff of the school belies the fact that Our Lady of Good Counsel and other Catholic schools across New Jersey are under severe financial stress.


Reservations
To the Editor: Betsy Wade's article on early billing of "guaranteed" hotel reservations is an important and timely piece.
Add to the early billing before use syndrome, the increased practice of having convention registration charges, including banquet tickets and city tour tickets, and continuing education credits show up on monthly charge statements three to four months prior to the actual convention.
In the past this seemed to occur closer to the time of the convention.
Recently early preregistration seems to be required earlier and billing appears to be occuring consistently earlier.
ROBERT DEITCHMAN Akron, Ohio


A Tough Case for Dr. Healy
DR.
BERNADINE P. HEALY, WHO IN APRIL BECAME the first female director of the National Institutes of Health, likes to tell about meeting Gen.
Colin Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, shortly after she arrived in Washington to start her job.
"He smiled," she recalls, "shook my hand strongly and said, 'Welcome to the N.F.L.!' "
Healy, a 47-year-old cardiologist, harked back to the general's cheerful warning in a recent conversation.
"I had to laugh," she said, "because for years I used an analogy of brain power versus muscle power." As she propelled herself through male domains in a dazzling career in medicine and government, Healy had often said that where brains counted, women had a level playing field: they could compete as doctors -- but not as football players.
"And now I'm here, and it's brawn and muscle," she said.
"I guess I have to compete with greater wit and brainpower."


Leave 'Em Weak and Powerless
FROM THE BALLROOM TO HELL
Grace and Folly in Nineteenth-Century Dance.
By Elizabeth Aldrich.
Illustrated. 225 pp.
Evanston, Ill.:  Northwestern University Press.
Cloth, $42.95.
Paper, $17.95.


Ms. Shannon, Designer, Wed
Catherine Shannon, a daughter of Frank W. Crouch Jr. of College Station, Tex., and Jean Kirkley of Lexington, S.C., was married yesterday to Timothy Scott Pietrzak, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elroy T. Pietrzak of Greendale, Wis.
The Rev.
Daniel W. Graham, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the home of the bride's mother and stepfather, C. Thomas Kirkley, in Lexington.
Ms.
Shannon, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, is an assistant designer for True Form Foundations, a lingerie concern in New York.
She changed her name legally.
A graduate of the University of South Carolina, she received an associate's degree in fashion design from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her stepmother is Christine Crouch of College Station.


THE WORLD/Next Stop: Washington; Mideast Peace Train Keeps Chugging Along
Nobody ever said that Middle East peacemaking would be easy, so there are no surprises in the fits and starts of the tender process being wetnursed by the United States.
The good news is that the peace train is still on track, and none of the parties want to be blamed for derailing it.
It thus has acquired a certain momentum, with the next stop set for Washington on Wednesday.


Technology; Layer by Layer to the Perfect Blend of Metals
At least since the Bronze Age, people have mixed metals together to obtain properties like hardness or ductility that are not present in the base materials themselves.
Now scientists are improving on the alloying process by combining materials in many fine layers only a few atoms thick.
This atomic engineering holds the promise of designer materials, ones whose properties are built in by blending elements that could not be combined in other ways.
Scientists say the new materials represent a new state of matter that was previously unavailable.


Miss Arzonetti To Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
Walter Arzonetti of Palm Coast, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Samantha Ellyn Arzonetti to Thomas McClure 3d, a son of Renee McClure of Corsicana, Tex., and the late Thomas McClure.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Arzonetti, 25 years old, is an account supervisor at McCann-Erickson Advertising in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Boston University.
Her father, who retired as the chief financial officer of Esso Petroleum in London, is the managing director of Halcyon Holdings, an investment consulting firm in Palm Coast.


Another Battlefield
To the Editor:
Although George Walker raises the valid issues of racism, tokenism and the blatant disregard for the accomplishments of black (male) classical composers  [ "Make Room for Black Classical Music," Nov. 3 ] , he fails to note that the plight of black classical women composers is far worse, since they are battling sexism as well.


A Long-Neglected Classic Still Amazes
The balletic revelation of the year has just occurred in England.
The Birmingham Royal Ballet has revived Leonide Massine's "Choreartium," a legendary work of the 1930's.
Although long neglected, it has not lost its power to amaze.
Set to Brahms's Symphony No. 4 in E Minor, "Choreartium" is a vast mural in motion that makes much recent choreography seem puny by comparison.
The British production was widely acclaimed when it was first presented in October in Birmingham, the company's home base since last year.
The troupe, directed by Peter Wright, then set off on tour, and during a visit to England, I saw two performances of "Choreartium" last month at the Theater Royal in Plymouth.
They were stirring occasions.


Where Radios and Disks Have Led, Computers Must Follow
To the Editor:
Lack of equipment standardization in the computer industry is indeed frustrating, as you say in "It Doesn't Compute" (editorial, Nov. 11), and serves the consumer poorly.
In the long run, I wonder if the companies protecting their markets are not shortchanging themselves.
I have postponed buying a computer for years, because I can't figure out which make to get.


Cooking
Although today's cookbooks may come in fancy trappings -- recipes elaborately garnished with a text of childhood memories, or travel anecdotes, or impressive erudition -- the dishes themselves are often simple and straightforward.
Amid all that intellectual finery, one finds a yearning, in fact, for home cooking -- everybody's home cooking, from Peoria to Peru.
It's as if the bad economic times had sent us all lurching toward hot soup and rice pudding.
A standout for the richness of what it has to say as well as for its no-nonsense, homey recipes is THE ART OF SOUTH AMERICAN COOKING by Felipe Rojas-Lombardi (504 pp., HarperCollins, $25).
The chef of the Ballroom restaurant in New York City, Rojas-Lombardi died this fall at the age of 46, and I find myself somewhat lamely regretting now that it took me so long to become a fan of his.


Chipping Away at Intel
It has been a case of so far, so good, for the Cyrix Corporation in its legal battle to weaken the Intel Corporation's dominance of math coprocessors, a pricey chip that handles calculations in personal computers.
Intel's attempt to block Cyrix from selling these chips was rejected last month by a Federal judge in Texas who issued a preliminary ruling that Intel had failed to show patent infringement.
A trial is set for 1993.


Woman's Plea to Die Stirs a Debate in Canada
In a case that is likely to set new legal precedents for Canada, a 24-year-old Quebec woman who is paralyzed by a rare neurological disease has asked a judge to approve the disconnection of a respirator that has kept her alive in a hospital room since June 1989.
Her doctor has testified that she is likely to die "within minutes" of the machine being switched off.


Bushwick Fire Leaves Scores Homeless
The firefighters and the police barricades were gone, leaving water in the streets and the charred remains of four buildings on Myrtle Avenue in Brooklyn.
Walter Heredia stood amid the rubble yesterday, looked at what was left of two houses he had bought and rented to his dozens of Ecuadorean friends and relatives, and cried.
"That's the one to blame," he said, pointing to a burned-out abandoned building that he said had become a crack house.
"They have had fires there three times before."


What Foreign Policy?
The Democratic challengers to President Bush have apparently decided to cede him his experience in foreign affairs and instead to focus on domestic issues, particularly the economy.
This would be a mistake.
Americans demand a President who is adroit in the international arena.
The Democrats' retreat from an affirmative foreign affairs role since the middle of the Vietnam War coincides exactly with their failure in Presidential elections.
Allowing Republicans to continue setting the foreign policy agenda while arguing from the back bench befits a legislator or perhaps a governor, but not a President.


Christmas Toys on the Run in New Haven
It may not be the New York City Marathon, but if Mayor JOHN DANIELS knows his apples, the difference may not be readily apparent if you try crossing State Street in New Haven next Sunday morning.
That's because the seventh annual five-kilometer Christopher Martins Christmas Run for Children is expected to attract the usual horde of several hundred runners to the State Street course.
Daniels is the race's official starter.
Despite its name, the race, which begins and ends in front of Christopher Martins restaurant at State and Clark, draws a mainly adult field.
What makes the race
for
children is that the entry fees are new toys, which are distributed to needy and sick children in the New Haven area.


Configuration of Board Twists Into New Shape
ANGRY Democratic legislators began to work on a strategy last week to regain the election victory they say is being stolen from them.
The 10-to-7 Republican majority was eliminated after nine Democrats were elected in November, a victory that seemed to give them control of the Board of Legislators for the first time in 83 years.
Their action followed Tuesday's announcement by a legislator-elect, Suzanne R. Swanson, a political newcomer and registered Conservative who was elected as the ninth Democrat, that she would support a Republican-Conservative, Stephen P. Tenore, as the powerful chairman of the Board.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball League
DENVER NUGGETS -- Activated Todd Lichti, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Scott Hastings, forward, on the injured list.
HOUSTON ROCKETS -- Signed Dan Godfread, forward-center.
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Activated Luc Longley, center, from the suspended list.
Waived Tellis Frank, forward.
Continental Basketball Association
ALBANY PATROONS -- Traded Derrick Chievous, guard-forward, to the Rapid City Thrillers for Jay Edwards, guard.
Traded Jay Edwards, guard, to the Fort Wayne Fury for Clinton Smith, guard.
Acquired Warren Bradley, center, from the Fort Wayne Fury for future considerations.


'Re-Parent' the Young Workers? Not on Your Life
In an article on the Forum page on Nov. 17, Morris R. Shechtman wrote that many workers in their 20's and 30's are still adolescents emotionally and are less productive than the workers of other generations.
He said managers should be prepared to deal with their young workers in the same way they treat their teen-age sons and daughters at home.
By using a strategy of "re-parenting," he said, companies may be able to increase self-absorbed workers' productivity to acceptable levels within two or three years instead of the six or seven years that might be required otherwise.


Protecting Against Shock
FOR safety and to satisfy virtually all electric codes, ordinary receptacles, or outlets, in damp or potentially damp locations, including kitchens, bathrooms, basements and garages, should be protected by ground-fault circuit interrupters.
The device interrupts power to a circuit, protecting against shock, when it detects a leak in the flow of electricity, as when a faulty appliance or cord touches a wet floor.


Stamps
Moldavian Independence
A set of three stamps proclaiming the independence of the Soviet republic of Moldavia -- an independence that has not yet been recognized elsewhere -- has reached the market in the United States.
This brings to five the number of Soviet republics and former republics that have started to issue their own stamps.


In Yugoslavia, There's No Escape From War
The large poster announcing a cartoon contest at the Kolarac Gallery shows a red-nosed clown in an ill-fitting camouflage uniform.
It is a commentary on the preoccupation of Yugoslavs with the civil war that has scourged their land since June.
Let alone the thousands killed and wounded, war-mindedness and incidents of violence have pervaded civilian life here.


For Independent Truckers, Roads Lead to Riches
For months Rodney and Rogene Johnson spent up to 22 hours a day running their truck from Pittsburgh to the West Coast, hauling butter and cheese and bringing back produce.
She would take over the wheel so he could crawl into the back of the cab and sleep.
"The only time we weren't running was to load, gas up and eat," she recalled.
The grueling pace -- averaging about 5,000 miles a week -- would go on for weeks in an effort to meet expenses and a $2,200 monthly payment on their new $80,000 Kenworth truck.
"If you could make your truck payment and live, that was a lot," he recalled.


Region Around New York Sees Ties to City Faltering
The cultural and economic links that bind New York City and the sprawling region around it are weakening, and as the two areas grow apart, residents of the city are far more pessimistic about the future of their community than are their neighbors in New Jersey, Connecticut, Long Island and Westchester and Rockland counties, the latest New York Times Poll shows.
Indeed, so attenuated have the ties between the city and the region become that half of all regional residents say events in New York City have "hardly any impact" at all on their lives.


Credibility Seen as Crux Of Celebrated Rape Trial
The ordeal began as a casual encounter between a local woman and a privileged son of America's most famous family.
It quickly evolved into one of the most highly publicized and minutely scrutinized rape cases in history.
Now eight months after their fateful evening together, William K. Smith and his accuser are about to meet again, as a Florida jury begins hearing evidence in the case.


Bridge
Almost 60 years ago, when Ely Culbertson with his honor tricks and forcing two-bids dominated the bridge scene on this side of the Atlantic, four young men led British bridge players down a very different path.
They espoused the 4-3-2-1 point count, a two-club opening for game-forcing hands, and limit raises, all of which became standard in North America much later in the century.
Since their club was on Acol Road in North London, they called their system Acol.
It has been the standard bidding style in Britain ever since, and is popular in Canada, Australia and other parts of the world.


Footlights Beckon an Imus Radio 'Voice'
AFTER belittling her husband ("You've been married to this loser for 11 years"), Don Imus, the outspoken radio host, declares his love for Jane Gennaro, a member of his troupe, and brazenly propositions her on the air.
Before long, a Diane Sawyer sound-alike denounces Mr.
Imus as a "sexist piggy poo." Representing "angry anchorwomen against Imus," the voice explains to the audience, "Sometimes we have to call him on all his improprieties."


POSTINGS: 102 Wall Township Homes; Preview Becomes a Sellout
In a scene reminiscent of the giddy buying sprees that characterized some home sales during the 1980's, all 102 residences in a yet-to-be-built community in Wall Township, N.J., were sold out in six hours during a blueprint preview on Nov. 23.
"We have not had a sellout like this since 1988," said Ara Hovnanian, president of K. Hovnanian Companies of Red Bank, N.J., developer of the complex.
"I think this shows that there is no slack in the demand for reasonably priced housing."


Conversations With God and Friends at Home
By all indications, the Goldrich family on Morlot Avenue here are traditional Jews.
They keep a kosher home, send their children to Jewish day schools and light candles on Friday and Saturday evenings to mark the beginning and end of the Sabbath.
But every other Saturday morning, at the hour when most traditional Jews head for the synagogue, the Goldriches stay home.
Instead of venturing out, they pray with friends in an informal home-worship circle.
"This has become as important to me spiritually as attendance in the synagogue," said Kenneth Goldrich, a commerical litigation lawyer in Paramus, who organized the service with his wife, Lois.


Jill E. Nagusky Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
David R. Nagusky of Mooreland Hills, Ohio, have announced the engagement of their daughter Jill Ellen Nagusky to Dr.
Michael Richard Epstein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Burton I. Epstein of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Nagusky, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and is pursuing a master's degree in human service management from Brandeis University.
Her father is the president of the Federal Metal Company in Bedford, Ohio.
Her mother, Helen Nagusky, is a pediatric social worker at Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital in Cleveland.


Off Campus
When the law school at the University of Bridgeport moved to secede from the financially troubled institution last week, civil war broke out.
Terence H. Benbow, the Bridgeport law school dean, said on Monday that he had arranged to affiliate the 700-student law school with Quinnipiac College in Hamden, Conn., and had done so under authority granted Nov. 7 by the Bridgeport administration and trustees.
But then the university's interim president, Edwin G. Eigel, who was named to the post on Nov. 11, dismissed Mr.
Benbow as dean, saying he had no authority to negotiate the law school transfer, which was announced just as the university was ending its liberal arts degree programs.
When Mr.
Benbow refused to accept the letter of dismissal and leave the premises, Mr.
Eigel called the police.
But nobody did anything until lawyers for both sides arrived.
Then it was agreed that Mr.
Benbow would continue to have access to his office pending a meeting of the trustees and law faculty tomorrow.


Ms. Rosenberg Has Wedding
Susan Beth Rosenberg, an associate professor of finance at Montclair (N.J.) State College, and Robert Otto Gurman, a vice president at the Swiss Bank Corporation in New York, were married last evening at Congregation Ahavas Torah in Englewood, N.J.
Rabbi Shmuel Goldin officiated.
Mrs.
Gurman, 35 years old, is also an associate at the Joyce Ketay literary agency in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a Ph.D. in finance from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Alexander and Frieda Rosenberg of Maywood, N.J., both investors.
Her father retired as the owner of the Maywood Printing Company, founded in 1919 by his mother, Sophie Rosenberg.


Yale Rep Presents A Debate by Fugard
ATHOL FUGARD has created theater of power, glory and majestic language, but when he turns to didacticism, watch out.
If your eyes glaze over at the prospect of a play that begins with the definition of a debate -- and goes on to sum one up, with arguments and concluding statements in front of the chalkboard -- then Mr.
Fugard's "My Children! My Africa!" at the Yale Rep might well justify all premonitions of a non-event.
Once priorities are shifted from the schoolroom to the stage, somewhere in the play's second act and into its third hour, the play gets going.
Until then -- save for a randomly placed showy monologue or two -- "My Children! My Africa!" which had its world premiere at the Market Theater in Johannesburg in 1989 and was produced by the New York Theater Workshop Off Broadway the same year, is indeed arduous.


County's Builders Fault Rutgers Study On Housing Needs
A LITTLE more than a decade ago, the County Board of Legislators released its first comprehensive housing plan, calling for 50,000 units of housing to be built by 1990.
Partly because of community resistance and a sluggish economy, only 34,000 units were built, mostly for people with middle income.
Last summer, amid pressure to provide affordable housing for people of lower income and to determine a policy that defined affordable housing need, the Board commissioned the Center for Urban Policy Research at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J., to assess Westchester's housing needs.


Sony Music's Mr. Big Spender
Tommy Mottola, the head of Sony Music, has been signing some rich and unprecedented deals with recording artists lately.
It is a strategy, amazing to some in the industry, that is eerily reminiscent of the spending spree on talent that helped produce Hollywood's current profit crunch.
In March, Mr.
Mottola signed an estimated $30 million contract with Michael Jackson and, in an unprecedented move, gave the singer an interest in profits from new albums, including his latest, "Dangerous," released last week.


Mutual Funds; Tailored Plans for Littler Folk
Wealthy investors -- those with $500,000 or more to put into the markets -- have long been courted by personal money managers offering to tailor portfolios to their customers' individual objectives.
But now mutual fund companies are trying to soup up the services they offer to less prosperous individuals.
Here is a roundup of some investing programs for people who are just starting out and those who have built up portfolios of $10,000 to $100,000.
*
The Dreyfus Group recently began a free investment review program available to anyone, no matter how small the account.
Investors complete questionnaires about their goals, tolerance for risk, investment history and other financial data; Dreyfus then gives guidelines for allocating their money among stock, bond and money-market funds and suggests funds in each category.


CAMPUS LIFE: Stetson; Change in Policy Shows Prevalence Of Alcohol Abuse
A change in the fraternity rush system at Stetson University has uncovered alcohol-related problems, including instances of under-age drinking and drivingwhile intoxicated, among the school's 2,000 students.
Fraternity and sorority rush, normally held during the first week of classes in the fall semester, was delayed this year by the administration in an attempt to introduce new students to other organizations and activities on campus before they decide to join a fraternity.


Games Are Hung Up By Questionable Calls
The quarterback looks to pass.
He is hit.
Had his arm begun the throwing motion?
Is it an incomplete pass or a fumble?
Was that interference or nifty coverage?
Did this receiver have possession?
Was that running back's knee down?
Sure looked like a touchdown to me.


New Yorkers, etc.
So you're at this flea market, and something tells you to buy the dusty, strange-looking bottle.
You get it home, rub it gently and -- good heavens! -- out pops a genie.
"So do I get the three wishes?" you ask.


The Archduke and the Czar
To the Editor:
In his review of Robert K. Massie's book "Dreadnought: Britain, Germany, and the Coming of the Great War" (Nov. 10), Stanley Weintraub commits a couple of unfortunate errors.
First, he refers to Archduke Franz Ferdinand, the heir to the Austrian throne in 1914, as the "grandson" of Emperor Franz Josef, when in fact he was the nephew of Franz Josef.
Second, a bit later on in his review, Mr.
Weintraub refers to Czar Alexander III of Russia, who died in 1894, when he should have referred to Czar Nicholas II.
CHARLES W. STEIN Buffalo


Going Slow on Economy Is Risky, Aides Tell Bush
Despite President Bush's decision to cling to a go-slow strategy for economic revival, White House advisers are increasingly concerned about the risks -- to the economy as well as to 1992 campaign prospects -- of simply waiting for the anemic recovery to take wing.
When Mr.
Bush suddenly endorsed a House Republican plan to cut taxes this week and challenged the Democrats to pass it, he was, in part, admitting that the issue of new economic initiatives had moved from "whether" to "when," a senior White House official said.
Mr.
Bush himself has promised to offer a fresh set of proposals to revive growth in his State of the Union Message, traditionally in late January.


The Perils of Pericles, a Serial Adventure
Pericles holds to a true course all through the storm-tossed romance that Shakespeare named after him.
But so does Campbell Scott, who happens to be playing the young prince of Tyre right now at the Public Theater.
Given the impetuous nature of the production that surrounds him -- and would probably swallow him up if it could -- Mr.
Scott's achievement may just be the more noteworthy.
After all, it's one thing to cling to virtue in a capricious universe, as Pericles does.
But to maintain your credibility as an actor -- and even project an unassuming dignity -- when the tone of the production changes so radically from scene to scene you can hear gears being stripped, well that's something else entirely.
It assumes a presence that naturally rises above circumstances without appearing haughty or superior.
Nothing distinguishes Mr.
Scott's performance quite so much as his ability to keep his artistic head high, when all about him -- not least the director Michael Greif -- are losing theirs.


Questions of Perception
C.
Boyden Gray, the White House counsel, may have some doubts about the efficacy of affirmative action.
But Joshua I. Smith does not.
"Affirmative action and set-aside programs work," said the chairman of the Maxima Corporation, a computer systems and management information company that is one of the country's largest black-owned businesses.
Mr.
Smith may be in possession of more information than Mr.
Gray: he has spent two years as the unpaid head of the Federal Commission on Minority Business Development, a panel established by Congress to evaluate business programs for minority groups.


FAMILY ISN'T EVERYTHING
I was interrupted seven times by my 4-year-old and 2-year-old as I was reading Robin Marantz Henig's Hers column "Family Isn't Everything" (Nov. 3).
Sometimes I'm smart and take the Magazine or Book Review into the bathtub with me, along with a cup of coffee.
Henig's honest portrayal of family life was therapy for me.
I was beginning to think I was selfish and lacked maternal instinct.
My family-centered friends don't admit they have such feelings, and my three friends who are trying everything that modern medicine has available in an effort to conceive would consider me an ingrate.
Yes, I love my children and wouldn't be without them.
But I can't help fantasizing about what my life would be like if I had chosen to take another direction.
LESLIE ZUCKER
East Setauket, L.I.


From Vice to Nice: The Suburbanization of Las Vegas
WHEN THE NOVELIST Richard Wiley learned of a job opening at the University of Nevada at Las Vegas a few years ago, he didn't exactly rush to apply.
Like many Americans, he could scarcely fathom the idea that people actually lived in Las Vegas, a place he associated with 24-hour drive-up wedding windows and Wayne Newton getting paid $90,000 a night to sing "MacArthur Park." But after two years as U.N.L.V.'s writer-in-residence, Wiley has discovered an unlikely flip side to the city -- a Las Vegas of backyard barbecues, slow-pitch softball games and sidewalks full of kids on Rollerblades.
"It's a wonderful place to live; it's amazing," insists Wiley, who has made this discovery along with 1,250 new arrivals every week.
"My whole neighborhood is full of people from someplace else. It's like living in an expatriate community abroad. No one knows where anything is. Everyone's kind of lost."
If Wiley and his neighbors are disoriented, that is the reaction of most people who come through Las Vegas these days.
The desert oasis founded on casino gambling is no longer the place that has been fixed in the national imagination for more than four decades as a cheesy mecca of glitz, the ultimate arcade-lined combat zone.


An April Bridal For Ms. Kaplan
Dr. and Mrs.
Philip Kaplan of Bay Shore, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jaclyn Lori Kaplan to Todd Nathaniel Morrison, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Morrison of Riverdale, the Bronx.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kaplan, 26 years old, teaches at Public School 11 in Manhattan.
She graduated from Emory University and received a master's degree in education from New York University.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in Bay Shore and a former president of the Long Island and the Suffolk County Ophthalmological Societies.


Political Talk
New Faces on the Bench
New York is now officially in line to have the its first Hispanic woman as a Federal District Court judge.


POSTINGS: 10,000 Sq. Ft. on Old Route 22; Strip Shopping for Armonk
A new strip shopping center will soon open in Armonk, N.Y., an affluent and largely residential hamlet in the Westchester County town of North Castle.
The shopping center, which is at 69 Old Route 22, is called The Courtyard at Armonk.
Consisting of 10,000 square feet of retail space, it will cater not only to Armonk and North Castle residents but also to those who live in Bedford, Chappaqua and Harrison in Westchester County and Greenwich in Fairfield County, Conn.


Roselyn Hage Weds W. A. Spencer
Roselyn Wadad Hage, a second vice president at Chase Manhattan Bank, and Wesley Allan Spencer, a vice president and the controller of Group W Radio, a subsidiary of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Miroslav Sultus performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Catherine of Siena Church in Riverside, Conn.
Mrs.
Spencer graduated from Cuttington College near Suacoco, Liberia, and received an M.B.A. from Pace University.
She is a daughter of Ada Gibson of Durham, N.C., and the late George S. Hage.
Her father was a rubber farmer and owned a general store in Gbarnga, Liberia.
Her mother, who is retired, was a rubber farmer in Kakata, Liberia.


Retailers Misunderstand the 'Traditional Christmas'
To the Editor:
Not one retailer interviewed for "Retailing's Wistful Christmas Dream" (Nov. 3) gave an ounce of thought to the possibility that perhaps one reason it has been "four years since retailers enjoyed a traditional Christmas" is because many consumers are actually enjoying a truly traditional Christmas.


PEARL HARBOR IN THE MIND OF JAPAN
Steven R. Weisman's article "Pearl Harbor in the Mind of Japan" (Nov. 3) works too hard to be "balanced" about Pearl Harbor (and associated infamies) and Hiroshima-Nagasaki.
The Japanese have not only sanitized the past, they have censored much of it out of existence.
Weisman does not note that the Japanese have institutionalized their own equivalent of denying the Holocaust, even removing authentic newsreel shots of the 1937 rape of Nanking from domestic showings of the film "The Last Emperor."
Perhaps the most stubborn and inexcusable Japanese behavior, duly observed by Weisman, is the homage paid to war criminals by high Government officials at the Yasukuni Shrine.
The German equivalent would be a shrine to Hitler, Himmler, Goebbels and Goering, and Americans would be outraged.
Yet the obeisance at the Yasukuni Shrine gives Japanese judges the moral authority to whitewash references to war aggression, and textbook publishers the excuse to rewrite the past.
But when Weisman quotes, unobjectionably, the cinema patriarch Akira Kurosawa as shrugging that the Japanese find it hard to be remorseful because "they were never aware of what was going on," he sanitizes Kurosawa's own history.


Noted With Pleasure
The Universal Turtle
In this excerpt from his essay "The Courage of Turtles," Edward Hoagland catalogues some of the reasons he so greatly admires turtles.
It is included in "Heart's Desire. The Best of Edward Hoagland: Essays From Twenty Years" (Touchstone, paper).


In the Amazon


Stephanie Elise LoRusso Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick M. LoRusso of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Stephanie Elise LoRusso, to Philip Yarnall Pearson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Pearson of Philadelphia.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss LoRusso, 22 years old, graduated from Princeton University, as did her fiance, 23.
She is studying law at the University of Virginia, where her fiance is a research assistant in plastic surgery.
The prospective bride's father is a personnel administrator for Westchester County in White Plains.
Her mother, Dr.
Diane LoRusso, is a diagnostic radiologist in Rye Brook, N.Y.
Mr.
Pearson's father, who is retired, was a packaging manufacturer with Joseph P. Pearson &amp; Sons in Philadelphia.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 3 about Guadeloupe included an incorrect telephone number for Jacques de Larsay, a service that makes reservations for the Creole Beach Hotel.
The number is (212) 477-1600; the service can also be reached through (800) 366-1510.


Family First


THE TOWN THAT CAN'T SIT STILL
Clifford D. May's article on Boulder, Colo., certainly captured the spirit that drew me and my family to this "international mecca for people who thrive on physical challenge and risk" ("The Town That Can't Sit Still," Nov. 3).
For us, a day without bungee jumping, ice climbing or paragliding is hardly worth living.
SUSAN B. STINE Boulder, Colo.


'Dream-Pop' Bands Define the Times in Britain
This year, the most popular phenomenon in British alternative rock is a wave of hazy neo-psychedelic guitar groups.
Some critics call them "shoe gazers" because of their on-stage bashfulness.
Perhaps the more appropriate term is "dream pop," which evokes these groups' blurry, blissful sound and out-of-this-world aura.
The most successful British dream-pop groups -- My Bloody Valentine, Slowdive, Lush, Chapterhouse, Ride, Swervedriver -- have records from major American labels already released or in the pipeline.
Dream pop combines nebulous, distorted guitars with murmured vocals sometimes completely smudged into a wall of noise.
This dazed-and-confused style was pioneered by American groups like Husker Du and Dinosaur Jr.
But the British groups tend to be more fragile, their swoony harmonies reminiscent of the Byrds.
Other influences include the ethereal soundscapes of the Cocteau Twins and the fractured "avant-garage" rock of Sonic Youth.


The Executive Life; A Hard-Times Holiday Alters Card Strategies
Sometime over the next few weeks, business associates of Peter Kalikow, the beleagured New York real estate developer and publisher of The New York Post, will receive his annual holiday greeting card.
Its cover features a sketch of a character with his pockets pulled out of his pants, empty.
The inscription: "Here's hoping 1992 will be more like 1988 for everybody."
Back then, of course, Mr.
Kalikow was flush with money.
Today, he's broke -- and joking about it.
"The card is a humorous approach to his predicament and to the times," said Nikki Henkin, vice president of Patterson &amp; Mclaughlin Communications, the publicity firm that represents Mr.
Kalikow and handles the mass mailing of his holiday cards.


On the Street; Mad About Hatters
A new generation is wearing hats that demand to be noticed and induce conversation.
These toppers are just plain fun and intended to be just that.
Two examples: a 15-inch high transparent birdcage crown (center) made from glycerined ostrich plumes, and the high turban (top left) of black coq feathers.
Other hats have inflated crowns that are worn pulled down to the eyes.
The hat that drew the biggest smile was a knitted one that resembled a baby's sweater (far right bottom) with the sleeves hanging like rabbit ears.
Even the classic shapes have been tampered with.
A cap, for example was cut from transparent plastic, and a beret was worn with the Hermes headband outside.
Even the basic fedora sporting a bouquet of pheasant tails tells us that these hats are for making a major statement that refuses to be dulled by the recession.


Pets in Co-ops
To the Editor:
In reference to your response to the question about pets in co-op apartments in the Sept. 8 Q &amp; A column, please be advised that Section 27-2009.1 has been construed by the courts to protect co-op tenants in virtually every case in which the issue has been raised.


Cocteau's Recipe
To the Editor:
May I add a corroborative anecdote to Edward Rothstein's essay on movie music?  [ "Need More Humor or Horror? Add Music -- Very Carefully," Nov. 10 ] .


1992 Wedding For Miss Snider
Edward M. Snider of Bryn Mawr, Pa., and Myrna Snider of Antibes, France, have announced February wedding plans for their daughter Lindy Lou Snider and Mark Harris Goldstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Goldstein of Rye, N.Y.
Miss Snider, 31 years old, is the director of research and development at Spectacor, owner of the Spectrum arena in Philadelphia and the Philadelphia Flyers hockey team.
Her father is the chairman of Spectacor.
Mr.
Goldstein, 30, is the president of Reality Technologies, a software publisher in Philadelphia.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
His father is a partner in the investment banking firm of Broadview Associates in Fort Lee, N.J.


Getting to JFK
To the Editor: In "Proposed Trains Between Planes in New York" (Travel Advisory, Oct. 6, 1991), you state that when low ridership ended the JFK Express to Kennedy in April 1990, the only option for most travelers was to ride the roads.
But you can still take the subway.
Upon arrival at JFK we have frequently taken a free bus to Howard Beach to catch a subway train for Manhattan.
After the JFK Express was abandoned, the price dropped from $7.50 to $1.15.
It now takes a few more minutes, but otherwise the service seems unchanged.
It's still the best way to get to our destination, West Fourth Street.
This route also has served us well in the reverse direction.
C.
C.
OLDENBURG Mill Valley, Calif.


Carole H. Buddenhagen Is Married
Carole H. Buddenhagen, the daughter of Helen C. Buddenhagen of Ridgewood, Queens, and the late Andrew R. Buddenhagen, was married yesterday in Avon, Conn., to Dr.
John G. Gelinas Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gelinas of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
Donald Ketcham, a Congregational minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Chapel of Jesus the Carpenter at Avon Old Farms School.
Mrs.
Gelinas, 31 years old, graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father was a New York City police officer.
Her mother is a secretary at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.


RESULTS PLUS
SKIING Schneider Opens With a Victory Vreni Schneider of Switzerland had a strong second slalom run and won the season's first World Cup women's race against a strong Austrian challenge yesterday in Lech, Austria.
Schneider, last season's slalom world champion, came from eighth place after the first run to edge Petra Kronberger of Austria.
Kronberger seemed in command after being timed in 43.99 seconds -- 1.2 seconds ahead of Schneider -- for the 51-gate first run.
But Schneider's second run of 43.05 vaulted her to the top.
She had a total time of 1 minute 27.84 seconds, with Kronberger a close second in 1:27.92.
Blanca Fernandez-Ochoa of Spain, tied with Austrian Monika Maierhofer for fifth after the first run, was only one-hundredth of a second behind Kronberger, finishing third in 1:27.93.
Julie Parisien of Auburn, Me., had the fastest second run.
Her time of 42.94 moved her from 12th after the first run to fifth over all in 1:28.09. (AP)


Tara A. Tracey Is to Be Married
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Tracey of North Plainfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Tara Anne Tracey to Justin Nicholas Taylor, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis N. Taylor of Spring Lake, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Tracey, 25 years old, is an assistant vice president in the real- estate division of the Marine Midland Bank in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father, who is retired, is the former chairman and chief executive of the Capital Financial Corporation, mortgage bankers in Somerset, N.J.


Chess
Playing cautiously against a formidable opponent may appear to be common sense, but in reality nothing could be further from the truth.
Caution lets the opponent have a free hand to develop his game with a minimum of interference.
The opponent should not be given such a boon.
Even if your aim is the modest one of making a draw, you should press as hard as you can to seize the initiative, to keep the enemy on the defensive.


Ms. Michel Wed To Albert Bruce
Alix Michel, an account executive with M magazine, and Albert Cabell Bruce 3d, a producer of the "Now It Can Be Told" television talk show on WPIX-TV, both in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in East Hampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Cecily Strannahan, an interfaith minister, performed the ceremony, assisted by the Rev.
Robert T. Capon.
Mrs.
Bruce, a graduate of the University of New Mexico, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Michel of Dover, Mass.
Her father is president of the Invicta Consulting Group, a fishing industry consortium, in Needham, Mass.


CAMPUS LIFE: Washington; Faculty Rejects Plan to Emphasize Cultural Diversity
After two years of debate, negotiation and compromise, the Faculty Senate of the University of Washington has voted down a proposal to require cultural diversity studies.
The issue will be raised again as part of a general review of undergraduate education.
A total of 921 faculty members, or 67 percent of the Senate, voted against requiring freshmen, beginning with next year's class, to take five credits in approved classes on cultural diversity, like women's studies or ethnic studies.
Thirty-one percent, or 434 faculty members, voted for the requirement, and 2 percent, or 27 faculty members, abstained.


Sports of The Times; Every Coach Needs a Lift Sometimes
RAY HANDLEY needs a helicopter.
Sam Wyche needs a helicopter.
All football coaches could use helicopters, not just for the mobility but for the decibels.
Handley of the Giants and Wyche of the Bengals, whose teams meet today at Riverfront Stadium, have had problems in those few minutes a week when they had to deal with civilians.
Football coaches really are a breed apart from baseball, basketball and hockey strategists, who spend more time socializing in public and less time plotting in sterile bunkers.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
SCHOOLS' TOP SANDWICH
Aislynn Poquette may have concocted the most creative sandwich in America, but she was still getting meat loaf for dinner.
"I know it's boring," said her mother, Josephine.
"But I'm not the one who's creative. It's my kid."


The Red Thread Threat
To the Editor:
"When 'Truths' Become Traps," brought to mind a three-year campaign I waged in the mid-80's with Johnson &amp; Johnson.
I attempted to get some explanation for its use of 1920-vintage packaging for its Band Aid products.
Freeing the bandage from its intricately folded cellophane-like wrapper using a tricky little red thread -- which never works -- is next to impossible.
I pointed out to J.&amp;J. that, because of its unwillingness to introduce more modern "peel down" packaging, an injured person is hobbled at the moment of his or her greatest need.
I sent letters.
I sent excerpts from books which explained the history of the infamous packaging and raised the same questions.
I cajoled.
I pleaded for change.


Youngstown Tops Villanova in Playoffs
Jeff Wilkins kicked a 33-yard field goal with 6 seconds remaining today, giving Youngstown State a 17-16 victory over Villanova in the first round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-AA playoffs.
The Penguins (9-3) came back from a 16-7 halftime deficit to beat the Wildcats (10-2).


No-Show Biz
Sometimes there are good reasons for the show not to go on -- like necessary rights have not been acquired and the script has not been finished.
Such were among the reasons that "Four Hours in Shatila" won't have its scheduled first preview at the New York Shakespeare Festival this week.
JoAnne Akalaitis, who took over from Joseph Papp as artistic director of the festival in August, was to present her own one-act adaptation of Jean Genet's account of a visit to the Palestinian refugee camp at Shatila after the massacre by Lebanese militiamen.
But it developed last week that Ms.
Akalaitis had not finished the adaptation, had not acquired the rights and had not let subscribers know that there would be no show.
A festival board member, Joan Davidson, took note of some mitigating circumstances.
"For the whole year that Joe Papp was dying, a lot of things were on hold," she said.
"An awful lot wasn't planned, and JoAnne didn't have the authority she needed to make plans."


If You're Thinking of Living in: Wilton
WHEN Prohibition was repealed 58 years ago, residents of Wilton voted to remain dry.
But because it is basically a statute meant to keep roadhouses out, the dry law doesn't stop anyone from bringing liquor in or from brown-bagging it to local restaurants, which sometimes provide a complimentary drink.
After World War II, being dry did not keep the 26.8-square-mile town, set amid wooded hills and rivers in Fairfield County, from becoming a well-to-do suburb.
Julian A. Gregory, a 78-year-old lawyer and the 10th generation to live in his family's 1740 farmhouse, recalled the days before the housing boom, when dairy farms and apple orchards abounded.


Delay on North Korea Leaves Nasty Choices
For more than a decade American intelligence experts scrutinized their satellite photographs as North Korea, piece by painstaking piece, assembled a giant nuclear complex in a river valley just outside a small town called Yongbyon.
From the start, there was little doubt what the pictures meant: Kim Il Sung, North Korea's aging "Great Leader," was pursuing a dream to build the bomb, a dream that dates to the Korean War.
But only now, when Mr.
Kim is frightfully close to putting together a weapon -- three years at the outside, say the experts, maybe much sooner -- is the Bush Administration declaring that a nuclear-armed North Korea would be "the most serious threat to peace and stability" in Asia.
With great fanfare Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d recently urged a reluctant China to join Japan and the Soviet Union in a diplomatic effort to isolate North Korea until it abandons its nuclear ambitions, no easy task when dealing with what is already one of the world's most isolated nations.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The raised hearth in front of my fireplace is made of masonry that has never been sealed.
Candle wax has dripped on the masonry and left several stains.
How can I remove the stains, and how can the hearth be treated to prevent future problems of this kind?
A.
The candle wax has apparently soaked in.
You will have to soften or liquefy it and then draw it out.
One way to do thaat is to cover the stains with dry powdered cement and then pour a solvent like paint thinner to saturate the powder.
Cover with a piece of plastic kitchen wrap for a couple of hours, and then sweep up or remove the powder.
Another way is to warm the concrete with mild heat, like that from a hair dryer, to melt the wax.
Promptly cover the area with powdered cement and apply more heat while the absorbent powder draws out the melted wax.
To minimize the chances of staining recurring, apply two coats of a clear masonry sealer.


Payton's View on Dickerson's Drop
Walter Payton, who holds the National Football League record for career rushing yards with 16,726, thinks that Eric Dickerson, had he remained in Los Angeles with the Rams, would have ended up shattering the record and possibly setting a rushing mark that would stand forever.
Payton, who was in New York last Tuesday with two business partners as part of an effort to get an expansion team for St.
Louis, said he believed Dickerson could have rushed for more than 20,000 yards had he stayed in Los Angeles and if he had been able to avoid some of the controversy that has surrounded his career.


Miss Murray To Wed in '92
Mr. and Mrs.
Paul B. Murray of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Gabriel Murray to Brian Charles Schadt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Schadt of Ruxton, Md.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Murray, 29 years old, graduated from Loyola College and is a securities trader for Train, Smith Counsel, a New York investment advisory firm.
Her father is the chairman of the First Empire Corporation, a bank in Buffalo.


A Ticklish New Job for Hospitals: Querying Patients on Death Plans
At a recent staff meeting at Overlook Hospital here, the mood was upbeat, the cookies were free and the subject was death.
Specifically, how to talk to patients about death.
A new Federal law that takes effect on Sunday requires that all patients admitted to any hospital for any reason be asked if they want to plan for their death by filling out a "living will."


Allison Kalish Weds J. R. Schwartz
Allison Leslie Kalish, a daughter of Marion Fraternale of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married last night to Joseph Robert Schwartz, the son of Eugene Schwartz of Del Mar, Calif., and the late Betty Freedman Barson.
Rabbi Bruce Goldman officiated at the Carlyle Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Schwartz, 30 years old, is a vice president and project director of Corporate Graphics International in New York.
She graduated from the Atlanta College of Art.
Her mother is a corporate vice president of graphics and packaging at R.H.
Macy &amp; Company Inc. in New York.
Her stepfather, Ladd Fraternale, is a freelance graphic designer.


Iraq: A Clear and Continuing Danger
Nine months after the remarkably well-executed Desert Storm operation, and six months after it became clear that the allies had imposed on themselves an incomplete victory, a new debate is rising in Washington.
As an unforeseen consequence of President Bush's decision last spring to leave Iraq's future to the Iraqis, rather than press then and there for the removal of Saddam Hussein, Iraq has become a time bomb both for the Bush Administration and for the 18 million people living in increasingly desperate conditions under Mr.
Hussein's rule.
The problem is made worse for Mr.
Bush by the fact that this time bomb is likely to be ticking all through next year's election campaign.
If the President needed any evidence, it came in a bipartisan letter signed by 17 senators last week putting the President on notice that "it is increasingly clear that Saddam hopes to use the looming humanitarian crisis in his campaign to end the international sanctions against his outlaw regime."


New Art Museum Opens in Seattle
The new Seattle Art Museum will open to the public on Thursday , tripling the museum's space for its permanent collection, which includes holdings of Asian, African, Pacific Northwest and contemporary American art.
The $62 million building, on University Street downtown, is next to the financial district and within walking distance of the waterfront and of five major hotels.
The building was the first museum design of the architect Robert Venturi, who later designed the Sainsbury Wing for London's National Gallery.
The 155,000-square-foot building will contain about 100,000 square feet of program space, expanding by four times the space available in the original Seattle Art Museum, an Art Deco structure on a hilltop in Volunteer Park.
The old museum is being renovated and will serve as an Asian art center scheduled to open in 1993.
The new museum, in adddition to galleries devoted to showing the permanent collections and major traveling exhibitions, features a large auditorium for films and performances, classrooms, gallery education rooms, a cafe and store.


Clearing a New Path for T. Rex and Company
Hall by hall, exhibit by exhibit, pterosaur by phytosaur, the American Museum of Natural History is shutting down the dinosaur dream rooms for renovations.
Visitors have only until Feb. 1 to climb to the last of the dusty dinosaur halls on the fourth floor and pay their respects to such scarifying old friends as Tyrannosaurus rex, that intemperate but improbably beloved icon for generations of children.
But while old favorites are being systematically sealed behind plywood, a five-story-tall Barosaurus is being unveiled.
On Wednesday, the tallest free-standing dinosaur exhibit in the world, the first of the museum's new dinosaur displays, will open to the public.


Bucks Players Fined for Missing Practice
Milwaukee Bucks Coach DEL HARRIS fined four of his top players for missing practice on Friday.
LARRY KRYSTKOWIAK, MOSES MALONE, ALVIN ROBERTSON and DALE ELLIS were all no-shows.
Most said bad weather kept them from returning to Milwaukee from their off-season homes, where they went for the Thanksgiving holidays.


Russia's Wild West
When Igor Klioutchnikov, an economist living in what was then known as Leningrad, began telling friends and colleagues the city needed a stock market, everyone insisted he was crazy.
That was three years ago, when the Soviet Union was in a dystopian holding pattern.
Last May, the less-than-crazy Russian rang the opening bell on the brand new St.
Petersburg Stock Exchange, of which he is now executive director and chairman.
"Step by step, people realized we need a market system," Mr.
Klioutchnikov said during a recent trip to the United States.
"You can't have a market system without an exchange."
Exchanges of various sorts, mostly dealing in commodities, have emerged in geometric profusion as free-market fever advances through the Soviet Union and the former Eastern bloc, but St.
Petersburg -- its pre-revolutionary name was restored this fall -- has a tradition to live up to.
Before the Bolshevik Revolution, "St. Petersburg was the financial capital of Russia," Mr.
Klioutchnikov said, sounding tired after spending several intense days on Wall Street studying computer trading systems.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Forcing Hyacinths
Q.
I love the fragrance of hyacinths.
Do you think it's too late to force them this year? -- Doris Leibowitz, Pittsburgh.
A.
I don't think it's ever too late to start forcing bulbs, although it is too late to mail-order hardy ones like hyacinths, tulips and crocuses.
Your best source now is a garden center or nursery.


Dugouts Altered At Oriole Park
Designers of the Baltimore Orioles new downtown stadium admit they went a little overboard when it came to the dugouts.
They complied with an Orioles request for bigger, more comfortable dugouts, but when the work was done the Orioles noticed it was hard for fans to see over the new dugouts.
So at a renovation cost of $100,000, the dugouts will be shortened, as will the roof.


CAMPUS LIFE: Dickinson; Report Urges More Services For Rape Victims
Dickinson College lacks adequate resources and legal capacity to deal with rape cases internally, according to a recently released report of the Commission on the Status of Women at Dickinson.
The report recommends that the college distinguish rape from sexual harassment in the student handbook and that it train two advocates to provide rape victims with legal guidance and emotional support.


Miller, on Stand, Finds It's as Tough as Silence
Playing the role of a silent observer is not easy for Mel Miller, the powerful and persuasive Speaker of the New York State Assembly.
That is what he had to do for the first two weeks of his fraud trial, while prosecutors tried to persuade the jury that he cheated clients in real-estate deals.
But last week Mr.
Miller got his chance to speak on the witness stand, and that was not easy either.
He had to undergo a vigorous cross-examination by the prosecutor, Matthew E. Fishbein, who challenged his credibility on several points.


Film Shows Ukraine Famine
"This film is my personal contribution to the Ukrainian independence referendum," said Oles Yanchuk, who worked for two years to produce his first feature film on a subject that was until recently erased from Soviet history.
Called "Famine 33," the film chronicles Stalin's forced collectivization of agriculture and the famine it caused in 1933.
More than seven million people in the central and eastern Ukraine died in the famine.


Werner Bamberger, 73, Ex-Reporter for Times
Werner Bamberger, a reporter who covered the waterfront for much of his 40-year career at The New York Times, died on Friday at Roosevelt Hospital.
He was 73 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Bamberger interviewed celebrities arriving aboard luxury liners, wrote about the shipping industry and investigated waterfront crime.
His trademark was meticulous attention to detail in stories that ranged from a front-page description of a liner berthing unassisted during a tugboat strike to accounts of wearying labor negotiations.


After Thanksgiving, Cranberries Linger
THANKSGIVING is over, but that's no reason to stop using cranberries.
Bags of cranberries will continue to be on supermarket shelves for a few weeks.
And there are dozens of dishes, beyond condiments for turkey, in which cranberries can be used.
The tart berries cook quickly in a little liquid.
Their astringency makes them an excellent foil for fish and rich game meats.
They can be added to pan juices at the last minute.
Cranberries are good to include in vegetable dishes, especially those made with beets, carrots, winter squash or onions, all of which have a good amount of natural sweetness to contrast with the cranberries.
Still, it may be necessary to add a little sugar, honey or other sweetening to counteract their tartness.


Correction
An article last Sunday about Tibet misidentified a Washington-based group that is critical of Chinese rule there.
It is the International Campaign for Tibet.


Hopes Growing for Release Of One Hostage in Lebanon
Expectations rose here today for the release of at least one Western hostage after the United Nations hostage negotiator arrived here.
Security officials and Lebanese Shiite Muslims said an American captive, Joseph Cicippio, was next in line to be set free.
The United States Ambassador, Ryan Crocker, told reporters today during a visit to northern Lebanon, "We are hoping that all hostages will be released by Christmas."


Values, Old and New, Debated by Athol Fugard
ATHOL FUGARD has created theater of power, glory and majestic language, but when he turns to didacticism, watch out.
If your eyes glaze over at the prospect of a play that begins with the definition of a debate -- and goes on to sum one up, with arguments and concluding statements in front of the chalkboard -- then Mr.
Fugard's "My Children! My Africa!" at the Yale Rep might well justify all premonitions of a non-event.
Once priorities are shifted from the schoolroom to the stage, somewhere in the play's second act and into its third hour, the play gets going.
Until then, save for a randomly placed showy monologue or two, "My Children! My Africa!," which had its world premiere at the Market Theater in Johannesburg in 1989 and was produced by the New York Theater Workshop Off Broadway the same year, is arduous indeed.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 10 about Provence misidentified the people against whom the Massalian city-state (now Marseilles) asked for Roman help in the second century B.C.
They were the native tribes of Liguria, not the Salian Franks.


As Winter Nears, Quake Survivors Need Shelter
More than a month after their homes were destroyed by a devastating earthquake, thousands of ill-clad and frightened villagers in the Himalayan foothills still huddle with their cattle for warmth under tents as rain -- snow in the higher mountains -- signals the onset of winter.
The survivors have lived in the open since Oct. 20, when an earthquake rumbled across a 70-mile belt in the foothills of the western Himalayas, destroying bridges, roads and villages.


One G.M. Goes Out Of His Way for Team
Last Monday, Pat Gillick had lunch in Bellevue, Wash., then drove 300 miles round trip for dinner in Yakima, Wash.
Before he completed his three-day trip, the Toronto Blue Jays' general manager stopped in California cities like Stockton, Whittier and Riverside.
This was not a see-the-West-Coast's-obscure-cities tour arranged by Greyhound.
Gillick went west to visit half a dozen of his younger players, a highly unusual trip for a general manager.


White House Memo; Adrift in Bush's Circle Seeking the Common Man
If Bush Administration officials were to place a "help wanted" advertisement, they would probably choose to run it in magazines like Four Wheeler, Hot Rod and Guns &amp; Ammo, and it would read something like this:
"Immediate opening for a consultant who understands the common fellow. Good career opportunity for someone familiar with bowling alleys, pro wrestling and K Mart who can explain 'average' thinking to a group of old-line public servants planning America's future overseas and seeking to expand into domestic portfolio."


CAMPUS LIFE: Queens College; This Visitor Witnessed First Russian Revolt
In all her 98 and a half years, most of them spent as an anarchist, Nellie Dick never threw a single bombshell -- until she addressed the "History of Anarchism" class at Queens College.
That's when Mrs.
Dick, a Russian Jew who came to New York via London, personally exploded many of the myths and stereotypes of who and what anarchists were and are.


'Much More Than TV'
To the Editor:
In his article "Public TV Takes Its Nose Out of the Air"  [ Nov. 3 ] , Mark Schapiro chose to ignore the very reason that, for nearly four decades, public TV has been -- and continues to be -- among the most valued cultural and educational institutions in America.
Contributions are at an all-time high, and support from Congress, educational institutions and other sources are strong.
The reason is simple: public TV is much more than TV.
It is a unique, education-based institution supported voluntarily by the money and sweat equity of millions of Americans in their local communities.


Property-Tax Breaks for the Elderly
FLORENCE LANDON, a retired secretary, cherishes the home in Great Neck, L.I., she has owned since the 50's.
But now Mrs.
Landon, who lives mostly on a pension, finds the nearly $3,000 in property taxes a burden.
She may get a break soon.


Tornado Kills Two, Injures 62 in Missouri


Can a Testy Maker of Video Games Set a Standard?
William (Trip) Hawkins, head of one of the largest computer and video game software makers, has recently seized the role of hardware basher, berating the newest generation of entertainment hardware as low on performance and high on price.
Among what one of his software colleagues calls Mr.
Hawkins's "laundry list of pejoratives" is the criticism that, by building incompatible machines, the Sonys and the Philips of the world are alienating consumers and forcing software companies like his own to create several versions of the same program.
If they would agree on a standard, he says, Nintendo games could be played on a rival Sega machine, opening up the entire segment to growth and innovation.
Mr.
Hawkins is no longer just talking.
Nearly a decade after founding Electronic Arts, which had sales of more than $100 million last year, he has turned over the day-to-day management to his president, Lawrence F. Probst, to devote himself to a new venture that is likely to concentrate on hardware design.


Wall Street; Elsa Peretti and the Taxman and Tiffany
Here, the news is just drifting out.
In the spring, a Milanese newspaper, Corriere della Sera, published an article about Elsa Peretti, the Italian heiress whose jewelry designs accounted for 15 percent of Tiffany &amp; Company's sales last year.
The paper reported that it, along with the tax authorities in the United States and Italy, had received anonymous dossiers accusing Ms.
Peretti of tax evasion.
Ms.
Peretti told the Italian paper that her tax advisers had assured her that her house was in order, and a colleague in New York reaffirmed that position Friday.


A Masterpiece by McGirt
It was a boxer's equivalent of a baseball pitcher's perfect game.
On Friday night, in the indoor ring here at the Mirage, James (Buddy) McGirt fought a 12-round masterpiece against Simon Brown, the World Boxing Council welterweight champion.


Cherkassky a Romantic? 'I Don't Know. I Only Play.'
Now it seems to be official.
Shura Cherkassky has been anointed the Last Romantic, an exalted position last held by Vladimir Horowitz.
The Russian-born American pianist, long resident in England, just passed his 80th birthday, which Nimbus Records celebrated by releasing an eight-CD collection of his live performances, and he has become the object of a media blitz.
Everybody
is calling him the Last Romantic.
Mr.
Cherkassky, who will give a recital in Carnegie Hall tomorrow evening, has all the qualifications to be the Last Romantic.
His main teacher, starting in childhood, was Josef Hofmann, one of the all-time greats, and his playing resembles Hofmann's in its subtlety of sound, glittering technique, individuality and freedom of phrase and rhythm.


Lemieux Plays 'Skins' Game (Getting Under Foes')
Tom McVie of the Devils is like all hockey coaches.
He loves players who hate to lose, players who work hard, agitate opponents and score goals too.
Claude Lemieux has all these attributes, and as a result the feisty right wing has McVie's unmitigated admiration.
"The guy is great, absolutely," McVie said about the 26-year-old Lemieux, who will go into tonight's game against the Kings in Los Angeles with goals in four straight games.
"He's an outstanding hockey player. I love everything about him."


Shedding a Northern Light On the Italian Renaissance
One defect of the history of Renaissance art as conventionally taught to undergraduates is an uncritical bias toward all things Florentine.
It is a little like Saul Steinberg's map of the world as viewed from New York.
The foreground is dominated by the distinctive, towering silhouettes of Giotto, Donatello, Brunelleschi, Masaccio, Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo, around which are clustered such characteristic landmarks as Fra Angelico, Ghiberti, Filippo Lippi, Botticelli and Pontormo.
In the distant Arno valley, clearly visible against a limpid, Tuscan sky, is the pastel-colored, abstract polyhedron of Piero della Francesca with, to the south, the twin sweet lakes of Perugino and Raphael.
Behind this much-trafficked landscape, clogged with academic pollution, rises the craggy spine of the Apennines, beyond which everything begins to telescope.
Nothing obstructs the sight of Venice, decked out with its belfries of Bellini, Giorgione, Titian, Tintoretto and Veronese, except, perhaps, the stony countenance of Andrea Mantegna, whose stark shadow falls across an otherwise featureless plain stretching from Milan in the north to the Adriatic.


Sunday Lunch; Noontime Oases in the Holiday Crush
Gift seekers will be moving through Manhattan's major shopping districts for the next three-and-a-half weeks.
Even the fervid shopper needs time to refuel and rest battered feet.
Today and for the next three weeks this column will be devoted to good luncheon bets in various commercial hubs in Manhattan.
David K's
1115 Third Avenue at 65th Street; (212) 371-9090 -- Light Oriental food makes a lot of sense if you are on the go all day.
David K's is comfortable and reliable.


Summer of '77


Talking: Parsonages; Housing For the Clergy
THE parsonage, a slice of congregational real estate often cited in works of literature and history, seemed for a spell to be on the endangered list.
The cause of its demise was the lure of the profits being reaped by lay people during the property boom of the 1980's.
The clergy were not above temptation, and some considered a home that would appreciate for them an essential part of their financial planning.
"Everyone started talking about missing out on the opportunity to build equity like other people and have something for retirement," said Manfred Holck, a retired Lutheran minister in Austin, Tex., who publishes The Clergy Journal, a nondenominational monthly for church professionals.
This attitude became so common that even today most congregations building a new church or synagogue do not build a parsonage or clergy house alongside it.


Florence
If Florence has a problem, it is simply this: what to do for an encore.
For years, this city straddling the Arno River has drawn increasing numbers of visitors attracted by its palaces and piazzas, by the overwhelming amounts of art in the Uffizi gallery, by 270 monuments in the open air, and 66 museums whose offerings include Michelangelo's "David" and Donatello's "Maddalena."
Yet, next year when America celebrates its discovery by Christopher Columbus, Florence will be celebrating a quincentenary of its own -- the 500th anniversary of the death of Lorenzo de Medici (Lorenzo the Magnificent), scion of the family that ran the city, patronized the arts and helped define the Renaissance.


FAMILY ISN'T EVERYTHING
Henig's query "Why does anyone have children at all?" can be answered in three simple words: Grandchildren, grandchildren, grandchildren!
JERRY A. SIEGEL
New Rochelle, N.Y.


POSTINGS: Guidebook-Checklist; To Serve the Disabled
There is no way to simplify the Americans With Disabilities Act, whose numerous provisions are meant to make public accommodations and commercial buildings accessible to the disabled.
But the Building Owners and Managers Association has tried to make the act more navigable by presenting it as a checklist.
The 79-page "ADA Compliance Guidebook" would interest not only landlords and builders but disabled people, as well.


Angela Lansbury Has a Hit. She Wants Respect.
Accordingly, many CBS programs are skewed toward an older audience, especially women.
These include "Murphy Brown," "Designing Women," "Evening Shade," "The Trials of Rosie O'Neill," "Knots Landing" and "Brooklyn Bridge," as well as news such programs as "60 Minutes" and "48 Hours."
It is CBS's view, one not fully shared by the other networks, that certain programs, like "Murder, She Wrote," attract advertisers because they lure both older viewers and unusually wealthy ones.
Mr.
Poltrack said that "Murder, She Wrote" was in the top five shows last year among viewers 55 and older, while it ranked 108th among adults 18 to 34.
But the average household income for the series' older audience was an unusually high $60,000, and a sizable number of the viewers were college-educated.


Jennings Sets Record With 6th Women's Title
Lynn Jennings captured a record sixth women's title while Todd Williams defeated the eight-time titlist Pat Porter in the men's race today at the United States national cross-country championships in Franklin Park.
Jennings, the two-time world cross-country champion from Newmarket, N.H., had unexpected company in the final circuit of the women's 6,000-meter (3.75 miles) event.
She outkicked Gwynn Coogen to triumph by 35 yards in 19 minutes, 24 seconds.


UKRAINE REDUCES PLANS FOR AN ARMY
On the eve of the Ukraine's referendum to declare independence from the Soviet Union, republic officials have significantly scaled down their plans to create a powerful Ukrainian army.
Leonid M. Kravchuk, the Ukrainian leader who is the front-runner to be elected president in the balloting Sunday, has steadily reduced his estimate of an independent army from more than 400,000 members to about 90,000.


A German Tradition Of Fun With Wood
A FIVE-FOOT-TALL nutcracker prince, with glowering wooden eyes and a fierce wooden scowl, stood at attention in the corner of the biggest toyshop in Seiffen, Germany, seemingly surveying the shoppers, as if impatient to be left alone.
Dozens of other nutcracker figures, some only a few inches tall, also were on display, all sporting the haughty, angry and fearsome countenance that a traditional nutcracker should possess.
Creating these characters, after all, started out as a sly way for miners from the Erzgebirge, the Ore Mountains of Germany, to poke fun at their betters while whittling in their spare time.


With the 325i, BMW Drops the 4th Shoe
I HAVE a friend named Noble John who likes to rib me about this, that and 60 other things.
He thinks it's funny that a reprobate with a beard and a baseball cap advertising Ford's Kentucky truck factory has discovered birdwatching.
He is amused by my affinity for plants.
And he is fond of saying that I never met a car I didn't like.
Well, John, that's not quite so.
It is true that, with most cars, I will make an effort to be . . . well,
nice.
And I really do like cars. But now I have been driving a bunch of BMW's.


After Thanksgiving, Cranberries Linger
THANKSGIVING is over, but that's no reason to stop using cranberries.
Bags of cranberries will continue to be on supermarket shelves for a few weeks.
And there are dozens of dishes, beyond condiments for turkey, in which cranberries can be used.
The tart berries cook quickly in a little liquid.
Their astringency makes them an excellent foil for fish and rich game meats.
They can be added to pan juices at the last minute.
Cranberries are good to include in vegetable dishes, especially those made with beets, carrots, winter squash or onions, all of which have a good amount of natural sweetness to contrast with the cranberries.
Still, it may be necessary to add a little sugar, honey or other sweetening to counteract their tartness.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The raised hearth in front of my fireplace is made of masonry that has never been sealed.
Candle wax has dripped on the masonry and left several stains.
How can I remove the stains, and how can the hearth be treated to prevent future problems of this kind?
A.
The candle wax has apparently soaked in.
You will have to soften or liquefy it and then draw it out.
One way to do thaat is to cover the stains with dry powdered cement and then pour a solvent like paint thinner to saturate the powder.
Cover with a piece of plastic kitchen wrap for a couple of hours, and then sweep up or remove the powder.
Another way is to warm the concrete with mild heat, like that from a hair dryer, to melt the wax.
Promptly cover the area with powdered cement and apply more heat while the absorbent powder draws out the melted wax.
To minimize the chances of staining recurring, apply two coats of a clear masonry sealer.


Camera
W.
Eugene Smith, who died in 1978, continues to exert influence on photography in death as he did in life.
In the 1950's, photographers eagerly awaited his photo essays in Life magazine to see, to copy, to be inspired by his vision of real people living with real problems.


What Columbus Discovered Versus What He Imagined
Spurred by the misconception that the quickest route to the Far East was across the Atlantic, as every schoolchild knows, Christopher Columbus sailed westward in 1492.
Upon landing in the New World, he compounded his error by insisting that he had reached Asia, a mistake that went uncorrected for a half century.
Columbus's misconceptions about where he had been, whom he had met and what he had seen on his four voyages provides one of the strongest themes in the exhibition "Imagining the New World: Columbian Iconography" at the New-York Historical Society, Central Park West and 77th Street, through Jan. 26.
The 173 paintings, books, engravings, maps, globes and navigational instruments incorporate many of the inaccurate notions Columbus shared with his contemporaries about life in the Americas among cannibals, naked Indians and monsters.
Nearly all the objects were lent by libraries and museums in Italy.


Sports Through the Cozy Prism of Television
The best of sports television is extraordinary dramatic theater, brought from distant places, with the results in question, as athletes perform not only for the fans in the stands but also for the lens in the camera.
A televised game is an exercise in video adaptation and enhancement: it is tracked by a fleet of high-tech cameras, replayed in slow motion from multiple angles, diagrammed by an analyst with an electronic pencil, called by announcers receiving a stream of instructions in their earpieces and illustrated with dazzling graphics.
Television's cozy video prism is the filter through which most of our sports recollections have been filtered, at least since the late 50's.
The drama of the gimpy-legged Los Angeles Dodger Kirk Gibson slowly circling the bases after his pinch-hit home run in the 1988 World Series, the Soviet gymnast Olga Korbut's stunning performance at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich and Joe Namath leading his New York Jets to the 1969 Super Bowl victory that he had guaranteed, were performed on stages far broader than a playing field.
The television-enhanced images of their achievements are the building blocks of our sports memory bank.


On the Farm


Corrections
A picture caption on Nov. 17 about ballooning in Switzerland misidentified the type of balloon.
It was a gas balloon, not a hot-air balloon.


CAMPUS LIFE: Dickinson; Report Urges More Services For Rape Victims
Dickinson College lacks adequate resources and legal capacity to deal with rape cases internally, according to a recently released report of the Commission on the Status of Women at Dickinson.
The report recommends that the college distinguish rape from sexual harassment in the student handbook and that it train two advocates to provide rape victims with legal guidance and emotional support.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Signs of Life Stir in Connecticut Housing
AFTER three years of recession, signs of recovery are beginning to emerge in Connecticut's home building industry.
"The decline in the numbers of permits is leveling off," said Chris Cooper, communications officer for the state's Department of Housing.
Permits were issued for 1,049 units in October, still 5.2 percent less than in October 1990.
"But we started 1991 with a decline of 20 percent," Mr.
Cooper said.


50 Years Later, Americans and Japanese Worshiping Together
NEXT Sunday morning, amid memories aroused by the 50th anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor, Americans and Japanese will worship side by side here in joint services at the Hitchcock Presbyterian Church.
The services will be led by the Rev.
Robert S. MacLennan, Hitchcock's senior minister, and translated aloud into Japanese by Norman Miyabe, a church deacon.
The service will also be printed in both languages.
Members of the Union Japanese Church, a group of about 25 local residents who use the Hitchcock Church for their own weekly religious services, have been invited to join the Hitchcock congregation for what Mr.
MacLennan called "an affirmation of reconciliation." He said the public was welcome at the services, which will be held at 9:30 and 11 A.M.


Little Waste of Stone
To the Editor:
When Robert Frost looked across the big, rolling field from our porch, he saw a fringe of trees at the other edge guarding a stone wall.
This was the wall I always saw, still see, in his poem "Mending Wall." Like all of us here in the North Country, he would have been amazed to think someone had just discovered that stone walls are "waste" stone (news article, Nov. 17).
They were always, perhaps, excess stone, but also fences.


At the North Pole
To the Editor: The letter from Harry K. McWilliams (Oct. 27) on being at the North Pole is both quite right and quite misleading or wrong.
He refers to hitting "90 degrees north, 180 degrees east and west." He means "90 degrees north."
All of the imaginary north-south lines that determine longitude converge at two points: the north and south poles.
Thus Mr.
McWilliams might have truthfully stated that he stood at "90 degrees north, with my left shoe in Longitude 82 degrees west and my right shoe, alongside it, in 109 degrees 39 minutes 21 seconds east longitude." Any other numbers, east or west, between zero and 180 would be equally correct.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column last Sunday about Eurailpass prices misstated the handling fee charged.
It is $10 for each order for a pass or passes, not 10 percent of the price of each pass.


Mimi Harmon Weds Bill Kahn
Muriel Joan Harmon, the president of Classic Corporate Capers, a New York special-events and public-relations concern, and Joseph Kahn Jr., the vice president of American Terry Company, a New York textile manufacturer, were married last evening in White Plains.
Rabbi Shira Milgrom officiated at the Jewish Community Center.
Mrs.
Kahn, known as Mimi, graduated from Smith College and is a former president of New York Women in Communications.
She is a daughter of Marion Bloomberg of Swampscott, Mass., and the late Haskell Bloomberg, a retired radio station owner.


Don't Call the Private Auto Mass Transit
To the Editor:
In "Cars Are America's Main Form of Mass Transit" (letter, Nov. 5), John A. Bradley makes the questionable claim that "we enjoy the most advanced mass-transit system in the world -- the private automobile," and chides Congress for focusing on other means of mass transit, such as passenger rail service.


Holiday Gifts Ready to Go
THE most exotic item in this year's collection of travel gifts is a mosquito netting for bed or bunk, an invaluable gift for travelers to Mexico, the Far East, Africa and other places where flying creatures can do you worse harm than make you itch.
The net would certainly be welcomed by yacht owners who like to sleep on deck or who are occasionally compelled to put guests on the cockpit cushions.
The copious, light netting flows down from a metal curtain ring at the top that can be affixed to a ceiling hook, a line run between trees or a halyard.
Bamboo sticks that fan into a circle are inserted into pockets near the top to flare the net, and the bottom hem is tucked under the mattress.
The net packs into a sausage-shaped nylon bag.


Topics of The Times; New York City's Loss
Sanitation Commissioner Steven Polan, who's leaving New York City government to join an international construction company, served with distinction during a tough period.
Despite daunting budget cuts, he kept the Sanitation Department going, even managing to introduce some efficiencies.
He complained about contracts that allow sanitation workers to work less than a full day.
And he put the emotionally charged issues of recycling and incineration in proper perspective.
Mr.
Polan pushed to get the city's recycling effort restored after it was scheduled to be cut from the budget.
Yet much to the annoyance of environmentalists who love recycling but hate incinerators, he also pointed out that recycling is no panacea.
Supported by First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel, he succeeded in persuading Mayor David Dinkins to endorse unpopular but critically needed incinerators.
Mr. Polan's sound common sense will be missed.


Holiday Events Abound in New York
THE sheer number of holiday activities -- for Hanukkah, Christmas, Kwanzaa or New Year's -- available to families in New York City this year makes orderly scheduling a gargantuan task.


Two Airlines Drop Limit on Senior Coupons
In a move that brings them into line with other major carriers in offering attractive rates to people 62 and older, American Airlines and United Airlines have dropped their limits on the length of travel allowed on senior coupons, a form of discounted tickets for trips within the 48 contiguous states.
Until midsummer, both airlines had limited flights on the coupons to 2,000 miles, and charged a premium for those who wanted to make transcontinental trips.
The coupons are available from several airlines in books of four or eight, with each coupon good for a one-way fare.
The books range in price from $396 to $473 for four, or $720 to $792 for eight -- depending on the airline -- making them a travel bargain that is hard to beat, particularly for those planning long trips.
They allow older travelers to make round-trip flights almost anywhere in the nation for under $250, although all airlines that offer them require two coupons for each one-way flight to Alaska or Hawaii.


Don't Tell
SOMETIMES discrimination announces itself like pie in the face to the most wide-eyed young worker.
I know this from a talk I had 18 years ago with the executive editor of the first newspaper I worked for.
I made an appointment with the busy man and asked if he thought I could ever move from copy editing into a reporting job.
He called for the results of the battery of tests I'd taken as a job applicant, he frowned over them and then he said no.
A machine-scored personality profile, which he helpfully posed in front of me to let me see that science compelled his answer, showed that I was much too female a type to work as a reporter for him.
So much for my career plans.
The news was a surprise (Nurturing and compliant? Me?), a non sequitur and an insult, and it looked like a violation of the employment-discrimination laws.
So what did I do?
I chatted up the editor at the press club.
At parties, I pasted on a smile of rapt interest in his anecdotes.
With my boyfriend of the moment, a protege of the editor -- bad coincidence -- I went to dinner at the editor's apartment and surely said, "Wonderful to see you." The man was widely loathed, but no one, except the poor boyfriend, heard a word of grievance from me; I was as sweet as the test said I was.
A year later, after I'd quit to take a job that then evaporated, I wrote the editor a warm, ingratiating letter asking him to take me back.
His response left the door open, but fortunately another job materialized.


LET'S KILL ALL THE COPY EDITORS
As a manuscript editor at a university press, I can confirm that William Safire has it right: we editors are a snooty lot of aspiring Thistlebottoms (On Language: "Let's Kill All the Copy Editors," Oct. 6).
Overzealous editing, alas, is as much a sin of the age as is bad writing.
Part of what drives editors to adopt sometimes arbitrary conventions of capitalization, hyphenation, punctuation and spelling is inconsistent usage by authors.
The author who objects to my lowercasing "cold war" on page 26 may himself choose the minuscule on page 27.
I try not to stand in the way of the author's voice, especially if it is barreling down the page like a Mack truck.
If the author has a nice feel for language and a sense of direction, I'm content just to point out the few bumpy phrases to avoid.
But if the author shows herself to be clumsy with words, then we may both be in trouble.
When she drives us over a metaphor, I shut my eyes in fear; later, looking ahead on the map, I encourage her to stick to the land route even if it takes us six sentences out of our way and over the most boring stretch of prose in the county.
In short, I become phobic, and that is a lousy state of mind for good editing.


Style Makers; Pelgye Kelden, Tibetan Hat Designer
Pelgye Kelden fled Tibet as a child when the Chinese Army invaded.
But he kept a love of his native land, and especially of its handicrafts, while growing up in Nepal, and since moving to New York in 1976.
Now, from a tiny shop called Do Kham in SoHo, Mr.
Kelden sells luxurious fur-trimmed hats based on an ancient Tibetan design.
In Tibet the hats are known as "wa sha," or "fox hats," because they were originally fashioned from a fox pelt and wrapped around the head.
The style started in the eighth century or so, and was adopted by shepherds, hunters and warriors.


Jeanne Hamburg to Wed Next Year
Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Bruce Hamburg of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter Jeanne Melissa Hamburg to Dr.
Jay Alan Schechtman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Schechtman of Jamaica Estates, Queens.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hamburg, 25 years old, is an associate in the law firm of Coudert Brothers in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Jordan &amp; Hamburg.
Her mother, Stephanie B. Hamburg, is a psychologist in the New York City public school system.


Women's Tennis: Courting Death?
To the Sports Editor:
A huge hip, hip, hooray for Robert Lipsyte for "And Still a Long Way to Go," (The Times, Nov. 22) expressing outrage at the continued Virginia Slims sponsorship of women's tennis tournaments.
It is indeed obscene that the Women's Tennis Association accepts money from one of the 'merchants of death,' whose product use causes this horrifying statistic: some 400,000 people die every year from the effects of cigarette smoking.


Giving Credit . . .
To the Editor:
While Boeing contributes much in the development of new airplanes, it is not always the first.
"Pushing the Envelope at Boeing" (Nov. 10) says "all the design and engineering for the 777 . . . is being done on computer screens, making it the first fully 'paperless airliner.' " Not true!
Airbus Industrie's A330 and A340, the first of which is now in flight test, were designed totally on computers.
And about 90 percent of the design of the A320, which entered service in 1988, came through computers.
And while your sidebar implies Boeing has developed the idea of moveable galleys and lavatories to meet specific airline configuration requirements, Airbus was presenting that concept to operators long before the 777 program was launched.
DAVID C. VENZ  Herndon, Va., Nov. 14
The author is vice president for communications, Airbus Industrie of North America.


Cuttings; Scents That Rob Winter of Its Sting
Who has not fallen in love with a jasmine -- its white flowers filling the air with their spicy scent -- and then taken it home from the plant store only to watch it drop its blossoms, grow scraggly as a stray cat and die.
That proves it, you say to yourself: I am not a house plant person.
And you spend the winter staring mournfully through the windows at your blossomless, scentless garden.
Even your nose feels sad.


Jeremy Irons as a Guy Named Joe (Kafka)
For an actor who began his career playing quintessential Englishmen, Jeremy Irons these days is looking pretty chameleonic -- even metamorphic, you might say.
Steven Soderbergh's "Kafka," Mr.
Irons's first movie since winning the Oscar in March for "Reversal of Fortune," opens in New York on Wednesday for a one-week run so it can qualify for this year's Academy Awards.
For Mr.
Soderbergh, "Kafka" represents the important Second Movie from a director who, two years ago, made one of the most widely heralded debut films in ages, "Sex, Lies and Videotape." Mr.
Irons, in turn, sees the new film as part of a continuing desire to surprise.
In it, he plays a quiet, intelligent clerk in what amounts to a cinematic riff on themes suggested by the author Franz Kafka.


THE HOUSE WE LIVED IN
The house and the pictures hit home -- my home in Cuba, which I left in 1960.
In 1988, my daughter had the opportunity to visit Havana.
She was allowed to visit my home and take pictures.
The cover page of your magazine -- the house after and before -- was exactly what she brought back.
What a poignant and accurate photograph.
CRISTINA A. PEDROSO FERNANDEZ
Montclair, N.J.


Tembac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Accounts
*
Compuadd Corp., Austin, Tex., to Young &amp; Rubicam San Francisco, for a $6 million campaign intended for corporate buyers of personal computers.
Other finalists in the review were Bozell Inc., Dallas; Taylor Smith, Houston; Tracy-Locke, Dallas, and U.S.
Creative Inc., Austin.
The account had previously been handled by an in-house advertising department. *
Consumers Power Co., Jackson, Mich., to Campbell-Mithun-Esty Advertising, Southfield, Mich., following a review.
The other finalists were Earle Palmer Brown Advertising, Kalamazoo, Mich., and W. B. Doner &amp; Company and DDB Needham Worldwide, both of Detroit.
The utility's account had previously been handled by William R. Biggs-Gilmore Associates, Kalamazoo.
Billings were not disclosed.


Maxwell Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Scientists Suggest Dumping Sludge On Vast, Barren Deep Sea Floor
Black as a cave, devoid of plants and home to worms and other low forms of life, the thick sediments at the bottom of the deepest oceans are described by marine scientists as immense and empty plains undisturbed by earthquakes or volcanoes.
Now scientists at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, one of the nation's most respected marine research centers, believe they have found a use for what they call the planet's most useless real estate.


Bridge
One of the world's great veteran players had his sights set on another major title at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals here today.
George Rapee, 76 years old, of Manhattan, who won three world team titles, in 1950, 1951 and 1953, and almost won another a year ago in Geneva, had a clear lead going into the final two sessions of the prestigious Reisinger Board-a-Match Team Championship.
Rapee's team includes Tony Forrester and Andy Robson of Britain, who have been outstanding on the international circuit in the last two years.
Their teammates are John Solodar of Manhattan, and Michael Seamon and Russell Arnold, both of Miami, Fla.


Miscellany
*
Grey Advertising Inc., New York, as expected, has announced that it will take a large charge against fourth-quarter earnings after a decision to close its subsidiary Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver.
The company had previously expected to report 1991 net income higher than the $14.6 million reported in 1990, but the charge will reduce this year's figure by a range of $9 million to $11 million.


A Prize for the Patient


INSIDE
Shuttle Glides Back Home
The space shuttle Atlantis landed flawlessly in California after cutting short its mission because of a mechanical failure.
Page A15.
Bridgeport U. at the Brink
Behind the University of Bridgeport's struggle lie pressures felt by many colleges.
News Analysis, page B1.
Symbolism Over Substance
Symbolic politics, not economic policy, has become the driving force in the rush to do something about the recession.
News analysis, page A13.
Piece in Subatomic Puzzle
Scientists offer new evidence that ghostly subatomic particles called neutrinos could hold the key to answering one of the most daunting questions of cosmology.
Page B7.


Sterling Optical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Meridian Point Realty Trust IV reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


France Defeats United States in Davis Cup Final


NUI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  UKRAINIANS FAVOR INDEPENDENCE
Voters in the Ukraine were reported to be registering overwhelming approval of an independence declaration to take the republic out of the Soviet Union and to create a nation of 52 million people.
Page A1  Ukrainian-Americans in New York celebrated.
A10  SOVIET CENTER FAILS TO HOLD
News Analysis: The Soviet Union is now little more than a label of convenience while Russia, the Ukraine and their neighbors sort out their separate fates.
A1  HOSTAGE TO BE FREED, CAPTORS SAY
Lebanese kidnappers said they would free an American captive, Joseph Cicippio, today, and there were indications that the two other remaining American hostages could be released by Sunday.
A1  ISRAEL AGAIN REBUFFS WASHINGTON
Israeli leaders reaffirmed that they would not be in Washington on Wednesday for the resumption of Middle East peace talks.
A8  GERMANS SEEK EUROPEAN UNITY
The European Community summit meeting will show Germany, long aggressively nationalistic, now more ready than any of its neighbors to surrender sovereignty to a strengthened community.
A3  PALESTINIAN GOAL: SELF-RULE SOON
Palestinian strategy in the Middle East talks rests on the conviction that self-rule in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip is attainable.
A8  A WORKING VISIT FROM MANDELA
Nelson Mandela left for the United States on a visit less dramatic than the one he made in 1990, carrying a more complex message.
A5  U.S.
POLICY ON ASYLUM DEBATED
The Bush Administration's response to the recent flood of Haitian refugees has opened a new debate over whether Washington has a consistent policy on political asylum.
A11  Ngorongoro Journal: Where the women do the heavy work.
A4  China announced its bid to be host of the Summer Olympics in 2000.
A6  Scotland Yard warned London shoppers after a series of firebombs.
A10  A Taiwan company plans to buy a big chunk of McDonnell Douglas.
D1  National A12-15, B6-7  ON THE RACIAL FRONT LINE
Though the number of black-white marriages has more than tripled since 1970, acceptance still comes slowly, if at all, for couples.
A1  SEEKING SAFETY IN THE DEEP
Tackling conventional wisdom about the fragile ocean, scientists are pressing ahead with a plan to investigate the use of the deep sea floor for dumping sewage sludge.
A1  MERCHANTS ARE CAUTIOUS
Although shoppers turned out in greater numbers than expected over the Thanksgiving weekend, merchants around the country expressed only tempered optimism about the holiday season.
A1  NEVER SAYING SORRY
President Bush says neither he nor the United States will apologize to Japan for dropping the atomic bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
A12  SAYING MUCH, DOING LITTLE
The '92 campaign has begun, with everyone in Washington talking vigorously about improving the economy, but really looking at the opinion polls instead.
A13  A TOWN OF DREAD
A dentist dead of AIDS; five of his patients infected with the virus; widespread fear in the community -- this is Stuart, Fla., in 1991.
A12  HELP FOR THE EXHAUSTED
Scientists' discovery of a hormonal deficiency in people who suffer from chronic fatigue syndrome opens the possibility of better treatment of the debilitating ailment.
A15  LOBBYING FOR RIGHTS
Changing times in Washington have meant more work and less influence for Ralph Neas, executive director of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights.
A14  CLUES TO THE UNIVERSE
Subatomic particles called neutrinos are almost everywhere but remain largely a mystery.
Now some researchers believe that they have discovered a key to the universe in the ghostly particles.
B7  EYES ON THE ROAD
Two days after 17 people died in a multiple-vehicle accident in California, safety experts say the unpredictability of human reactions are as much a cause of traffic accidents in conditions of limited visibility as is the fog or dust itself.
A15  NEW VIEW OF CAPITOL
An exhibit of models of Washington's monuments will allow blind people to more fully experience the capital's architectural treasures.
B7  The shuttle lands safely.
A12  Metropolitan Desk Digest, B1 TWO YOUNG LIVES, ONE DEATH
Darrell Sharpe and Jason Bentley lived within a mile of each other amid the threadbare streets and bricked-up buildings of East New York, but their paths never crossed until gunfire in a school killed one and left the other under arrest.
A1  Business Digest, D1 Sports C1-11  Baseball: Mets in thick of Bonilla bidding.
C4  Basketball: Seton Hall, St.
John's look tough.
C11  Big East-A.C.C.
Challenge.
C11  North Carolina routs Cornell.
C11  Column: Anderson on the Jets.
C6  Vecsey on Lawrence Taylor.
C9  Features: Sidelines.
C2  Question Box.
C4  Tennis: France tops U.S. in Davis Cup.
C1  Football: Giants upset by Bengals.
C1  Jets lose to Bills.
C1  Bills clinch A.F.C.
East title.
C6  Falcons rally to top Packers.
C7  49ers beat Saints.
C7  Giants not ready to give up C8  Hurricanes stack up winning points.
C8  Golf: Birdie and big payoff for Stewart.
C3  Soccer: St.
Louis back in N.C.A.A. semifinals.
C3  Hockey: High marks for Islanders.
C2  Obituaries D10  Robert Kasanof, former director of Legal Aid Society  Rev.
O.
Urcille Ifill Sr., leader of African Methodist Episcopal Church  Arts/Entertainment C13-16  New Line Cinema's strategy.
C13  A pre-Columbian gold collection goes to the Metropolitan Museum.
C13  Music: A Mozart opera preserved in amber.
C13  A solemn Eastern ritual.
C15  "Traviata" cast changes.
C16
Dance: City Ballet performs.
C14  Word and Image: "Medusa," a Madonna spoof.
C13  Holiday gift books.
C15  Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  EditorialsA16  Tax breaks: Stale seduction.
Congress fails; will banks?
Letters A16  William Safire: Bringing the 'dead cat' to life.
A17  Anthony Lewis: More free lunch.
A17  Karel van Wolferen: An economic Pearl Harbor?
A17


GROUP IN LEBANON MOVES TO RELEASE AMERICAN HOSTAGE
The long Middle East hostage saga moved into a possibly climactic phase as Lebanese kidnappers said that they would free an American today, hours after Israel released 25 of the roughly 300 Arab prisoners it has been holding in southern Lebanon.
A statement released in Beirut early this morning said that Joseph J. Cicippio would be released from five years of captivity today, and a Syrian official told Reuters in Damascus that the other two Americans held in Lebanon, Terry A. Anderson and Alann Steen, were expected to be free by Sunday.


One Killed, 3 Hurt In 2 Club Shootings
Two shootings that erupted after fights in Manhattan nightclubs early yesterday left one man dead and three other people injured, the police said.
In the first incident, 21-year-old Robyn Rodriguez was shot in the chest at 2:22 A.M. by an unidentified man he was fighting with inside Club Tracks, at 531 West 19th Street near 11th Avenue.
Mr.
Rodriguez, of 80-06 47th Avenue in Elmhurst, Queens, died at St.
Vincent's Hospital, said a police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:  Aames Financial Corp., 1.45 million common shares.
Oppenmheimer &amp; Co.
Acclaim Entertainment Inc., four million common shares.
Volpe, Covington &amp; Welty.
American Strategic Income Portfolio Inc., four million common shares.
Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood Inc..
Bank of New York Co., five million common shares.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Century Cellular Corp., 3 million common shares, with 2.4 million to be offered in the United States.
Lehman Brothers.
Clayton Williams Energy Inc., six million common shares.
Paine Webber Inc.
Conseco Inc., 2 million common shares, with 1.5 million to be offered in the United States.
First Boston Corp.
Diagnostek Inc., 3.5 million common shares.
Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
ECI Telecom Ltd., two million ordinary shares, with 1.6 million to be offered in the United States.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Engle Homes Inc., 2.3 million common shares.
Paine Webber Inc.
General Nutrition Cos., 6.9 million common shares, with 5.5 million to be offered in the United States.
Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
C.
R.
Gibson Co., 1.8 million common shares.
Paine Webber Inc.
Inforum Inc., two million common shares.
Volpe, Covington &amp; Welty.
Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc., 2 million common shares, with 1.6 million to be offered in the United States.
Lehman Brothers.
Medisys Inc., 1.7 million common shares.
Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood Inc.
Nutrition Management Services Co., one million class A units, each consisting of one common share and one warrant.
Stratton Oakwood Inc.
Peer Review Analysis, one million common shares.
Tucker Anthony Inc.
Sam &amp; Libby Inc., 2.75 million common shares.
Montgomery Securities.
John B. Sanfilippo &amp; Son Inc., two million common shares.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc.
Seagull Energy Corp., two million common shares.
First Boston Corp.
Southern Electronics Corp., 1.4 million common shares.
Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Syratech Corp., three million common shares.
First Boston Corp.
Systemed Inc., 2.5 million common shares.
Sutro &amp; Co.
Tuboscope Corp., five million common shares.
Paine Webber Inc.
U.
S.
Facilities Corp., 1.5 million common shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch


Potomac Electric Power reports earnings for 12mos to Oct 31


Biotechnica International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Agnico-Eagle Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Precision Standard reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday Construction Spending...Oct.
Tuesday Leading Indicators...Oct.
New-Home Sales...Oct.
Wednesday Revised G.N.P....3rd Qtr.
Auto Sales...Nov Corporate Profits...3rd Qtr.
Thursday Factory Orders...Oct.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday Unemployment...Nov.
Consumer Credit...Oct.


After a Long Hiatus, Billikens Are Back
It took St.
Louis University 17 years to return to the limelight of the college soccer scene that it dominated for two decades with 10 national titles.
"It's been so long," Joe Clarke, the coach of the Billikens, said yesterday by telephone from his home in St.
Louis, "I was a player the last time we made it."


Bank of Montreal reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


L&amp;N Housing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Adobe Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Jets Keep Slipping on the Ladder
IN the moments after the Bills' 24-13 victory, the Jets were in the midst of the celebration.
But they were not part of it.
For the fourth consecutive season, the Bills had clinched first place in the American Conference East, the division where the Jets keep struggling.
To protect the goal posts from the celebrants and to protect some of the 80,243 spectators from themselves, several police dogs were out on Rich Stadium's artificial surface along with about a dozen mounted police.
Nobody argues with a horse.
Just as nobody argues that the Bills are the A.F.C.'s best team.


Electrochemical Industries Frutarom Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jets Suffer Growing Pains
The Jets might have got a glimpse at their future this afternoon, as displayed by the Buffalo Bills.
The Bills, runners-up in Super Bowl XXV last January, made enough mistakes to bury themselves.
But then they made the necessary plays to take a 24-13 victory and clinch the American Football Conference East Division before a near-capacity crowd of 80,243 at Rich Stadium.


Historical Forces Drove U.S. and Japan to War; Rape of Nanking
To the Editor:
"Infamy Is Still Infamy" by Leslie H. Gelb (column, Nov. 17) proves that not everyone in the United States news media has forgotten Japan's role in World War II and its zealous attempt to whitewash history.


Town Learns Indians Are Taking Most of It Back
Dayrll Wetherby drove every nail in his house here.
A Vietnam veteran, he spent a decade building the split-level home: He hauled the stone for the foundation from a creek, felled and milled oaks for the three-inch-thick stairs, laid the floor joints, and hoisted the roof's center beam on his back.


Islanders, Unlike Ushers, Are Earning High Marks
If the Islanders continue to win the way they did over the weekend, they will probably draw crowds bigger than the four-digit gatherings that have watched most of their games this season at Nassau Coliseum.
And even if the crowds don't get larger, the team's management wants a few answers about crowd control and security staffing from Spectacor Management Group, which operates the Coliseum and many other facilities across the country.


Roanoke Electric Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Fortune Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vanderbilt Gold Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kellwood Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Christian Purchasing Network reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METRO DIGEST
NEW 'LIVING WILL' LAW TAKES EFFECT
On the first day of a new Federal law that requires hospitals to ask all patients if they want to plan for their deaths by filling out "living wills" or designating health-care proxies, the mood of patients, nurses and other staff members at hospitals throughout the metropolitan region was one of relief.
B3.
NEW YORK CITY TWO LIVES COLLIDE VIOLENTLY
Darrell Sharpe and Jason Bentley never knew each other, but they each lived amid the threadbare streets and decaying buildings of East New York.
In a neighborhood where the sound of gunfire is common, fear pervaded their young lives, and each chose to deal with it in his own way.
Darrell turned inward, staying out of people's way.
Jason, the police say, bought a $50 gun.
Their lives came violently together last Monday in a crowded third-floor hallway at Thomas Jefferson High School.
A1.
FOUR SLAIN IN A FLATBUSH APARTMENT
Two girls and two women were found shot to death in a Brooklyn apartment.
The quadruple slaying left neighbors stunned and the police searching for a motive.
There were no signs of a struggle or of a robbery, indicating that the four might have been killed by someone they knew.
B1.
PORT AUTHORITY BEGINS HOMELESS SWEEP
The Port Authority began removing homeless people from its bus terminal in Manhattan, but unseasonably warm temperatures and warnings of the crackdown reduced the number of people officials said they had expected to encounter.
The crackdown part of a campaign to restore commuter comfort and safety in the terminal, widely regarded as a haven for transients and criminals.
B3.
THE ULTIMATE POLITICAL MACHINE
In a windowless office two miles from City Hall, a high-priced high-powered bureaucrat has quietly decided one of the most politically volatile issues in New York City today: where to place or build shelters for homeless people.
The bureaucrat is an I.B.M. 3090 computer, and it is supposed to inject fairness into the selection process.
But its use raises some fundamental questions.
Metro Matters, B3. 5-YEAR-OLD BROOKLYN GIRL IS FOUND DEAD
A 5-year-old girl was left for dead, floating in the bathtub of her family's home in Brownsville on Saturday, and the police said the child's father told them that he had beaten and squeezed her until she stopped breathing and then put her in the tub.
A police spokesman said the father "said she was annoying him." B3.
REGION  TOWNS RESIST INDIANS' CLAIMS
The Seneca Indians are claiming ownership of the land and homes of 6,600 residents of Carrollton and Salamanca, N.Y.
About 50 families in the once bustling railway hub, built almost entirely on the Senecas' reservation, have obtained permits to dynamite their homes rather than to turn them over.
B1.
THE UNIVERSITY OF BRIDGEPORT'S LEGACIES
Should the University of Bridgeport soon end the long fall from its heyday in 1970 by closing its half-empty campus and going out of business, it will leave two legacies to the world of higher education.
It has shown how very hard it is to kill an American university, and it has shown just how to do it, step by step.
News Analysis.
B1.
DEMOCRATS DISMANTLE WHAT THEY BUILT
The New Jersey Legislature's lame-duck Democrats plan to undo, in their last nine days in power, the $2.8 billion tax package that was their biggest achievement and their political downfall.
It is the most controversial item on the agenda as the 204th session winds up, but not the only one.
Others include the explosive issue of redistricting and a scattershot of other bills.
B5.
WHATEVER HAPPENED TO GIVING AN APPLE?
In Scarsdale, N.Y., the most wealthy town in Westchester County, the simple act of giving from student to teacher has never been simple.
For years the school district's no-gift policy was ignored by a stream of children bearing gifts, some of them modest and some anything but.
At its last meeting, the Board of Education tried to put the issue to rest.
Scarsdale Journal, B5.
Neediest Cases B2  The Traffic Map B4


Sanmark-Stardust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Television; On Children And Who Cares Most
The message of "Childhood in America," the follow-up to the PBS "Childhood" series, is that attention must be paid, but viewers may find it hard to pay attention.
The 9 panelists who take up most of the 90-minute program, at 9 tonight on Channel 13, seem to be competing to show the most concern for the millions of poor children being hurt by inadequate health care and problems at school.
But all agree that the condition of the American family is at the heart of the matter.
The air is filled with calls for "commitment," "leadership," "community," "priorities." Heard it before?


College Bound Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


We Should Have Listened to Van Buren
To the Editor:
May I add a note of some late-20th-century relevance to your excellent article on Martin Van Buren, who was elected eighth President of the United States in 1836, and Lindenwald, his home outside Kinderhook, N.Y., 125 miles north of New York City, which has been designated a national historic site (Nov. 10)?


Saatchi Consolidates Under Kobs &amp; Draft
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. is consolidating its direct-marketing operations worldwide under its Kobs &amp; Draft Advertising unit, which is based in Chicago.
The move, which is likely to be completed by year-end, is intended to give Saatchi a single global brand name in direct marketing to compete with Ogilvy Direct and Wunderman Worldwide.
The new agency, to be called Kobs &amp; Draft Worldwide, will combine the Kobs &amp; Draft unit, which had been under Saatchi's Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide unit, with Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Direct, the direct-marketing operation of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Worldwide.
The change represents something of a coup for Kobs &amp; Draft.


Florida Employers Insurance reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PVC Container Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Friedman Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Clue in Mystery of Nature's Forces
Measurements of a rare form of radioactive decay have produced what scientists say is new evidence that subatomic particles called neutrinos could hold the key to fundamental forces of nature and one of the most daunting questions of cosmology: what is the mass -- and fate -- of the universe?
Among the most elusive particles known to science, neutrinos can emerge from radioactive decay of atomic nuclei -- indeed their existence was first theorized to explain a deficit of energy during such decay -- and they are everywhere, traveling close to the speed of light.
Yet they interact with ordinary matter only very rarely, so that swarms of them are always passing through earth unimpeded and virtually undetected.
Neutrinos have no electric charge and, it had been thought, no mass.


Norstan Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Jako Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clarence Allgood, 89, Federal Judge Since 1938
Clarence W. Allgood, a Federal judge in Birmingham, Ala., who dismissed a 1963 case involving 1,100 black students who had been suspended for demonstrating against segregation, died of a gunshot wound over the weekend.
He was 89 years old.
Judge Allgood's body was found at his home on Saturday by his son, and a handgun was nearby, The Associated Press said.
"Everything indicates it was self-inflicted," Sgt.
LaFaree King-Walker of the Birmingham police told the news service.


General Employment Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MANDELA DEPARTS ON A VISIT TO U.S.
When Nelson Mandela first visited the United States a year and a half ago, he was greeted with a curiosity verging on adulation because of a stature attained over 27 1/2 years as the world's most admired political prisoner.
Tonight Mr.
Mandela left for the United States on a less dramatic working visit, carrying a more complex message as the leader of the African National Congress.


American Stores Co. reports earnings for 13wks to Nov 2


Mauna Loa Macadamia Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Valley Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nucorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israelis Hold Fast
Saying it still lacks adequate American assurances, Israel reaffirmed it will not come to Washington for Mideast talks until Dec. 9.
Page A8.


Abroad at Home; More Free Lunch
Suddenly politicians of every stripe are demanding a tax cut to "fight the recession." President Bush turned from opponent to enthusiast overnight.
Democratic Congressional leaders called hearings for this week to explore their ideas and the President's.
The stampede tells us something about this country.
It shows how addicted we are to fulfilling immediate desires, how unable to focus on long-term needs.
It shows that we are still gripped by the faith of the Reagan years, though its ruinous effects are all about us: We believe that somewhere there is a free lunch.


Leisure Concepts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Commercial Gem Is Remade By Ayer to Promote DeBeers
NO one is likely to enshrine in an advertising hall of fame an unassuming, albeit warmly emotional, 1977 television commercial for DeBeers diamonds.
But unlike far more celebrated spots, the 30-second commercial, called Washer and Dryer, has been accorded a rare tribute: a remake.
Beginning tonight, consumers can see the 1991 version of the spot, the focus of a $3.3 million campaign to promote giving diamonds for the holidays.
While the remake, called "Christmas Eve Surprise," differs in several ways from its predecessor, particularly in casting and overall appearance, many aspects remain the same, including the soft-sell script, the director and the agency.


Call Veto on Abortion a Setback for Women
To the Editor:
You term the President's veto of legislation meant to overrule the "gag rule," which prohibits doctors and counselors in federally financed family planning clinics from discussing abortion with pregnant women, and Congress's failure to override the veto, a setback for the Democrats (front page, Nov. 20).
It would have been more appropriately called a setback for women.


Voter Guide Would Do More if It Only Could
To the Editor:
We at the New York City Campaign Finance Board read with interest "Inadequate Voter Guide" by Erika Frankel (letter, Nov. 20), stating her view that the New York City Voter Guide should include candidates for judgeships and district attorneys.


Germany Now Leading Campaign to Strengthen the European Community
The European Community summit meeting in the Netherlands next week will show Germany, once an aggressively nationalist country, now more ready than any of its neighbors to surrender sovereignty to a strengthened community.
Its push for a strong European Parliament and central bank appears to have failed to overcome determined opposition from Britain.
But when Chancellor Helmut Kohl stood in Parliament last week and boomed, "We favor the political unification of Europe," the cheering of legislators from across the political spectrum was testimony to how profoundly their country has changed over the second half of this century.


Stewart Pockets Birdie and Big Payoff
Payne Stewart had to wait an uncomfortably long time before his superb golf amounted to anything, but his patience was rewarded today when he captured the single richest hole in the nine-year history of the Skins Game.
Stewart went from being shut out on Saturday to winning $260,000 when he holed a 4-foot putt on the 376-yard, par-4 14th hole of the TPC Stadium Course at PGA West.


Audrey Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.N. Envoy Arrives to Back Yugoslav Truce
As fresh clashes began in eastern Croatia, the United Nations special envoy, Cyrus R. Vance, arrived here today on a new mission to shore up a fragile cease-fire accord and arrange for the possible deployment of United Nations peacekeeping forces.
The Croatian radio reported that Serb irregulars and the Serbian-led Yugoslav national army had shelled Osijek, Vinkovci, Daruvar and other towns in the Croatian republic's eastern panhandle.
The Yugoslav press agency reported new fighting near the towns of Lipik and Novska.


Question Box
World Series Ending
Q.
Suppose that on the hit that scored Dan Gladden from third base and won the World Series for Minnesota in the bottom of the 10th of Game 7 this fall, both the runner on second base, Kirby Puckett, and the one on first base, Kent Hrbek, had never gone to their next bases.
Suppose they instead had turned away and dashed directly to home plate to join in the celebration.
Would the Series-winning run have counted?
A.
Not if an Atlanta fielder was on the ball and the ball was in his glove when his foot tagged the appropriate bases.
Since there was one out and the bases were loaded when Gene Larkin "singled" Gladden home, all a Braves' fielder had to do was retrieve the ball from the outfield, carry it to the infield, get an umpire's attention, touch third base for out number two, touch second for out number three, then watch the Twins try to put the corks back in the champagne bottles.


Selvac Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Bank of Nova Scotia reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Allcity Insurance Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Randi Minsky, A Teacher, Wed
Randi Minsky, a teacher, and Charles Jeremy Pellett, a news writer at WINS radio in New York, were married yesterday at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Rabbi Ronald Sobel officiated.
Mrs.
Pellett, 24 years old, graduated from Smith College and is a substitute teacher in private elementary schools in New York.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold I. Minsky of Brookville, L.I.
Her father is president of his own litigation support firm in Jericho, L.I.
Her mother, Judith, is a senior at Smith.


Curragh Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Smith Hits Fast Forward And the Jets Just Unravel
Whether that was the old Bruce Smith or the new Bruce Smith playing his second game of the season today, all that the Jets could tell was that the Buffalo Bills defensive end was the same kind of player he's been for most of his seven years in the league.
He made his presence felt after only a week of practice.
"I said, 'Bruce, I know what you're thinking,' " said Bills Coach Marv Levy, who waited until the last possible moment before activating his All-Pro pass rusher.
"You're thinking the people want to see the Pro Bowl Bruce Smith out there right now. I said, 'I don't expect you to be at the top of your game, but if you're going to be at the top of your game down the road you've got to get in there sometime.' "


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
By late Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 4.36 percent and the six-month bill at 4.40 percent.


Marcy DiMona Wed in Rome
Marcy DiMona, a translator and English teacher in Rome, and Roberto Mander, an immigration specialist with the Province of Rome, were married yesterday in a civil ceremony at the Campidoglio, Rome's City Hall.
The bride, 34 years old, graduated from Yale University.
She is the daughter of Barbara and Joseph DiMona of New York.
Her father is an author.


Hollywood Park Operating Co./ Hollywood Park Realty Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pace Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Medicine Shoppe International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Instacool -North America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nutmeg Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Black-White Marriages Rise, But Couples Still Face Scorn
In another era, Tom and Yvette Weatherly might never have known each other.
They grew up in opposite worlds in Atlanta, his white and affluent, hers black and working-class.
But as the children of integration, they met when she was bused to his virtually all-white high school and sat behind him in English class.
They helped each other with class work and goaded each other to raise their hands.
Eight years ago they were married.
They have survived their families' shock and disapproval and the stares and unwelcome comments of strangers.
They know not to stop in small towns or rural areas when they travel.


General Tire's Boon to Babbit
The billings of Babbit &amp; Reiman Advertising Inc. could increase by as much as a third with the agency's selection by General Tire Inc. for its estimated $15 million to $20 million account.
"We start burning rubber on Dec. 1," Joey Reiman, chairman and chief executive, said in a telephone interview from Atlanta on Friday.


Medical Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Innovo Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Telebyte Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Television Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


C&amp; R Clothiers Gets Co-Chief at Its Agency
One route to the top at C&amp; R Clothiers, a California men's clothing chain, is through its ad agency.
Jack Roth, the president of Admarketing, Los Angeles, C&amp; R's agency, has been named co-chairman and co-chief executive of C&amp; R. He will share those positions with Paul S. Reisbord, who had previously been the retailer's sole chairman and chief executive.
While both men will work on C&amp; R's strategic planning, Mr.
Reisbord, who appointed Mr.
Roth, will continue to manage day-to-day operations.


New Exhibit Shows Capital to the Blind
Freddie Peaco has been in and out of the Capitol building 20 times but has never seen its dome or the House and Senate wings that span it.
Now, thanks to a new permanent exhibit at the National Building Museum, she and others with limited eyesight can visualize the architectural treasures of the nation's capital for the first time.
The exhibit, "Washington: Symbol and City," features models for the blind to touch so they can understand the structure of the Capitol, the White House, the Lincoln Memorial, the Washington Monument and other well-known landmarks.
Financed by the American Foundation for the Blind and the National Endowment for the Arts, the exhibit opened recently at the building museum on F Street Northwest.


2 Who Lost Their Way in Urban Wilds
Darrell Sharpe and Jason Bentley lived within a mile of each other amid the threadbare streets and bricked-up buildings of East New York, but had never met.
In a neighborhood where gunfire is common, fear pervaded their young lives, and each chose to deal with it in his own way.
Darrell turned inward and chose his friends carefully, so as to stay out of harm's way.
The police say Jason apparently armed himself, as many teen-agers there say they do to protect themselves from one another.


Pacesetter Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On First Night of Hanukkah, Homeless Children Learn Holiday Rites


Intercontinental Life reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coming Back; Tax Breaks: Stale Seduction
New York City's economy is in trouble.
Unemployment is up 25 percent this year; nearly a million New Yorkers are now on welfare, the most in 15 years.
Financial firms, including Morgan Stanley, an industry leader, are pondering leaving.
And many other employers express revulsion over filthy streets, crime, aggressive panhandling and soaring drug use.
The common impulse is to demand remedies from City Hall.
But even if City Hall were responding brilliantly to the gloom, there are no quick fixes.
The city's maladies arise from fundamental forces over which government has little leverage.


Positive Reaction Greets 'Living Will' Law
Hospitals began routinely asking patients yesterday how they want to live the last days of their lives.
And the reaction among patients and staff members at hospitals in the metropolitan region was largely one of relief.
This new interest in the care of terminally ill patients was generated by the first day of a new Federal law that requires hospitals to ask all patients if they want to plan for their death by filling out a 'living will' or designating someone as their health-care proxy.


Slow Death On Campus
Should the University of Bridgeport soon end the long fall from its heyday in 1970 by closing its half-empty campus and going out of business, it would leave two legacies to the world of higher education.
Its increasingly painful struggle to stay alive during the last two decades will have shown, first of all, how very hard it is to kill an American university.
Yet it will also have demonstrated just how to do that, step by step.


Coming Back; Congress Fails; Will Banks?
When the 102d Congress began last January, it had one pre-eminent responsibility: to pass bank reform.
When the 102d Congress went home for the holidays last week, it had barely passed a pathetic shell of a law.
It pours money into a leaky deposit insurance fund without even trying to plug the leaks.
Bank reform succumbed to a frenzied attack by lobbyists.
Congress can now set banks right with a second-best proposal -- called core banks -- that strips away the lobbyists' only legitimate argument.


PRESIDENT REJECTS APOLOGY TO JAPAN
President Bush today rejected any suggestion that the United States owed Japan an apology for dropping atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945, saying that the bombings might have saved millions of American lives and that Americans helped rebuild Japan after World War II.
"No apology is required, and it will not be asked of this President, I can guarantee you," Mr.
Bush said, adding that he felt strongly about the matter.
"War is hell, and it's a terrible thing. But there should be no apology requested. And that, in my view, is rank revisionism."


Seton on Top of the World? We'll Find Out
Being bigger than everyone has its drawbacks.
But Luther Wright discovered long ago that the drawbacks are usually outweighed by advantages.
"When I was young, I'd go to the court and people didn't want me to play," recalled Wright, Seton Hall's 7-foot-2-inch, 290-pound sophomore center from Elizabeth, N.J.
"They thought I was too big."


Mutual Assurance Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Asylum Policy for Haitian Refugees Stirs Debate on Fairness by the U.S.
The Bush Administration's response to an unanticipated flood of Haitian refugees in recent weeks has opened a new debate over whether Washington has a consistent policy on political asylum, particularly in the Caribbean and Central America.
As the Administration looks for ways to undo a court order temporarily barring the forced return of Haitians to a country run by a military Government that Washington does not recognize, critics have charged that damage is being done to America's image and reputation as a nation of safe haven.
They contrast the treatment of the Haitians with the Administration's opposition to the forced repatriation of Vietnamese boat people from the British colony of Hong Kong, and with the welcome the United States has extended to to Cuban refugees over the years.


Forced to Return Early, the Shuttle Lands Safely
The space shuttle Atlantis swooped back to earth today after a faulty navigation device forced the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to cut its mission short by three days.
Col.
Frederick Gregory of the Air Force, the mission commander, guided Atlantis through thin clouds and gusty winds to a landing on the hard-packed runway on a dry lake bed here at 2:35 P.M., nearly seven days after its takeoff from Cape Canaveral, Fla.


McDonnell's Rich Taiwanese Backer
In a nook on the 29th floor of a new office building in this city is a two-month-old company whose 40 employees scribble memos, hold meetings and receive guests but have not yet manufactured a single product.
Now the novice company is raising eyebrows, and a few tempers, with a plan to pay as much as $2 billion for a large chunk of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation.
The Taiwan Aerospace Corporation is no fly-by-night operation, but rather the high-priority venture of a Government with $76 billion in foreign-exchange reserves, more than any other nation.
The prospect of Taiwan's buying a major interest in McDonnell, the largest American manufacturer of civilian aircraft after the Boeing Company, is a sign that this island's economy is coming of age and entering the world of international partnerships and investments.


Galactic Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Economics '92-Style; Thus Far, All the Talk by Politicians About What Can Be Done Is Just That
Deep down, most of the senior Republicans and Democrats in Washington, including President Bush and much of the leadership in the Senate and House of Representatives, doubt that there is much they can do in the next few months to boost the economy to any significant degree.
Even a pre-Christmas tax cut, the subject of so much wrangling last week, would probably not have any significant impact until well into 1992.


Evergreen Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Opera; 3 'Traviata' Changes, One a Surprise
There were three major cast changes in the Met's run of "La Traviata" on Saturday afternoon.
Two of them had been awaited with some anticipation, the third turned into an unexpected pleasure.
Cheryl Studer became Verdi's Violetta, bringing with her a formidable range, power and flexibility.
"Ah, fors' e lui" and then "Sempre libera" in Act I became an impressive catalogue of virtues: a strongly supported upper register, an easy coloratura and a big, even sound throughout the entire range.
So convincing is her voice that some of Ms.
Studer's overdrawn stage gestures seem extraneous and are certainly ineffective.


Review/Opera; Preserving Mozart in Amber
Mozart's "Entf:uhrung aus dem Serail" lived its early life in circumstances Cole Porter would have found familiar.
As purveyors of public entertainment in search of instant success, both men eagerly cashed in on the popular style of the moment, wrapped their music around the stars who could sell it, and composed and recomposed according to the exploitable vocal assets of some and the deficiencies better hidden in others.
The Metropolitan Opera revived Mozart's 1782 singspiel on Friday.
James Levine conducted, and when he is around the house, the Met's splendid orchestra seems to play that much better; the precise contact between it and the stage, so rare in the opera world, came quickly to be taken for granted.
John Dexter's 12-year-old production has been shined to a nice and uncomplicated finish by Paul Mills for this year's performances.
Jocelyn Herbert's cut-out sets are Mediterranean sunshine and pastel shade.


Concord Fabrics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 1


Historical Forces Drove U.S. and Japan to War
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb's "Infamy Is Still Infamy" (column, Nov. 17), on Japanese thinking about the attack on Pearl Harbor as we near the 50th anniversary of United States entry into World War II, trivializes history by focusing on the timing of Japan's declaration of war.
It avoids the real moral question: was the Pacific war avoidable, or were both nations trapped by historical forces?


Bonds Fail To Follow Old Rules
The upside-down logic of the credit markets, where bad news about the economy gets a warm reception and good news is decidedly unwelcome, is becoming even more perverse.
Reaction to good news will still be bad.
But until further notice, bad news may not make participants in the bond market feel better and could make them feel worse.


Codenoll Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jones Plumbing Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mets Cross Their Fingers, and Await Bonilla's Choice
Bobby Bonilla will sign a contract this week, and it appears almost certain that when he's done applying his signature, the free agent will have become the highest-paid player in baseball.
Should Bonilla not sign with the Mets, the club will undoubtedly feel anguished.
But what the Mets won't do is agonize over what more they could have done to lure Bonilla to Shea Stadium.


Giants Insist That Surrender Can't Be Found in Playbook
By all logic, the Giants eliminated themselves from playoff contention today with their 27-24 loss to the Cincinnati Bengals.
To make the National Football League playoffs, they must win their three remaining games -- against the Philadelphia Eagles, the Washington Redskins and the Houston Oilers, all of them tough opponents -- and hope other things fall into place.


Fonar Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Bliss &amp; Laughlin Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Memorial to Those Lost to AIDS
In a stark gallery of empty frames and pedestals at the Museum of Modern Art, dozens of people, including Manhattan Borough President Ruth W. Messinger and Mayor David N. Dinkins, gathered yesterday to read the names of hundreds of people who have died of AIDS.
A bell at Riverside Church in Manhattan tolled once every 10 minutes, the rate that people die of AIDS.
The World Trade Center, the Brooklyn Bridge and Rockefeller Center dimmed their lights.


PRAYERS ANSWERED FOR EMIGRES IN U.S.
In the grimmest days of World War II, when he was a starving Ukrainian partisan besieged by German forces on one side and Soviet troops on the other, Stephen Maksymiw said he endured by whispering to himself over and over that one day the Ukraine would be free.
Nearly 50 years later, as he prayed yesterday morning in St.
George's Ukrainian Catholic Church in Manhattan, Mr.
Maksymiw said he felt that his dream had finally come true.


Scientists Find Hormonal Deficit in Chronic Fatigue Sufferers
Federal scientists reported today that they had detected low amounts of hormones in the brains and endocrine glands of people with chronic fatigue syndrome.
The findings could advance the search for the underlying cause of the debilitating ailment and could lead to new treatments for it, scientists from the National Institutes of Health said.


Woman Is First Off the Bench At Pratt Institute
After seasons with records of 3-23 and 8-17, Coach EUGENE MARSHALL Jr.  of Pratt Institute was looking for help for his men's basketball team.
So what if she turned out to be a 5-foot-7 1/2-inch guard?
ANNE BRIGITTE NILSSEN will make her home debut tonight at Pratt's Brooklyn campus on Willoughby Street.
Marshall believes she may be the only woman on a men's team in the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III.


Vacation Spa Resorts reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Groupe Videotron reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


In Palestinians' Strategy for Talks, Self-Rule Is Seen as Attainable
Palestinian strategy in the Middle East peace talks scheduled to resume Wednesday in Washington rests on the conviction that self-rule in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip is an attainable goal that serves larger American interests in the region and can be tolerated by Israel as well.
Palestinians plotting the course of their direct talks with Israel say their primary goal will be to compress the time it will take to attain self-rule and hold local elections.
Their aim is to build up, in a period short of three years, a core of Palestinian leaders in the Israeli-occupied territories at the nuts-and-bolts level of governing.


MacLand Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AOI Coal Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Retailers Expressing Tempered Optimism For Holiday Season
Although shoppers turned out in greater numbers than expected over the Thanksgiving weekend and sales in many stores seemed better than retailers anticipated, merchants around the country expressed only a tempered optimism yesterday about the holiday season.
Most said they would be hard pressed to achieve sales increases of 3 to 5 percent over last year, increases that would barely exceed the rate of inflation.


Northgate Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Historical Forces Drove U.S. and Japan to War; A New McCarthyism
To the Editor:
The last decade of Reagan-Bush politics and economics have torn American society and unraveled United States-Japanese relations.
Middle-class America is rapidly disappearing.
The American economy is stuck in a debilitating recession with mounting unemployment.


Port Authority Begins Removing Homeless From Terminal


Market Place; Mattel Thrives as Barbie Grows
At age 32, Barbie is doing better than ever, and so is the doll's manufacturer, Mattel.
More than three decades after she was introduced, Barbie is expected to post sales for Mattel Inc. this year of more than $800 million, up 10 percent from last year and almost double the level of four years ago.
She is far and away Mattel's most important product, accounting for half the company's revenues.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Pistons' Victory and Record Isiah Thomas scored 22 points and became Detroit's leading career scorer yesterday as he paced the Pistons to a 94-87 victory over the Houston Rockets in Auburn Hills, Mich.
Thomas passed Bob Lanier as the Pistons' career scorer when he hit a free throw with 3 minutes 53 seconds left in the third quarter, giving him his 15,489th point.
"It's great, but it's not important as the championships we've won," Thomas said about the mark.
"The most important thing is that we won the game." Houston had cut the Pistons' lead to 78-74 with 8:23 left in the game, but Joe Dumars, who had been 1 of 8 from the field at that point, hit a jumper, buried a 3-pointer, then made another jumper to increase the lead to 11.
Otis Thorpe led Houston with 20 points and 14 rebounds. (AP) Trail Blazers 91, Bullets 87: Clyde Drexler scored 20 points, including three free throws in the final 1 minute 23 seconds, lifting the Trail Blazers past the Washington Bullets in Portland.
The Bullets closed to 85-83 with 2:13 remaining, but Portland scored the next 5 points on free throws to regain control.
Rookie Larry Stewart led the Bullets with a season-high 19 points, 13 of them in the first quarter. (AP) N.H.L.
Oilers Rout Canucks Bill Ranford made 33 saves and the Oilers' previously dormant offense came to life in a 7-0 drubbing of the Vancouver Canucks yesterday in Edmonton.
With the Oilers ahead by 3-0 after the first period, Ranford stopped 16 shots, including a penalty shot, in the second period.
It was Ranford's first shutout of the season and the third time the Oilers have beaten the Canucks, who lead the Smythe Division.
Scott Mellanby scored twice for the Oilers, who had averaged only 3.04 goals through their first 25 games.
Edmonton announced that Bernie Nicholls, obtained from the Rangers as part of the Mark Messier trade, will report for Friday's game in Winnipeg. (AP) Bruins 5, Whalers 4: Peter Douris and Bob Carpenter scored 15 seconds apart in the first minute of the third period as the Bruins held off the Hartford Whalers in Boston.
Douris retrieved a 90-foot drive by Ray Bourque off the backboards and fired the puck past goalie Kay Whitmore 44 seconds into the third period.
Carpenter then raced down the slot to convert his own rebound and give the Bruins a 4-1 lead just 59 seconds into the period with his sixth goal in the last five games. (AP) Jets 3, Blackhawks 2: Winnipeg rallied as Thomas Steen tied the game with 7 seconds left in regulation and Darrin Shannon scored 1 minutes 9 seconds into overtime for a victory over the Chicago Blackhawks in Winnipeg.
Shannon took a pass across the slot from Pat Elynuik and whipped the puck into the net, handing the Blackhawks their fifth straight loss and extending the Jets' unbeaten streak to seven games.
Steen, playing his second game of the season since returning from a back injury, sent the game into overtime by backhanding a rebound into the net for his first goal. (AP) TENNIS Witsken Wins Final Todd Witsken defeated Wayne Ferreira, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4, yesterday to win the South African Open in Johannesburg.
In the final, the 28-year-old American dropped his first set of the tournament, then fought back with a patient baseline game and sharp second-serve returns.
With the 20-year-old Johannesburg resident ahead by 5-4 in the first set, Witsken double-faulted on set point.
Witsken came back in the second set, breaking Ferreira early by returning winners off second serves.
Ferreira led by 4-2 in the third set, when Witsken seemed to increase his intensity to win on his serves and break Ferreira in the eighth and 10th games. (AP) SKIING Spaniard Takes Slalom Blanca Fernandez-Ochoa of Spain edged Vreni Schneider of Switzerland yesterday to win the World Cup women's slalom in Lech, Austria.
Fernandez-Ochoa had the fastest time in the first run, clearing the 51 gates 41.55 seconds.
The 28-year-old Madrid native, who plans to retire after this season, was second fastest over the 52-gate second run in 45.14, for a combined time of 1 minutes 26.69 seconds.
It was her fourth World Cup victory in 10 years of competition.
Schneider, who won Saturday's race by rallying from eighth after the first run, again was eighth after the first run yesterday.
She had the fastest time for the second at 44.55 for a total of 1:27.11.
Petra Kronberger of Austria was third at 1:27.59. (AP) SWIMMING U.S.
Open Mark Set in 1,500 Glen Housman of Australia set a United States Open record in the 1,500-meter freestyle yesterday in Minneapolis, capturing the event in 14 minutes 58.55 seconds.
Housman's performance was the ninth fastest time in history as he became the first swimmer to break the 15-minute barrier in the United States. (AP)


Tough Times for Movie Theaters
For the first time that he can recall, Sumner M. Redstone, the owner of the National Amusements theater chain, has strong doubts about the movie theater business.
Mr.
Redstone has been a leader in building movie theaters across the country.
But now he is retrenching.


Erly Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gold Artworks Of the Americas Go to the Met
Seventy pre-Columbian gold objects have been donated to the Metropolitan Museum of Art by Jan Mitchell, a New York businessman and collector.
The donation, including money to reinstall the museum's holdings of pre-Columbian gold, was announced last week by Philippe de Montebello, director of the Metropolitan.
The centerpiece of the collection is a rare 15th-century Tairona pendant from Colombia, a 5-inch-tall figure with a bat's head or mask, a diamond-shaped nose and an elaborate headdress.
It is on view in "Circa 1492: Art in the Age of Exploration," at the National Gallery in Washington.
A Panamanian pendant of crested crocodiles and a Calima funerary mask from Colombia are among the other objects.


Koo Koo Roo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giants Are Barely Alive
Well, at least the Giants are the Super Bowl champions until someone wins Super Bowl XXVI eight weeks from today.
Just don't expect that team to be the Giants.
Mathematically, there is still a chance for the Giants to make the National Football League playoffs.
But realistically, after the way they fell apart after taking a 10-point lead into the final 20 minutes today, their chances are nowhere.


Reserve Stands Out In Tar Heel Victory
Reserve Matt Wenstrom hit 10 of 12 shots from the field and scored 21 points as North Carolina defeated Cornell, 109-66, today.
Wenstrom was filling in for center Eric Montross, who is injured.


Boston Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Rent-a-Wreck of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


J.A.M. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brady (W.H.) Co.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Samson Energy Co. L.P. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Democrats Seek to Undo Unpopular Tax Package
The New Jersey Legislature's lame-duck Democrats plan to set to work Monday morning to undo in their final weeks of power the tax package that was their biggest achievement and their political downfall.
In the weeks since the election, the thought of Democrats' repealing the $2.8 billion tax package has grown from a joke-like aside at a news conference to the dominant item on the agenda of what promises to be a tumultuous nine-day session.


Atwood Oceanics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Abraxas Petroleum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dubrovnik, Cultural Hostage in Yugoslav Turmoil
The threat to cultural monuments posed by the fighting in Yugoslavia has caused anguish and division among American specialists in Serbo-Croatian culture, many of whom trace their ancestry to that part of the world.
Of particular concern to scholars are reports of damage to the ancient walled city of Dubrovnik on the Adriatic Sea.
The city's massive limestone walls -- up to 82 feet high, 19 feet thick and dating to the 13th century -- and many medieval buildings and artworks have earned Dubrovnik a place alongside Venice, Florence and Angkor Wat on the United Nations World Heritage List of monuments of "universal value."


Commercials on Video Gain Only a Few Fans
In 1987, when the Pepsi-Cola Company placed a commercial for Diet Pepsi on the videocassette version of the movie "Top Gun," many advertising executives called it the dawn of a new advertising medium that could rival television.
There even was talk of buying commercial time on as many as half of the video releases in a given year.


Sports of The Times; Giants Miss the Real L.T. on Field
THERE were dozens of imitation Lawrence Taylors and Phil Simmses in the stands yesterday for the regular convention of the Giants' 1156 Club.
But the real Lawrence Taylor missed the game with a knee injury, and the Giants missed him dearly.
The Giants lost, 27-24, to the Bengals, the last weak team they will see this season, which is very likely to end in three weeks, because of yesterday.


Jobless Man's Plight Typifies Neediest
Two years ago, David Gonzalez and his family had a six-room home.
A year later, he, his wife and their three children were living in a station wagon.
"My kids became quiet and withdrawn -- they held everything in," the 32-year-old Harlem native said last week.
"But sometimes they'd ask me, 'Daddy, how come no one will hire you?'


Armatron International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Value Merchants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 9


Dividend Meetings


Ngorongoro Journal; Woman's Work Is Never Done (Not by Masai Men)
Parimitoro Ole Kasiaro, a 35-year-old elder of the Masai tribe, recently married his third wife.
Waiting in the wings is a fourth, a 10-year-old girl paid for with cattle by his father to her father before she was born.
With three underfed wives and three scrawny children, Mr.
Kasiaro, whose cattle are dying of disease and who often confesses to being hungry himself, knows he cannot afford another wife.
But Masai custom, which is paramount among the mud and dung houses here on the edge of the Serengeti Plain, dictates that he must in time marry again.


Peerless Tube Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; City Ballet Offers 'Temperaments'
"The Four Temperaments," one of George Balanchine's greatest works, received a fine performance by the New York City Ballet on Friday night at the New York State Theater.
Viewed literally, "The Four Temperaments" can be said to be made up of artful distortions of traditional classical steps to a score by Paul Hindemith in which a musical theme in three parts is followed by four variations.
But Balanchine appeals to the mind and heart as well as the eye.
Each choreographic variation evokes one of the "temperaments," or character types, into which medieval thinkers believed human beings could be classified.


Varlen Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Father Is Arrested in Death of 5-Year-Old Brooklyn Girl
A 5-year-old Brooklyn girl was left for dead floating in the family's bathtub on Saturday, the police said yesterday.
The child's father told the police that he had beaten and squeezed his daughter until she stopped breathing and then placed her in the bathtub, the police said.
The girl's father, Robert Marbley, was arrested on Saturday and is likely to be charged with second-degree murder pending a grand jury investigation, the police said.
The child, Shirley Oden, who lived with her parents at 131 Belmont Avenue in Brownsville, was pronounced dead on arrival at Brookdale Hospital at 1 P.M. on Saturday, the police said.


Home Intensive Care reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hechinger Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


United Park City Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SIDELINES: FAME AND FIGURE 8's; Olympic Skaters Return to the Ice
In a rare showdown of participants from three different Olympic Games, four acclaimed figure skaters will compete Saturday in the world professional championships.
The event at the Capital Centre in Landover, Md., will include 1980 Olympic gold medalist ROBIN COUSINS of Britain, 1984 gold medalist SCOTT HAMILTON of the United States, 1988 silver medalist BRIAN ORSER of Canada and the defending professional champion, BRIAN BOITANO, who captured the Olympic gold in 1988.
Also, DEBI THOMAS, who finished third among women in the 1988 Olympics and went on to win the professional title in 1988 and 1989, will skate against the defending female champion, DENISE BIELLMANN of Switzerland.
Former three-time United States champion ROSALYNN SUMNERS, who took the Olympic silver medal in 1984, will skate, too.


Robert Kasanof Is Dead at 62; Lawyer Led Board of Correction
Robert Kasanof, a New York criminal lawyer who served as chairman of the city's Board of Correction and was director of the Legal Aid Society for more than a decade, died on Saturday at his Manhattan apartment.
Mr. Kasanof, who was 62 years old, died of a heart attack, his wife, Stephanie, said.


Trans Leasing International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Washington at Work; Lobbyist on Civil Rights Wins Despite Hostility
Believe it or not, Ralph Neas, the executive director of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, is feeling a bit nostalgic for his battles with the Reagan Administration.
Despite strong ideological differences with Ronald Reagan, Mr.
Neas could often gain a sympathetic ear from White House moderates like James A. Baker 3d and Kenneth M. Duberstein, who were each chief of staff.


American Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Quotation of the Day
"Not from this President." -- GEORGE BUSH, on whether the United States owed Japan an apology for the atomic bomb attacks that ended World War II.  [ A12:2. ]


Deciding on Sites for Shelters: A Faceless Numbers-Cruncher
IN a nondescript, windowless office two miles from City Hall, an unelected, unfeeling and faceless numbers-cruncher with more personality than some public officials and more power than most quietly decided earlier this year whether a shelter for homeless people might be built in your backyard.
This high-priced bureaucrat derives power from Chapter 8, Section 203a of the revised city charter.
Also from an electrical outlet.
Meet the 1990's incarnation of the political machine: an I.B.M. 3090 computer.
It was enlisted by the city to help formulate its proposed dispersal of the homeless from barracks-style dormitories to two dozen smaller shelters scattered in every borough.


American Enterprises reports earnings for Year to July 31


Image Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Television; A Spoof of That Platinum-Haired Rock Star
Few gambits are more risky than attempting a parody of something that already revels in parody, but Julie Brown mischievously succeeds in "Medusa: Dare to Be Truthful." The object being skewered, in black-and-white, of course, is Madonna, more or less as she carefully packaged herself in the rockumentary "Truth or Dare." "Medusa" can next be seen on Showtime on Thursday at 9:35 P.M. (with additional showings scheduled for Dec. 13, 18 and 31).
Ms.
Brown has been paying her dues in spoofs since the late 1980's on a weekly half-hour MTV show called "Just Say Julie," offering barbed commentaries on music videos and performers.
She has also appeared in a string of generally odd movies, including "Earth Girls Are Easy." In "Medusa," of which she is the executive producer and co-writer with Charlie Coffey, Ms.
Brown proves that her hilariously nasty jabs can be serious.


Seneca Foods Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Miller Spurs Falcons' Late Victory
Falcons 35, Packers 31
ATLANTA, Dec. 1 (AP) -- The Green Bay Packers almost silenced Atlanta's playoff talk.
Then the Falcons struck for three touchdowns in the final quarter today to keep those hopes alive.


Crackdown on Homeless Is Begun at Bus Terminal
The Port Authority began removing the homeless from its Eighth Avenue bus terminal yesterday, but unseasonably warm temperatures and warnings of the crackdown reduced the number of people officials said they had expected to encounter.
Those who remained had the choice of being evicted or accepting a bed in a shelter and being put into contact with social-service programs, Port Authority officials said.
By last night, 16 hours after the sweep began, 41 homeless people had accepted the authority's offer of help and 23 had left the terminal voluntarily.


Brandon Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Miami Keeps Stacking Up Points To Maintain Its No. 1 Ranking
The Miami Hurricanes needed their 39-12 rout of San Diego State on Saturday night, their 11th victory this season without a defeat, to retain the No. 1 position in The Associated Press poll of writers and broadcasters.
That was because Washington's candidacy made gains last week after Miami had a close call against Boston College.


Bono Keeps Niners Alive
They are down to their third quarterback and their last three games in a season full of unusual turns, but somehow the San Francisco 49ers carry on.
The playoffs remain only a hope, but the 49ers -- just a defeat away from falling out of the race for a wild card -- stayed in contention.
They beat the New Orleans Saints, 38-24, at Candlestick Park today and kept themselves within reach of a post-season berth, even if it is a distant one.


Reserve Stands Out In Tar Heel Victory
Reserve Matt Wenstrom hit 10 of 12 shots from the field and scored 21 points as North Carolina defeated Cornell, 109-66, today.
Wenstrom was filling in for center Eric Montross, who is injured.


Block (H&amp;R) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Enscor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Film Company's Success Story: Low Costs, Narrow Focus, Profits
Out West, two young hustlers wander aimlessly across the alienated landscape of "My Own Private Idaho," the director Gus Van Sant's moody art film.
Meanwhile, in an unnamed, cheerfully lighted region of the United States, the hip-hop artists Kid and Play dish out a heaping helping of Middle American values as they steer through a teen-age obstacle course of girls, freshman courses and rap music in "House Party 2."
Two films.
Two different audiences.
But they deliver the same message to New Line Cinema Corporation, the independent company that produced them: keep the costs down, aim at a specific audience, and a modest profit may loom.
Once in while, as happened with New Line's "Nightmare on Elm Street" and the Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles films, the heavens may open up and shower down pure gold.


4 Are Slain In Apartment In Flatbush
Two girls and two women were found dead in an apartment on a quiet Brooklyn street late Saturday night, each shot in the head.
Neither the police nor stunned neighbors yesterday could assign a motive to the massacre.
There were no signs of a struggle, and no indications that drugs were involved, investigators said.
Robbery had not been ruled out.


Random Access Inc. reports earnings for Year Aug 31


International Accounting Rules Advance
After years of talk, the adoption of an internationally accepted set of accounting rules is moving toward reality.
A London-based group, the International Accounting Standards Committee, which has been working on the rules for 18 years, is finally nearing its goal.


Northeast Utilities reports earnings for 12mos Oct 31


G.E. Is Said To Get Korea Satellite Job
The General Electric Company said yesterday that it expected to be notified early this week about a $400 million contract for South Korea's first satellite.
South Korean newspapers, quoting Government officials, reported yesterday that Seoul had selected General Electric over British Aerospace P.L.C. as the main manufacturer of a telecommunications satellite to be launched in 1995.


FPA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


O. Urcille Ifill Sr., 70, a Leader Of a Black Church and of Causes
The Rev.
O.
Urcille Ifill Sr., a national leader of the African Methodist Episcopal Church and a former president of the Black Clergy of Philadelphia, died Thursday at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.
He was 70 years old and lived in Philadelphia.
Mr.
Ifill died of congestive heart failure, said his daughter Gwen, a reporter in Washington for The New York Times.


Essay; Bringing The 'Dead Cat' to Life
What do you do when the right thing to do is not enough?
That's the Bush dilemma on the economy.
The recovery that began this summer from the too-mild, too-short recession turned out to be a "dead cat bounce" -- a brief turn-up before a further sinking sensation.
Because the consensus economic forecast turned out to be mistaken, public hand-wringing is rising as consumer confidence is sinking.


Frustrated, Israel Still Rejects Talks on Wednesday
Saying they still lack the assurances they expect from the United States, Israeli leaders reaffirmed today that they will not be in Washington on Wednesday for the resumption of Middle East peace talks.
By insisting again that the negotiations get under way on Dec. 9 instead of on Wednesday, the Israelis seem to many political commentators and even some Government officials to be headed into a diplomatic quagmire.


Pileup Inquiry Examines Driver Reaction
As Jack Parsley slowly drove his station wagon through the blinding dust storm in which 17 people died last Friday, he says he prayed that the car ahead would not stop suddenly and set off a chain-reaction crash.
His worries reflect a concern being addressed by government transportation officials: that the unpredictability of human reactions are as much a cause of accidents in conditions of limited visibility as is the limiting dust or fog itself.


Letter: On Yugoslavia; Don't Empower the Extremists
To the Editor:
As a concerned and frustrated Yugoslav I would like to comment on two of your recent pieces concerning the unfortunate events in my country.


Interpharm Laboratories Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Where a Dentist Died of AIDS, Wariness Remains
It has been nearly 15 months since Dr.
David J. Acer died of AIDS and perhaps doomed Kimberly Bergalis, one of his patients, to live out her life as a poignant symbol of that disease.
For all the medical investigations, intensive studies and heated debates about AIDS and AIDS testing that the case has generated, much remains unknown about how Miss Bergalis and four other patients of Dr.
Acer (pronounced ACK-er) came to be infected.


CHRONICLE
How do the organizers of benefit auctions come up with lists of items and events that will entice people to bid large sums of money?
It's simple, just dream up what you yourself want, said TED SLATE, who cajoled a lot of donors into giving to the fifth annual auction of the Mercantile Library Association tomorrow in the Board Room Club, at the Bankers Trust Building at 280 Park Avenue, between 48th and 49th Streets.
"New Yorkers can be jaded about going to an auction and getting items that they might otherwise simply be able to purchase, so I've tried to put together items that would be unique opportunities," Mr.
Slate, who is director of research services for Newsweeek magazine and a member of the library's board, said the other day.
"I think, 'What do I want?' "


Unitel Video reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


New President at Penthouse Looks Beyond Printed Page
As magazine publishers go, Kathy Keeton has a nontraditional background.
The former dancer, who has just been appointed president and chief operating officer of the General Media Publishing Group, also holds the nontraditional view that the future of magazines lies not in print but in electronic publishing.
Raised on a farm in South Africa and sent to live alone in London at age 12 after winning a scholarship to the Royal Ballet school, Ms.
Keeton learned early on not to flinch at taking risks.


Medical Action Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


World Economies


Innovex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


The Soviet Shell; Yeltsin's Assumption of National Finances Suggests an End to the Kremlin's Authority
Assuming control over the Kremlin's purse strings this weekend, Boris N. Yeltsin has moved to make the vestiges of central Soviet authority an extension of his Russian government.
His agreement to finance the Soviet payroll and guarantee Soviet state bank credits may have seemed a little routine after the high drama of events beginning with the attempted Kremlin coup and its collapse 14 weeks ago.
The move was announced in the form of a brief communique after a "working meeting" between Mr.
Yeltsin, the Russian republic's President, and the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Got 'Em, Got 'Em Need 'Em Tovarish
It was bound to happen: For the first time, Soviet hockey stars (yes, there still are some who haven't taken jobs in North America) are featured on their own trading cards.
The Upper Deck Company, which makes the cards, made capitalist-style deals with the skaters.
The cards are printed in English, but the phrase "Soviet Stars" appears in Russian on both sides.
Upper Deck is sending boxed sets to both MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV, the Soviet President, and BORIS N. YELTSIN, the President of the Russian republic, said the company's vice president, TONY LOIACONO.


Newspaper Jobs Vanishing As Advertising Disappears
IN the last 18 months, employment in the nation's newspaper industry has fallen on a scale probably not seen since the worst days of the Depression.
And a recent survey of newspaper executives by Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons, a Baltimore investment firm, suggests that more jobs may be lost because the Christmas advertising season looks "pretty grim" and that even a mild recovery is not expected to come any sooner than well into 1992.


ATS Money Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ackerley Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hormel (Geo. A.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


NEWS SUMMARY
THE ECONOMY
Merchants around the U.S. expressed only tempered optimism about the holiday season, even though shoppers turned out in greater numbers than expected over the Thanksgiving weekend.
Most merchants said they would be hard pressed to achieve sales increases of 3 to 5 percent over last year, increases that would barely exceed the rate of inflation.
And those modest gains would be from the depressed levels of the last two holiday seasons, which were among the worst on record.  [ Page A1. ]
Most senior Republicans and Democrats in Washington doubt there is much they can do in the next few months to bolster the economy.
Yet Democrats are hurling thunderbolts at Republicans and vice versa, hoping the voters will not notice how perilously little scope for real action they have.
News Analysis.  [ A13. ]


UKRAINIAN VOTERS CROWD THE POLLS TO CREATE NATION
Voters in the Ukraine were reported today to be registering overwhelming approval of an independence declaration to take the republic out of the Soviet Union to create a nation of 52 million people.
"This is a great day -- it is the flowering of our soul," exulted Olga Ovsiyenko, an election worker tending some of the millions of Ukrainians who went in a holiday mood to the ballot boxes to affirm the long-sought cause of Ukrainian statehood.


Books of The Times; Gifts From the Amusing To the Zoological
'Twas the night before Christmas, when all through the house not a creature was stirring, not even a mouse . . . because the creatures and the mice had got together, taken down the stockings from the chimney with care and found stuffed inside them this year's selection of Christmas gift books.
THE ANNOTATED NIGHT BEFORE CHRISTMAS:
A Collection of Sequels, Parodies, and Imitations of Clement Moore's Immortal Ballad About Santa Claus, edited, with an introduction and notes, by Martin Gardner. (253 pages. Summit Books
. $20.)
There are a minimum of annotations here by Mr.
POST IMPRESSIONS:
by JoAnna
Poehlmann.
Three volumes: FOOD FOR THOUGHT, LOVE LETTERS and CANCELING OUT (Unpaginated, accordion-bound and boxed in paper slipcases.  Abbeville Press. $10.95 each.)
Each page of these charming ribbon-tied little paperback collections is composed of a saying by a famous person accompanied by a facsimile reproduction of a fitting postage stamp.
"My darling, be a wife, be a friend, write good letters, do not mope, do not torment me," says Anton Chekhov on a page next to his portrait on a 1954 45-haler commemorative issued by Czechoslovakia.
WOODEN BOATS:
From Sculls to Yachts, by Joseph Gribbins. (127 pages. Grove Weidenfeld
. $24.95.)
The symmetry, the luster, the robustness of wooden boats richly photographed and elegantly laid out on the page.
From skeletons in the boatyard to billowing sails on a froth-flinging open sea.
THE CLASSIC GUIDE TO FLY-FISHING FOR TROUT,
The Fly-Fisher's Book of Quarry, Tackle and Techniques, by Charles Jardine.
Photographs by Peter Gathercole. (288 pages. Random House
. $35.)
and THE GAME FISHING BIBLE,
By John Buckland. Foreword by the Royal Coachman. (256 pages.  Prentice Hall
. $40.)
It's a good thing fishing people are increasingly releasing whatever they catch, because what with beautiful, savvy books like these two available, the fish just don't stand a chance.
VEGETABLES,
Growing, Cooking,
Keeping, by Colette Rossant and Marianne Melendez.
Photographs by Greg Sclight. (277 pages. Viking Studio Books
. $40.)
If you're content with a vegetable love, which would certainly not suit
me,
why, we can both be happy with this vegetable book, which serves meat with its parsnip puree.
COMPLETELY MAD:
A History of the Comic Book and Magazine, by Maria Reidelbach. (208 pages. Little, Brown.
$39.95 (Cheap!).)
The whole furshlugginer story of the 40-year-old magazine that Americans have loved to hate, or hated to love, with reproductions of Alfred E. Neuman and every single cover since 1952.
THE AMERICAN MAGAZINE,
by Amy Janello and Brennon Jones for the Magazine Publishers of America and American Society of Magazine Editors. (240 pages. Harry N. Abrams
.  $60.)
A book that achieves one contributor's ideal of its subject: "a blend of words and pictures that entertains and enlightens."
PHOTOGRAPHS ANNIE LEIBOVITZ 1970-1990.
(232 pages. HarperCollins
.  $60.)
Bare-chested Jerzy Kosinski in polo togs and altogether bare John Lennon tagging Yoko Ono, along with less well-known portraits of cultural icons by this photographer whose subjects collaborate with her to produce startling and unforgettable images.
THE PARIS RITZ,
edited by Mark Boxer. (175 pages. Thames &amp; Hudson.  $60.)
Caught here are the people, the decor and the ambiance of the hotel that, as Pierre Salinger reminds us in his introduction, was Proust's second home, Chanel's inspiration and Hemingway's watering hole.
THE SPLENDOR OF FRANCE,
Chateaux, Mansions and Country Houses.  Photographs by Roberto Schezen.  Text by Laure
Murat.
Introduction by Olivier Bernier.
Design by Massimo Vignelli. (416 pages. Rizzoli. $110 until Jan. 1; $125 thereafter.)
Exteriors and interiors that are almost intimidating in their solemn grandeur.
GEORGIA O'KEEFFE,
The New York Years.
Edited by Doris Bry and Nicholas Callaway. (130 pages. Alfred A. Knopf
in association with Callaway, New York. $100.)
With coolly geometrical cityscapes that contrast with giant calla lilies and irises, this volume spans the years 1916 to 1932, when O'Keeffe met and married Alfred Stieglitz and began her career as an artist, and completes the trilogy on her work begun by "One Hundred Flowers" and "In the West."
THE COMPACT OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY:
Second Edition. (2,386 pages. Oxford University Press. Slip
cased, with hemispheric magnifier and A USER'S GUIDE TO THE OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY: $295.)
If creating this book's forerunner, the two-volume compact O.E.D. published in 1971, was like floating the Queen Elizabeth in a bathtub, then producing this compact version of the 1989 edition, which combined the original edition with the 1986 Supplement, is like shifting the great ocean liner to a sink.
In a single volume, it's about twice as small as its predecessor and quite impossible to read with the naked eye.
But it's also a lot easier to remove from its slipcase, and the hemisphere-shaped magnifying glass actually works.
So live well and look up the history of English words.
And have a Merry Christmas.


Video Games Are Serious Stuff
The snow is swirling, the Eagles are blitzing and you wonder, just what do you do now?
Ask JOE MONTANA.
He's connected to you via the latest generation electronic game, Sega's Genesis Joe Montana II football for home video game systems.
It is indicative of how far these "toys" have come that they test the knowledge, and dexterity of expert adult sports fans.


Publicker Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Transcontinental Realty Investors reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Oil-Dri Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


DSP Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Item Pricing Benefits Markets and Consumers
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 18 report on the new battle over item pricing of groceries in New York State overlooks the most important issue.
The average customer regularly purchases many items, perhaps from more than one store.
These items typically have odd prices -- "two for $3.79" and such.
The only way most customers can observe a price change is to compare the sticker on the new item with the sticker on the empty package it replaces.
Few people are likely to save and compare cash register receipts.


Cyanotech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHINA MAKES A BID TO HOLD OLYMPICS
China's leaders have a special dream for a patch of empty ground in northern Beijing: the hope that in September 2000, in a 100,000-seat stadium to be built on that spot, they will preside over the opening ceremonies of the Summer Olympic Games.
After months of preparations, the Chinese leadership formally announced its bid today to become the host of the 27th Olympiad.
Prime Minister Li Peng said in a letter sent today to the International Olympic Committee that China would try "to make the 2000 Olympic Games a grand celebration in sports marking the advent of a new millennium with a better prospect of peace and friendship."


Scarsdale Journal; Grade Inflation: Gifts to Teachers Come in Karats
An apple for the teacher?
Try Louis Vuitton handbags, silk ties, gold bracelets and sweaters with three-figure price tags.
In the most wealthy town in Westchester -- itself the 11th richest county in the nation in average household income -- the simple act of giving from student to teacher has never been simple.
For years the district's no-gift policy was universally ignored by a stream of children bearing neatly wrapped packages.


Two Teams Need Some Assistance
Hard times at Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn are nothing new.
But this is an especially difficult moment for the school, where last week a student was shot to death and a teacher was wounded.
In the midst of this turmoil, the basketball team may have to do without one of its annual treats: a Christmas visit to the Modie Riser tournament in Charleston, S.C.
In recent years, Jefferson has made the trip with another school from Brooklyn, John Jay, the tournament's winner last year.


CHRONICLE
The responsibility for composing a piece of music to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor was awesome, according to JOHN DUFFY, who wrote "Time for Remembrance," a symphonic song cycle that will be performed in Honolulu on Saturday.
"You feel that you must find some way to people's hearts, to hit them in the guts, to not hold back and not be sentimental," said Mr.
Duffy, who was commissioned by the United States Department of the Interior, the National Parks Service and the U.S.S.
Arizona Memorial.
"You can't diminish what war is -- it annihilates people -- but at the same time you must have hope and in Franklin Delano Roosevelt's words, 'The job, my friends, is to end war.' "


Review/Music; An Eastern Sonic Ritual In an Imaginary Religion
Tan Dun's 1989 composition "Soundshape" began on Saturday night in total darkness.
From the sides of the Annex Theater of LaMama E.T.C., deep, bass vocalizations emerged.
The sounds were like the drones used in much Asian music, unvarying, providing a sonic foundation for what was to come.
But as the members of the group Crossings moved onto the stage, still sustaining their low pitches, overtones could be heard, hovering in a high treble range, changing pitch, sliding gradually upward in slow, repeated waves.
This was a vocal technique I have heard used only by Tibetan monks who could produce two pitches at once by controlling the shapes of their mouths and throats.
The sense of solemn Eastern ritual continued as the eight players almost reverentially took their places behind arrays of instruments.
Each array, like a rack of percussion instruments of the modern orchestra, had a set of homemade ceramics hanging from hooks.
They were created by the craftsman Ragnar Naess, who collaborated with the composer.


ASA International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sonesta International Hotels reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Bubbly France Drinks Up Davis Cup
It was a Davis Cup celebration done in the local style, Lyonnaise, which mandated that everybody cry into his champagne.
There was kissing -- in fact, a double dose of it, for that's the way the French like to express themselves, especially when they've won the tennis title they had to wait 59 years to regain.


Lawson Mardon Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stores in London Firebombed, Raising Fears of I.R.A. Christmas Campaign
Scotland Yard warned the British public today to be "extremely vigilant" after a series of firebombs raked shops in central London before dawn and the police discovered an explosives cache in a garage in the East End of the city.
The firebombings, which caused extensive damage but no casualties, are believed to be the work of the Irish Republican Army, said Comdr.
George Churchill-Coleman, the chief of Scotland Yard's antiterrorist squad.


Kirov Director Says 2 Dancers Lied for Asylum
The director of the Kirov Ballet has accused two corps de ballet dancers who requested asylum in the United States and who they said they were kept under surveillance by him in Washington of making up "the whole story" to strengthen their case for asylum.
Aleksandra Koltun and Zhanna Sinitsyna, both 20-year-old former members of the Soviet ballet troupe, left the Kirov tour in Washington on Oct. 26.
After spending a week in New York, they returned to Washington with a driver sent by the director, Oleg Vinogradov.
Mr.
Vinogradov said they had called him for help, but Miss Koltun has said, "We were scared" when Yelena Vinogradova, Mr.
Vinogradov's wife, telephoned them and urged them to return with the driver.


U.S. Expanding Refugee Center As More Haitians Flee Homeland
With more than 6,300 Haitian refugees in American custody, the United States Navy is expanding its emergency center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to accommodate as many as 10,000 new arrivals, a military official said today.
The Navy base at Guantanamo was ordered last week to erect temporary shelters for 2,500 people after a Federal judge in Miami issued a temporary order on Nov. 19 stopping the forced repatriation of refugees to Haiti.
The original plans for the tent camp's capacity have proved inadequate as more than 4,000 Haitians have been brought to Guantanamo by the Coast Guard over the last week.
Guantanamo Bay is across the Windward Passage from Haiti.


Observers Blame Serb-Led Army For Escalating War in Croatia
European Community military observers directly blamed Yugoslavia's National Army for the escalating warfare in Croatia in a report leaked to correspondents over the weekend.
The document refers to the army as "cowardly" and suggests that foreign military intervention be used to halt it in its tracks.
The report represents the most direct indictment of the Serb-dominated national force by an independent observer team.


Florida's Christmas Murders
After 40 years of seeming indifference, Florida has reopened its investigation into the murder of Harry T. Moore, the leader of the N.A.A.C.P. in Florida, and his wife, Harriette.
But how serious is the state about solving a murder that could expose a joint venture between Klansmen and lawmen, including a helping hand from the F.B.I.?
On the night of Dec. 25, 1951, a bomb killed the Moores as they entered the bedroom of their frame house in Mims, midway down the eastern coast of Florida.
It was their 25th wedding anniversary.


Brian J. Dunbar, 33, A Broadway Manager
Brian Jay Dunbar, a Broadway company manager whose shows included Neil Simon's "Lost in Yonkers," died last Tuesday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 33 years old.
He died of pneumonia, said Glen Gardali, his companion.


WAR CRIMINAL GETS SLOVAK MEMORIAL
A plaque in memory of the Rev.
Jozef Tiso, a Roman Catholic priest who presided over the Slovak Republic established by Hitler in 1939, was put up in October here at the house of his birth.
No one protested the memorial, even though the cleric was hanged as a war criminal in 1947.


Review/Music; New York Premiere Of Violin Concerto From Elliott Carter
The spiritual character of Elliott Carter's Violin Concerto has been profoundly affected by necessity.
The solo concerto form, flexible only to a point, comes with its own prefabricated limits.
How, for example, will each composer go about distributing musical power and influence equitably between one string instrument and one large orchestra?
While some music begins with an idea -- a motif, a rhythmic system or a color scheme -- and then searches for the procedures that will liberate it, this is music in which the form and its problems arrive before the thought, like an empty box whose contents have yet to be decided on.


Hostages and Haste
Kept in isolation for five years, often in chains
. . . moved more than 20 times from one airless prison to another . . . denied access to friends or news . . . threatened with execution.
Joseph Cicippio's ordeal as a hostage in Lebanon, which ended yesterday, reminds the world of the fanaticism of his captors.
Decent people everywhere can only welcome his release, like that of seven other Westerners freed this year, and hope urgently for the promised release of two Americans and two Germans still held.


CHRONICLE
No one at the Minyan of the Stars had any idea, when plans were made for a Hanukkah party to be held today, how things would change before the occasion.
Joseph Papp, who founded the organization two years ago to provide ways for people in show business to observe Jewish holidays and rituals, died on Oct. 31.
Robert Maxwell, its honorary chairman, died on Nov. 5.
In addition, RAOUL LIONEL FELDER, chairman of the Minyan, had to be in Palm Beach, Fla., this week for the trial of William Kennedy Smith on rape charges.
Mr.
Felder represents Anne Mercer, a friend of the plaintiff, who went to the Kennedy mansion to pick her up after the reported attack.
Ms.
Mercer is to take the stand today, Mr.
Felder said, adding: "As soon as she does, I will catch a plane to New York. I have a special responsibility because of the two misfortunes."


Unisys Stock Up Sharply; Suitor Cited
The Unisys Corporation's shares jumped $1.375, to $5.125, in heavy trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange following publication in USA Today of a report that the troubled computer-maker might become the target of a takeover attempt organized in Britain.
Unisys, based in the Philadelphia suburb of Blue Bell, Pa., declined to confirm or deny the report.
Nor would the company discuss the recent activities of James Unruh, the Unisys chief executive.
The USA Today report suggested that Mr.
Unruh was aware of the interests of a group led by Lord King, the chairman of British Airways P.L.C., and including investors from other countries.


Continental Routes
Continental Airlines Inc. announced the start of daily nonstop flights to Madrid, Paris and Munich, Germany, and the addition of a daily nonstop flight from Newark to London.
The new daily flight to Paris will leave from Houston Intercontinental Airport beginning on June 1, 1992, the carrier said.
The Madrid route will begin on Jan. 15 from Newark and the Munich flight will start June 1, also from Newark.
The additional daily flight from Newark to London will begin on June 1.


NBC Names Executive Producer of 'Today'
NBC News yesterday named Jeff Zucker, 26 years old, as executive producer of the weekday program "Today" in a move that is expected to help contract contract negotiations between NBC and Bryant Gumbel, the "Today" anchor.
Mr.
Gumbel's contract expired two weeks ago, and he has been on vacation since then.
He is due back from vacation on Monday.
But a member of the "Today" staff, speaking on condition of anonymity, said yesterday that Mr.
Gumbel had told NBC executives he would not work without a new contract.


Condition Downgraded
The condition of the Colgate coach, TERRY SLATER, worsened yesterday, a day after he suffered a stroke, a hospital spokeswoman said.


Business Scene; The Good News That Fails to Cure
ALMOST every day brings another gloomy statistic about the economy.
The flow of data, however, also includes a number of good news items; in fact, a relatively long list for an economy popularly characterized as dead in the water.
But is there enough good news to generate a recovery?
Increasingly the answer among economists, in Congress and even at the White House is veering from "yes" to "no."
The problem is that among the eight or so good news entries, only two qualify as engines of economic growth potentially powerful enough to lift the economy from its stagnation.
One is home construction, which has risen but not nearly enough to bring the huge construction industry to life.
The other is falling interest rates, which should be low enough to lure people into buying on credit.
Somehow, the shopping splurges are not happening.


Kenyan Yielding on Multiparty Politics
Bending to pressures at home and abroad, Ken- ya's President, Daniel arap Moi, decided today to allow multiparty politics in this East African nation, leaders of his ruling party said.
A meeting of the governing council of the party, the Kenya African National Union, agreed to Mr.
Moi's proposal to scrap a 1982 section of the Constitution that legalized one-party rule, party leaders and diplomats said.


Nobelist Entangled in Fraud Case Resigns as Head of Rockefeller U.
Dr.
David Baltimore said yesterday that he would resign as president of Rockefeller University after an 18-month tenure dogged by a case of scientific fraud against a colleague with whom he wrote a disputed scientific paper.
In a letter to the trustees, Dr.
Baltimore said that the controversy over the paper had "created a climate of unhappiness among some in the university that could not be dispelled."


Insurers Buy An Interest In Goldman
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, one of Wall Street's last surviving independent partnerships, has completed the sale of $275 million in interests in the firm to 22 insurance companies, industry executives said yesterday.
The deal, which was completed last week, marks the third time since 1986 that Goldman has sold stock outside the partnership, and it underscores the rapidly changing nature of Wall Street.
The huge amounts of capital required to compete in today's volatile global financial markets and the risks that securities houses face have forced nearly every top firm to sell shares to the public or to find a large financial partner.


Clinton's Campaign Signs On Strategists Who Aided Wofford
The Presidential campaign of Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas has signed on the two men who masterminded Senator Harris Wofford's upset victory in Pennsylvania last month, an event that has already acquired mythic status in Democratic Party circles.
Mr.
Clinton announced today that the men, James Carville and Paul Begala, would serve as general campaign consultants.
"James and Paul will help us build on the tremendous progress the campaign is making around the country," he said.


Great Western In Acquisition
The Great Western Financial Corporation agreed to acquire the assets and liabilities of the Capitol Finance Group, a subsidiary of the First Union Corporation of Charlotte, N.C.
Capitol Finance, with assets of $178 million, operates 54 consumer finance offices in four Southeastern states.
Terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.


Port Authority Keeps Up the Pace of Homeless Roundup


BAKER WILL VISIT UKRAINE TO DISCUSS NUCLEAR QUESTION
On the heels of Ukraine's landslide vote for independence, President Bush ordered Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today to visit Kiev this month to discuss American concerns about the control of nuclear weapons on Ukrainian territory.
The announcement came as the White House officially welcomed the Sunday vote as "a striking testimony to the will for liberty" and indicated again that it would grant full diplomatic recognition to the new nation in due course.


France Plans Sale Of Shares in Elf
The French Government plans to sell 5.8 million shares of the Elf Aquitaine oil and gas company this month, or 2.3 percent of the state holding, the French stock exchange said today.


Iacocca Is Back, Amid Some Doubt on His Effectiveness
LEE A. IACOCCA has returned to the airwaves, and advertising and automotive executives remain divided over the effectiveness of his appearances on behalf of the Chrysler Corporation.
Mr.
Iacocca, the car maker's chairman and chief executive, is a prime example of the "selling C.E.O.," who has become omnipresent in advertising in the last decade.
In a new television spot by Bozell Inc., he appears with a fiery red Dodge Viper, a sports car Chrysler plans to introduce in March, to demonstrate, he says, "what an American car company can do when we put our minds to it."


Man in the News: Leonid Makarovich Kravchuk; Leader-Come-Lately
The metamorphosis of Leonid M. Kravchuk is something even a butterfly might find impressive.
After more than 30 years as a plodding Communist ideologue conditioned to stomp on any manifestations of nationalism, he has abruptly burst forth as the first popularly elected national leader of Ukraine, dedicated to leading it out of the Soviet Union.
Mr.
Kravchuk, of course, is hardly the only former Communist among the leaders of the post-Communist Soviet states.
Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Kremlin, Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and Nursultan A. Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan are only three of the better known new leaders who rose to political prominence through Communist ranks.


INSIDE
Hint of Qualms on Court
Three Supreme Court Justices indicated concern that lower courts might go too far in shutting doors to death penalty appeals.
Page B10.
Smith Testimony Begins
Testimony began in the William K. Smith rape trial after the judge barred three witnesses who say Mr.
Smith attacked them.
Page A18.
Kenya to End One-Party Rule
Bending to pressures at home and abroad, President Daniel arap Moi decided to allow multiparty politics in Kenya, his party said.
Page A3.
Steroid Use by East Germans
A group of 20 former coaches confirmed the use of anabolic steroids to help East German women dominate international swimming.
Page B15.
Mandela in New York
Nelson Mandela, in New York City to press for change in South Africa, praised Mayor Dinkins for his trip there last month.
Page B3.
Gaps in Flu Fight
Once again, an outbreak of influenza has surprised the experts who prepare vaccines to protect the public from the ailment.
Page C3.


McDonnell and I.R.S. Settle
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said yesterday that it had put another of its financial problems behind it by settling a tax dispute with the Internal Revenue Service.
McDonnell Douglas said it had already paid the Government the additional $150 million called for in the settlement.
Because the company had set up financial reserves in excess of that amount to cover any settlement, McDonnell Douglas executives said they expected to record a one-time gain to earnings of about $50 million in the fourth quarter.


Doesn't New York Monitor Its Contractors?
To the Editor:
"The New York City assistant commissioner for street reconstruction has been removed from his job amid revelations that city contractors used watered-down concrete and violated safety rules at three major street repair projects" (news article, Nov. 22).
What happened to the physical testing laboratory or laboratories?
You report the city's Transportation Commissioner as having said it is virtually impossible to guard against substandard or below-specification concrete, asphalt and other materials for city road reconstruction.


Now Playing in Newark: Ethics
As the cameras roll, a woman hands a bag containing cold cans of soda to sanitation workers who have just picked up her trash, which exceeds the weight limit they are supposed to handle.
When the workers drive away, they open the bag and find $10 bills wrapped around the soda cans.
Is the money a tip?
A bribe?
Should they return the money?
Keep it?
Give it to a supervisor to return?
Does anybody care?


Agreement on Health Care Eludes Panel
A Federal advisory panel appointed by the Bush Administration has devised a proposal for a nationwide network of school clinics and subsidized health insurance for children, but could not agree today on how to finance health care for millions of adults who lack insurance.
G.
Lawrence Atkins, a member of the panel, said that "the political context makes it almost impossible" for the 13-member advisory group to endorse any comprehensive plan to overhaul the nation's health-care system.


El Paso Electric Tries To Avoid Bankruptcy
The El Paso Electric Company, a power supplier severely weakened by bad real estate investments and a costly stake in an Arizona nuclear power project, said today that it could be forced to file for bankruptcy court protection from creditors.
The utility said it was unable to obtain certain loan guarantees by a Sunday deadline and that as a result it was in default on some financing agrements involving the Palo Verde Nuclear Generating Station near Phoenix.


Q&amp;A
Spectacular Sunsets
Q.
Does fall have the most spectacular sunsets?
Why?
And what makes the sun look red at sunset
?
A.
"Fall, particularly early fall, is a time of relatively clear weather," said Lee Grenci, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University in University Park, Pa.
"The upper atmosphere is warm, which precludes or inhibits the formation of clouds, and the large storms of late fall and early winter are yet to come," he continued, so that the chances of being able to see the horizon during an attractive sunset are greatly improved at that time of the year.


Buechele Still Being Courted
Gene Michael, the Yankees' general manager, called Steve Buechele's agent Friday to express his continued desire to sign the free-agent third baseman, the player's agent said yesterday.
Alan Meersand, who represents Buechele, is arriving in Miami Beach, Fla., on Sunday for the winter meetings, and he plans to meet with Michael at least by the following Tuesday.
Meersand said Michael asked him to keep the Yankees in mind, and the agent said he would.


Corrections
A brief report in Weekend on Nov. 15 about the opening series of movies at the new theater of the Film Society of Lincoln Center included one work in error.
Pedro Almodovar's "High Heels" is to be shown at a screening tonight by invitation only, not in the opening series, which begins on Monday.


Family Leaves Are Good for Business
To the Editor:
A representative of the Chamber of Commerce has said that the family leave bill passed by the House of Representatives, which guarantees unpaid leave up to 90 days for family emergencies, "actually could hurt those it is designed to help by forcing additional costs onto employers and eliminating jobs" (news article, Nov. 14).
We must take issue with his comment.
Leaves to deal with family needs don't increase costs.
They limit employee costs by reducing turnover, absenteeism and lateness.


Trenton Plan By Democrats For Tax Cuts
Assembly Speaker Joseph V. Doria Jr. said today that Assembly Democrats had reached a "general consensus" on a tax rollback and that they would introduce a bill by next week, with the most likely target being a cut in the 7 percent sales tax to 6 percent.
"That was the tax we least liked, the one we were most philosphically against," Mr.
Doria said at a news conference he called after spending much of the afternoon in caucus with fellow Democrats.
"But there is a discussion on all the taxes."


Congress Eases Curbs On Visas For Artists
In its rush to adjournment last week, Congress passed a bill easing severe restrictions on the number of foreign artists who may enter the United States for performances.
The bill rescinds or modifies important provisions of a 1990 immigration law under which only 25,000 foreign performers and other professionals could receive entry visas to the United States annually.
The bill was passed last Monday by the House and last Tuesday by the Senate, in both cases by voice vote.
The principal sponsors were Representative Romano L. Mazzoli, Democrat of Kentucky, and Senators Edward M. Kennedy, chairman of the Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration and Refugee Affairs; Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, and Paul Simon, Democrat of Illinois.


Two Different Calls On Playing With Pain
When is playing in pain heroic and laudible and when it is just plain stupid?
Week 14 of the 1991 National Football League season offered examples of both.
Let's start right here, where the Chargers were thumped, 9-7, by the Raiders on Sunday night.
The San Diego quarterback, John Friesz, nursing an injured left ankle that prevented him from practicing last week, played on every Chargers offensive down.
In the first half, Friesz completed none of eight passes for minus-19 passing yards.
In the second half, he was 12 of 19 for 150 yards and an interception.


Law Proposed To Seize Cars In Vice Arrests
A woman sat hunched on the curb, showing not the least reaction to the squad car spotlight turned upon her.
"She is in bad shape," said Sgt.
Aristides Mojica of the Suffolk County police, who knows most of the crack-addicted prostitutes here and in adjoining hamlets by their names, aliases and health problems.
Nonetheless, community groups and Suffolk police say, such women lure a steady stream of male customers who drive by, circle back and pull up to bargain for sex.


A Milestone in High-Definition TV
Two years ago, many experts said it couldn't be done.
But a small band of engineers here has succeeded in building the first working prototype of a digital high-definition television system.
The development by the General Instrument Corporation's Videocipher division is proof that digital television, long a dream of engineers, is feasible.
And by capitalizing on digital technology, many experts say, American companies have now leapfrogged the Japanese in the race to develop the television system of the future.


Coastline Endangered By Man and by Nature
THE isolated coastline here, below 70-foot-high bluffs, gives every appearance of being a wildlife paradise.
This is the season the elephant seals come up on the beach to give birth and to mate.
Bull elephant seals with harems of 40 to 100 females loll in the sun and are cooled by the wind, emitting satisfied noises somewhere between a burp and a deep gargle.
Snowy sheathbills, known as the Arctic dove, peck at fossilized oyster shells that are more than 13 million years old.
A visitor is greeted with a casual over-the-shoulder glance.


McWilliams Resigns As Coach of Texas
DAVID McWILLIAMS, the Texas football coach whose team fell from Southwest Conference champion to an also-ran in one year, resigned yesterday.
McWilliams told a news conference in Austin that he had asked to be reassigned to another university position.
McWilliams read a brief statement and declined to answer questions.


3 Women's Testimony on Smith Is Barred
Testimony began today in the rape trial of William K. Smith, after the judge ruled that three women would not be allowed to testify that Mr.
Smith had sexually attacked them years ago.
In their opening arguments, lawyers for the State of Florida and for Mr.
Smith presented drastically different accounts of his late-night encounter with a local woman on the Kennedy family estate here on Easter weekend.


Thrift Hired by Cubs
The Chicago Cubs named SYD THRIFT, the former Pirate and Yankee executive, to a new position of assistant general manager yesterday. . . .
The Cincinnati Reds claimed catcher BOB GEREN from the Yankees.
Geren, 30, hit .219 in 64 games last year for New York.


Bank Agency Sets Job Cuts
The Federal Home Loan Bank System, faced with declining revenues and membership, said today that it would eliminate about 90 positions next year.
A spokesman for the Housing Finance Board, supervisor of the system, said operating expenses of the 12 Home Loan Banks would be trimmed by $39 million, or 15 percent, next year.


Shanghai Journal; Will Houses Blossom Along Capitalist Road?
Yu Muqiao must stride over the gaping crack in the wooden floor of her two-room house, scurry down a narrow pitch-dark hallway cluttered with wet clothes and stray beams, then down a flight of broken steps and around the corner 20 yards to get to the newly built public toilet that her family uses.
Her son must pull out a thin mattress every night to sleep on the kitchen floor.
Still, Mrs.
Yu, the 62-year-old matriarch who lives with her household of seven in this cubbyhole, pays a monthly rent of just $1.22.
That sum is split among six salaried adults, and after the family pools its rent subsidies, it takes in more money than it pays out for the home.


Prices on Treasury Issues Rise
Prices of Treasury securities rose in moderately active trading yesterday, pushed higher by buying in overseas markets and by a report from the nation's purchasing managers that showed the manufacturing sector was even weaker than anticipated in November.
The buying overseas was brought on by a further sharp slide in equity prices in Tokyo.
Traders said the buying continued after activity shifted to European financial markets.


Mitchell Denies Charges
San Francisco Giants outfielder KEVIN MITCHELL has denied an accusation that he raped an acquaintance at his winter home in Chula Vista, Calif., a police detective said yesterday.
Mitchell, the 1989 National League's most valuable player, was arrested Saturday afternoon.


I.B.M. Fills Enterprise Systems Post
I.B.M. said yesterday that it had named Nicholas M. Donofrio to the position of senior vice president and general manager for its enterprise systems line of business.
Mr.
Donofrio, who will have responsibility for I.B.M.'s mainframe business, replaces Carl J. Conti, who will retire from I.B.M. on Dec. 31.


In California, New Talk Of Limits on Immigrants
When times were good in the 1980's, California largely welcomed the millions of domestic and foreign immigrants who flooded into the state.
But now that times have turned tough, a cry has risen to narrow the gates to the Golden State.
The cry has been led by Gov.
Pete Wilson, a Republican, who has been saying that immigrants, foreign and domestic, are putting the state in a fiscal squeeze by using more in services than they pay in taxes.
Critics say it is nothing more than an racist attempt to find a scapegoat for the intractable social problems that have been building in California for two decades.


Mercedes-Benz Review Said to Include 7 Shops
At least seven agencies are participating in the review on the $90 million-plus advertising account being conducted by Mercedes-Benz of North America Inc.
Advertising executives, who spoke yesterday on the condition of anonymity, confirmed reports in trade publications that the list included Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, Chicago; the Richards Group, Dallas, and five New York agencies: McCaffrey &amp; McCall, the incumbent; Ally &amp; Gargano; Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg; Partners &amp; Shevack, and Scali, McCabe, Sloves.


Birdie Gives Dent Victory in Hawaii
Jim Dent defeated Gene Littler today to win the 1991 Merrill Lynch senior shootout golf championship here.
Dent won the $50,000 first prize purse by scoring a birdie on the final hole, a par 5.
Littler finished in second place and George Archer, the leading money winner on the 1991 senior tour, finished third.


Patterns
The Fear of Shoppers
The consumer has come under a microscope this season.
Judging by the nonstop coverage on television and in newspapers, going to a store to buy something for Christmas is some sort of major event.


Digital Plans To Introduce New Models
The Digital Equipment Corporation, continuing a recent blitz of product announcements, will display four new models of competitively priced RISC-based work stations on Tuesday in San Francisco.
Digital's share of that market has been slipping, and the new models are aimed at Sun Microsystems Inc., the market leader.
In a demonstration of its growing relationship with the Microsoft Corporation, Digital will also show Microsoft's newest operating system, Windows NT, running on the new work stations, though the capability will not be available to software developers until the spring.


Jets Upbeat Despite Losing on Sour Note
A day after suffering a disappointing loss to Buffalo, the Jets' spirits seemed none the worse for it.
Perhaps Seattle's loss to Kansas City on Sunday, which left the Jets and Miami in a race for the last American Football Conference wild-card playoff spot, kept the mood from dragging on the locker-room floor here.
"When you look around, we're still in the thick of it," said right tackle Irv Eatman.
"We could have helped ourselves a whole lot by winning yesterday, but we didn't. We've got three games to play, and if we take care of our business, things will fall our way. If we don't take care of what we have to do, it won't really matter what anybody else does."


Conversations About Dying
Most people seem anxious to avoid dealing with their own deaths, especially when they're in their prime, enjoying decent health -- and at their most competent to think about matters of such consequence.
But growing numbers, perhaps a fifth of Americans, are thinking, talking and acting in advance of a health calamity.
A new Federal law will advance that objective, encouraging but not requiring a conversation about dying.
Virtually every hospital and most medical care facilities now must ask patients whether they wish to plan for their death by issuing an advance directive like a "living will," stating what types of treatment they do or don't want or designating someone to make critical decisions if they become incompetent.
It's a prudent, compassionate law that could greatly ease the confusion, anger and litigation that now attends many deaths.


Give the Haitians Safe Haven
The tragedy of the Haitian refugees mandates that Congress enact a new law that would grant them, and possibly other future refugees, temporary protected status in the U.S.
Under this status, the Haitians would be allowed to remain in this country until conditions at home justified their return.
Temporary protected status already exists in law under an amendment to the Immigration Act of 1990.
Under that provision, the Attorney General may grant such status to noncitizens when he finds they cannot return to their countries because of internal disorder or armed conflict, among other conditions.
Most recently, the Attorney General has granted Salvadorans, Kuwaitis, Lebanese and Liberians safe haven.


Sellers Shows UConn The Way
There are younger voices chirping in the dressing room of the University of Connecticut basketball team these days, sounds of prized freshmen who can't understand what it is like to have dealt with Derrick Coleman's game, or Dikembe Mutombo's strength, or the Big East life Rod Sellers has known.
If Connecticut is to come close to meeting the annual unrealistic expectations and successfully mix its coast-to-coast recruiting class with its veterans, Sellers will have to play the kind of part he did tonight.


At P.S. 139, a Hanuk-Chris-Kwanz-Etc. Pageant
Public School 139 in Flatbush is six blocks from a once-boycotted Korean grocery store and a comfortable hike from two neighborhoods synonymous with ethnic tension, Crown Heights and Bensonhurst.
But yesterday, black, Hispanic, Asian and white third graders, radiant in their white assembly-day shirts and blouses, thronged together to sing songs of Hanukkah, Christmas and the black American celebration of Kwanzaa.


Shooting Deaths of 4 Are Still a Mystery
The police yesterday were still seeking a motive in the killings Saturday night of two girls and two women who were each shot in the head in an apartment in Brooklyn.
Detectives of the 67th Precinct talked yesterday to Michael Williams, the father of one of the victims, 11-year-old Nadia, and the former boyfriend of another victim, 24-year-old Sharon Robertson, said Capt.
Richard A. Ward, commander of the 12th Division Detectives.


The Curse of Marx Kills a Leftist British Journal
Seldom has a British magazine been cursed with a more misleading title than Marxism Today, a lively political journal that delighted its readers with provocative interviews with Conservative Party leaders but will be put quietly to sleep this week because it has the wrong name.
"Given that anything called Marxism is collapsing all over the place," said its 46-year-old editor, Martin Jacques, "the reaction is not one of surprise."


Nelson Mandela Returns to New York City


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Japan and the U.S. are struggling to prevent their successful alliance from being engulfed by a rising tide of frustrations, resentments and recriminations.  [ Page A1. ]


Charting Where We Go From Here
ANYONE whose job involves putting text in boxes that are connected by lines knows what a messy job it can be.
The goal might be creating an organizational chart, explaining the flow of a process in the shop or the office or designing a complicated system.
It is difficult to make a chart that shows logical relationships without knowing the relationships in the first place, associations that the chart itself is intended to bring out.
In its new incarnation, version 3.0 for Windows, MetaDesign almost makes charting fun, and you do not have to have the faintest idea of what the final product will look like before you start because it is easy to edit as you go along.


Raiders' Long Out At Least 2 Weeks
The Los Angeles Raiders will be without the six-time Pro Bowl defensive end Howie Long for at least two weeks and probably until some time into the playoffs, the team learned today.
Long, 31 years old, suffered a sprain of the medial collateral ligament in his left knee early in the Raiders' 9-7 victory over the Chargers on Sunday night in San Diego.


3 Women's Testimony on Smith Is Barred
Testimony began today in the rape trial of William K. Smith, after the judge ruled that three women would not be allowed to testify that Mr.
Smith had sexually attacked them years ago.
In their opening arguments, lawyers for the State of Florida and for Mr.
Smith presented drastically different accounts of his late-night encounter with a local woman on the Kennedy family estate here on Easter weekend.


Coaches Concede That Steroids Fueled East Germany's Success in Swimming
The stunning domination of international swimming by East German women for nearly two decades was built upon an organized system of anabolic-steroid use, a group of 20 former East German coaches confirmed yesterday.
Their admission, provided to reporters in Bonn, is the latest evidence -- and some of the most convincing -- that senior sports administrators of the now-dissolved Communist state made performance-enhancing drugs a critical part of the training programs for the country's elite athletes.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PRIVATE HOSPITAL TO SEVER CITY TIES
In a vivid display of the struggle over the future management and mission of New York City's public hospitals, a major private hospital announced that it would no longer provide the doctors to a public hospital in Queens.
The decision, by Long Island Jewish Medical Center, means that beginning next summer the Queens Hospital Center, a city hospital in Jamaica, will have to find a new source for doctors who do most of the day-to-day work of the hospital.
A1.
MURDER BY INTIMIDATION?
Four days before the start of a murder trial, a gunman fired into the Bronx home of the key witness's parents, killing a woman who was visiting.
Now the police are investigating whether the motive for the slaying was intimidation.
B3.
MUSIC THERAPY FOR THE HOLIDAYS
Public School 139 is six blocks from a Korean grocery store in Flatbush that was the target of a boycott led by blacks, one mile from Crown Heights and two miles from Bensonhurst.
But yesterday, black, Hispanic, Asian and white children thronged together to sing songs of Hanukkah, Christmas and the African-derived holiday of Kwanzaa.
B3.
NEW HOTEL FOR THE NEW FLUSHING
The new Sheraton La Guardia East Hotel tells a lot about where Flushing is heading.
Once it was a quiet residential area sprinkled with mom-and-pop stores.
But since the mid-1970's, with the first wave of an influx of Asian immigrants, the neighborhood has become an international financial center.
B8.
Mel Miller's co-defendant denies conflict of interest.
B3.
REGION CITIZENS' CRY: SAVE THE TREES
Residents of Rochester couldn't do much to help when an ice storm last March damaged thousands of trees there.
But when they thought the trees faced a further assault -- from city government -- they took action.
B4.
DIOXIN SUIT GOES TO TRIAL
A long-awaited trial pitting scores of Newark residents against the Diamond Shamrock Corporation, which manufactured Agent Orange there in the 1950's and 60's, opened with a lawyer for the plaintiffs arguing that the company recklessly endangered the health of its workers and the neighborhood.
But the defense countered that the company had acted reasonably and that there was no proof that dioxin, an unwanted by-product of Agent Orange, had harmed any of the plaintiffs.
B6.
A PROBLEM OF PLENTY
The Board of Education in Greenwich, Conn., one of the nation's most affluent communities, has just completed a rigorous debate on the philosophical issue of private gifts to public bodies.
It is a question that thousands of other districts would love to have the luxury of tackling.
Our Towns, B6.
FIGHTING PROSTITUTION ON L.I.
In an effort to crack down on open-air emporiums for prostitution, the police and members of the Suffolk County Legislature are promoting a new approach: Seizing the cars of those caught buying sex.
B5.
In Newark, videos teach ethics to city employees. B6. Neediest Cases B2  Fashion B13


Censorship Points to Something to Hide
To the Editor:
"Newspaper Gains Zambia's Respect" (news article, Nov. 13), on the role of The Weekly Post in exposing Zambian governmental corruption and contributing to the defeat of President Kenneth Kaunda, highlights an important freedom of expression issue: Of all the rationales for censorship of governments -- national security, protection of public morals, curbing racial and ethnic hatred -- perhaps the predominant real reason is preventing exposure of corruption.
That's why Kenya's President, Daniel Arap Moi, has shut down newspapers and outlawed all political parties except his own, and why Zaire's President, Mobutu Sese Seko, has been desperate to retain the absolute power that enabled him to accumulate a fortune estimated at $4 billion.


White Plains Council Blocks Electric Menorah for Park
Ending days of debate over whether to allow a giant electric menorah on parkland here, the White Plains Common Council tonight unanimously rejected such a display.
In its vote, the Council affirmed a local tradition of keeping parks free of religious and political displays.
Many mainstream Jews in White Plains opposed the display.


Review/Dance; A Homeless Man's Journey in New Muller Work
Jennifer Muller's world is full of sleek, lush dance that invariably draws cheers from her audiences.
But Ms.
Muller is also concerned with darker themes suggested by life around her.
She balances the light and dark in "Righteous About Passing (on the Left)," a piece about the anomie and creativity of urban life that was performed by Jennifer Muller/The Works on Sunday afternoon at the Joyce Theater.
But when Ms.
Muller deals overtly with social themes, the mix is frequently an uneasy one.
And that was the case with her new "Regards," also performed on Sunday.
The solo, which is set to songs by Tracy Chapman, depicts a homeless man and intends to trace his journey from despair to anger and self-assertion.
John Brooks rises only to fall again in the solo's first section.
By the end, less coiled with tension, he is on his feet until a final descent into the huddled position with which the dance opened.
There are some powerful moments, most of them when Mr.
Brooks is still, clutching his head, letting the music flow by in the opening section.


Antarctic Ice Buildup
WARMING of the climate is causing a "significant increase" in the accumulation of ice in East Antarctica, rather than a depletion as widely predicted, American and Japanese scientists have found.
The report, in the journal Geology, is based on dating layers in sea-floor sediment extracted off Wilkes Land and Prydz Bay, where tongues of continental ice sometimes push far out to sea before breaking off.


Gutkowski Is Named to Run Garden
Robert Gutkowski, who as president of the Madison Square Garden Network engineered the landmark $500 million cable deal with the New York Yankees, was named president and chief executive of the Garden yesterday.
He replaces Richard H. Evans, who resigned under pressure in August.
Gutkowski, 43 years old, who Garden insiders say navigated smoothly through a testy relationship with Evans, has been running the entertainment group of the Garden since his predecessor's departure.


Breast Implants Should Halt, Pending Study
To the Editor:
In "The Case
for
Breast Implants" (Op-Ed, Nov. 14) David Hildago, a plastic surgeon, uses anecdotal information mainly derived from his clinical experience to support the continued use of silicone breast implants.


L.I. Jewish Hospital Will Stop Providing Doctors for Queens
In a vivid display of the struggle now under way over the future management and mission of New York City's public hospitals, a major private hospital announced yesterday that it would no longer provide the doctors who staff a public hospital in Queens.
The decision, by Long Island Jewish Medical Center, means that beginning next summer the Queens Hospital Center, a city hospital in Jamaica, will have to find a new source for doctors who do most of the day-to-day work of the hospital.


New Measure For Economy
The Government this week will no longer emphasize figures for the gross national product, favoring instead numbers on gross domestic product.
What's the difference?


Chapter 7 Hearing Is Set for Midway
A Federal bankruptcy judge scheduled a hearing for Dec. 30 in the Chapter 7 liquidation proceedings for the bankrupt Midway Airlines Inc.
Midway changed its bankruptcy proceeding to Chapter 7 liquidation from Chapter 11 reorganization last week.
The airline still has a lawsuit pending against Northwest Airlines Inc. over the failed purchase of Midway.


Korean Air Disaster Ruling Stands
The Supreme Court today let stand an appeals court ruling that threw out an award of $50 million in punitive damages against Korean Air Lines over the 1983 Soviet downing of an airliner that killed 269 people.
But in upholding a companion appellate ruling that the KAL crew was guilty of misconduct, the Justices allowed survivors of the victims to sue the airline for compensatory damages beyond the $75,000 allowed in an international treaty on air travel.


Dioxin and Former Maker Go on Trial
A long-anticipated trial pitting scores of local residents against the Diamond Shamrock Corporation, which manufactured Agent Orange here in the 1950's and 60's, opened today with a lawyer for the plaintiffs arguing that the company had recklessly endangered the health of its workers and knowingly exposed residents and businesses near its plant to the potentially harmful effects of dioxin.
But the defense contended that Diamond Shamrock had acted reasonably and countered that there was no proof that dioxin, an unwanted byproduct of Agent Orange and other herbicides, harmed any of the plaintiffs.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  BUSH SENDING BAKER TO UKRAINE
Moving on the heels of Ukraine's landslide vote for independence, President Bush ordered Secretary of State Baker to visit Kiev this month to discuss American concerns about the control of nuclear weapons.
A1  PRESIDENT OF UKRAINE ELECTED
Leonid M. Kravchuk was pronounced the winner of Ukraine's first presidential election, and his republic's popularly endorsed independence received swift recognition from the Russian republic.
A1  Man in the News: Leonid Makarovich Kravchuk.
A10  U.S.-JAPAN TENSIONS RISING
Fifty years after the attack on Pearl Harbor, the United States and Japan are being forced to redefine their ties -- especially the tradition of Washington providing security while Tokyo tends to business.
A1  HOSTAGE CICIPPIO IS RELEASED
Joseph J. Cicippio, looking thin and haggard and smiling only weakly, was released to American officials in Damascus after more than five years in captivity in Lebanon.
A14  Members of Mr.
Cicippio's family gathered at a brother's house.
A14  What the Lebanese kidnappers want for the rest of the hostages.
A14  U.S.
HOPES MIDEAST TALKS GO ON
Senior American officials expressed confidence that peace talks between Israel and its Arab neighbors would reopen by next week, although Israel said it would boycott the session scheduled for Wednesday.
A3  The European Community may impose sanctions on Libya.
A7  KENYA TO ALLOW MULTIPLE PARTIES
Bending to pressures at home and abroad, President Daniel arap Moi decided to allow multiparty politics in Kenya, his party said.
A3  HAITIAN REFUGEE CAMP TO EXPAND
With more than 6,300 Haitian refugees now in American custody, the Navy is expanding its emergency center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to accommodate as many as 10,000 new arrivals.
A6  European monitors blamed Yugoslavia's army for the growing war.
A8  Peru has issued tough emergency decrees to combat terrorism.
A17  Shanghai Journal: Rents are to rise under a housing reform plan.
A4  National A18-21, B10  COMING, AND GOING?
A series of White House meetings heightened the sense of expectation among Republicans in Washington that a shakeup of Presidential aides may be near.
A1  SMITH'S PAST IS OFF LIMITS
The rape trial of William K. Smith began in West Palm Beach after the judge prohibited testimony from three women who have asserted that Mr.
Smith sexually assaulted them years ago.
A18  FEELING THE ECONOMIC HAMMER
In the small town of Wales, Mass., little remains of the state's economic miracle of the 80's.
Five of the town's seven elementary school teachers have just been dismissed, creating classes of 70 students each.
A18  A MECCA RECONSIDERS
Stung by recession and a budget crisis, Californians are debating a once taboo topic: whether the state's golden door to immigrants should be closed a little.
A20  DEATH PENALTY REVISITED
The Supreme Court refused to hear an appeal by a convicted murdered on Virginia's death row, but in doing so revealed what may be an unexpected rift among Justices.
B10  HEALTH PANEL STYMIED
A Presidential advisory panel was unable to agree on a plan to overhaul the nation's health-care system, but offered two proposals that would benefit children.
B10  PRIEST TO QUIT UNDER FIRE
A priest who is a former provost of the the University of Notre Dame agreed to resign his teaching post at the university amid accusations of sexual misconduct.
A20  A vaunted team joined the Clinton Presidential campaign.
A21  Federal agents seized nearly 12 tons of cocaine.
A20  Metropolitan Digest, B1 PRIVATE HOSPITAL BALKS
Long Island Jewish Hospital says it will no longer provide the doctors who staff a public hospital in Queens in a dispute over the future management and direction of New York City's public hospitals.
A1  Neediest Cases B2  Business Digest, D1 Science Times C1-13  ROCKEFELLER U. CHIEF RESIGNS
Dr.
David Baltimore said today he would resign as president of Rockefeller University after an 18-month tenure dogged by controversy over his role in a fraud case.
A1  How volcanoes and avalanches shaped the Hawaiian islands.
C1  A dog named Gregor Mendel, father of the dog genome project.
C1  Scientists reaching new consensus on effective child discipline.
C1  Flu vaccine shortage shows monitoring gaps.
C3  Patagonian environmental woes reflected in penguin deaths.
C4  Personal Computers.
C13  Peripherals.
C11  Arts/Entertainment C15-18  Oscar fever in Hollywood.
C15  Lincoln Center to the rescue of the art film.
C15  Kirov director says dancers lied about being locked up.
C17  Bill to ease artist-visa curbs.
C17  Marxism Today is folding, a victim of its name.
C18  Music: A Carter concerto.
C15  Dance: New work by Muller.
C15  Word and Image: "The Mozart Myths." C18  "Wildflower," on Lifetime.
C18  Obituaries B12  George Stigler, Nobel Prize winning economist  Jan Papanek, member of postwar government of Czechoslovakia  Charles D. Breitel, former Chief Judge of the Court of Appeals  Sports B14-19  METS SIGN BONILLA
The Mets made Bobby Bonilla the highest paid player in team sports, giving the free-agent outfielder a five-year contract worth $29 million.
In obtaining Bonilla, the Mets outbid the California Angels, Philadelphia Phillies and Chicago White Sox.
A1
Football: Jets stay upbeat.
B19  Basketball: Knicks defeat Hornets.
B15  Connecticut beats Wake Forest.
B16  Shackleford on the rebound.
B16  Columns: Berkow on Handley.
B15  TV Sports.
B18  Olympics: East German use of steroids admitted B15  Tennis: Dreamy Davis Cup for France.
B17  Fashion Page B13  Pants, for an era of vacillating hems.
Patterns.
Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23  Editorials A22  Hostages and haste.
Conversations about dying.
Connecticut's tax brawl.
Topics: Bush's closed doors.
Letters A22  A. M. Rosenthal: A Haitian father.
A23  Russell Baker: Bush-bashing shunned.
A23  Naomi Flink Zucker, Norman L. Zucker: Haitians and safe haven.
A23  Stetson Kennedy: Florida's Christmas murders.
A23


Conoco's Chief to Become A Vice Chairman at Du Pont
Constantine S. Nicandros was named a vice chairman of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company and a member of the finance committee of the board.
Mr.
Nicandros (pronounced nee-CAN-dros), who is 58 years old, had been an executive vice president of Du Pont and president and chief executive of its Conoco Inc. oil subsidiary, a post he will retain.
He joins Elwood P. Blanchard as a vice chairman of the big chemical company.


Jan Papanek, 95, Czechoslovak Who Stood Up to Communism
Jan Papanek, a prominent member of the democratic postwar Government of Czechoslovakia who made a dramatic exit as his country's United Nations delegate in 1948 and then devoted his efforts to the refugees from its Stalinist regime, died on Saturday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 95 years old.
His family said he died after a prolonged illness.


Mets Sign Bonilla for $29 Million, Making Him Richest in Baseball
The Mets, with a flair for the dramatic and an unprecedented expenditure of cash, signed free agent Bobby Bonilla last night to a huge contract that made him the highest-paid player in team sports.
The deal is a guaranteed package for five years and is worth $29 million.
The Mets will pay Bonilla $27.5 million in base salary, as well as $1.5 million in a promotional arrangement.
So the player who helped lead the Pittsburgh Pirates to consecutive National League East titles in 1990 and 1991 will reap an annual wage of $5.8 million.


BRIEFS
*
Apache Corp., Denver, an energy company, said the sale of two of its energy property packages in Colorado and Montana generated $12.2 million in cash. *
Base Ten Systems Inc., Trenton, a military electronics concern, expects a pretax loss of about $11.3 million for fiscal 1991, which ended Oct. 31.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
The Los Angeles Department of Water and Power said it had postponed indefinitely the sale of $114 million revenue bonds scheduled for today because of unfavorable market conditions.
Common Stock  *
Tyco Toys Inc., Mount Laurel, N.J., said it had completed an offer to exchange 26 shares of its common for each $1,000 principal of $7.5 million in 12 percent convertible subordinated debentures, due June 1, 2002, of its subsidiary Nasta International Inc.


Breast Implants Should Halt, Pending Study; 'I Could Stand Straight'
To the Editor:
Last May I had a mastectomy.
For such a harrowing experience there is little solace, except that we caught the cancer in time to eliminate it and that when I woke up from the operation, my body was still recognizable, if not quite familiar, to me.
That is because on the operating table upon completion of the mastectomy, my plastic surgeon reconstructed the missing breast, using a silicone and saline implant.
I have had no problems with it.
It has behaved exactly as the doctor predicted, and I am pleased with it.


Alzheimer Drug Gets Wider Use In Tests
The Food and Drug Administration today authorized wider use of an experimental drug for Alzheimer's disease under a new effort to give patients afflicted with life-threatening conditions greater access to unproven therapies.
The agency said the new treatment program for the drug, tacrine, also known as THA, will allow up to 3,000 patients to begin daily use of the drug in increasing dosages to see if it curtails symptoms of the disease.
The program is expected to begin in February, the F.D.A. said in a statement.


New York to Let Public Buy Public Housing
In a policy shift that could represent the future of public housing in New York City, the city's Housing Authority said yesterday that families would be able to apply some of their rent toward buying their apartments in some new developments to be built with Federal funds over the next two years.
The Bush Administration strongly favors programs that would turn over public housing to tenants across the nation.
The decision by New York City, which has the largest housing authority in the nation, will send a forceful signal to other cities, Federal officials said.


Ex-Im Bank Export Pact
The Bankers Trust Company said yesterday that it had arranged $162 million in export financing guaranteed by the Export-Import Bank.
It said the financing was the first guaranteed transaction of the Export-Import Bank to be financed in the commercial paper market.


Machines For the Job, Now and Much Later
IN our last episode, computer shoppers were advised to choose their software first.
Once the software is chosen, the hardware choice gets easier.
Not a lot easier, granted.
But if the shopper has narrowed the choice to Windows, say, or Macintosh, or plain DOS, the hard part is over.
Then it becomes a process of finding a computer that will run the chosen software with the best combination of price and performance.


Helmick May Be Asked to Resign From International Committee
Robert Helmick, who resigned under pressure as president of the United States Olympic Committee in September over questionable business practices, may be asked as early as tomorrow to step down as a member of the International Olympic Committee.
A senior member of the I.O.C., who spoke under the condition that he not be identified, said yesterday that sentiment seemed to be growing for Helmick's removal.
Helmick, a 54-year-old lawyer from Des Moines, has been an I.O.C. member since 1985, the year be became the U.S.O.C. president, an unsalaried position.


World Cup Officials Set Out To Buy Time With Networks
World Cup soccer officials are in town this week to attend the qualifying draw Sunday for the sports spectacle to be played in the United States in 1994.
But of greater importance than who plays whom is who will televise it.
That issue was thought to be settled two years ago when the United States Soccer Federation agreed to an unusual partnership equity deal with NBC Sports in which the network would put up $11.5 million in return for a cut of certain sponsorship, advertising and ticket revenues.


Corrections
An article yesterday about "A Day Without Art," an observance for people who have died of AIDS, described one activity incorrectly.
At the Museum of Modern Art, a tape-recording of a bell at Riverside Church was played every 10 minutes.
The bell did not ring at the church itself.


Sea Floor Holds Story Of Hawaiian Isles' Doom
OCEANOGRAPHIC surveys are throwing dramatic new light on the cataclysmic landslides that lopped off a large part of the Hawaiian island of Oahu and may one day strike the chain's big island, Hawaii.
Oahu's lost half has been missing for some time, probably a million years or more, but only recently have the missing pieces been located.
The new oceanographic surveys have mapped in greater detail the massive fields of avalanche debris.
Some of the fragments are gigantic blocks measuring 10 miles on a side.


Breast Implants Should Halt, Pending Study; External Wear
To the Editor:
I've had bilateral radical mastectomies dating back to 1961.
In 30-plus years I've probably tried every external prosthesis that's been on the market and have never been happy with any of them.


Review/Television; Happily-Ever-After Tale of a Disabled Teen-Ager
When it comes to disabled characters in uplifting television movies, Alice Guthrie, played by Patricia Arquette, can claim a niche of her own.
Kept in a shed for most of her life because her ignorant parents think she's possessed by the devil, the fictional 17-year-old suffers from epilepsy and partial deafness, not to mention frequent beatings from her ferocious stepfather.
But this being television, don't worry.
Everything works out for the best.
Alice comes out of a Sara Flanigan novel titled "Alice," now adapted by the author and directed by Diane Keaton for a made-for-cable movie called "Wildflower." It can be seen at 9 tonight on Lifetime.
Lifetime previously had considerable success with another Flanigan adaptation, "Sudie and Simpson" starring Sara Gilbert and Louis Gossett Jr.
Born and raised in Georgia, Ms.
Flanigan clearly knows her rural folk.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.00
4.87
7.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.37
4.36
7.06
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.41
4.40
6.96
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.85
6.94
8.12
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.90
7.93
8.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.93
8.94
9.66
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.86
6.90
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Ferret Rescue Mission
Two months after 49 black-footed ferrets were released into the Shirley Basin in south-central Wyoming under a program to reintroduce them into the wilderness, 6 have fallen prey to coyotes and badgers.
But officials of the program said they were pleased with the results because more of the endangered ferrets were surviving than had been expected.
The mortality rate was projected to be 80 percent by May.


A Greenwich Quandary: Reining In Philanthropy
THE public school system here has a problem with gifts.
The problem is not with finding rich people to give the gifts.
It's handling all the offers of gifts that drift its way.
And so the eight-member Board of Education of one of the nation's most affluent communities, here on the tree-pocked shoreline border of New York and Connecticut, has just completed a rigorous debate on the philosophical issue of private gifts to public bodies.
It is a question that thousands of other districts would love to have the luxury of tackling.
One thousand points of lights or not, the board decided unanimously that it must crack down.
"At some point," said Thomas Heagney, a lawyer and outspoken board member, "we need to draw the line." The line, it turns out, is not necessarily a straight one.


Peru's Military Is Granted Broad Powers in Rebel War
Peru's civilian Government has issued tough emergency decrees that sharply widen the military's powers to combat terrorism by the Shining Path movement.
The decrees will allow soldiers to requisition private property and draft individuals for the war effort.
Military units will also have freedom to enter prisons and universities.


Japan and U.S. Struggle With Resentment
Japan and the United States are struggling to prevent their successful alliance from being engulfed by a rising tide of frustrations, resentments and recriminations.
Solid majorities of both countries say they feel that relations between them are friendly and that the alliance between Japan and the United States is dependable, according to an opinion survey in late November by The New York Times, CBS News and the Tokyo Broadcasting System.


Mandela Back in New York To Press for Faster Changes
Nelson Mandela returned to New York City yesterday to press for speedier changes in South Africa and praised Mayor David N. Dinkins for traveling there last month, saying his visit had "turned the country upside down."
While Mr.
Mandela did not explain what he meant by the comment, aides to Mr.
Dinkins said they hoped it would convince New Yorkers that the Mayor's trip to South Africa was fruitful.


Bank Drops Stock Offer
The Bank of New York withdrew an offering of 5 million shares of new stock yesterday because of the recent downturn in the stock market.
"We're withdrawing due to the adverse market conditions which are apparent to anybody who has followed the market in the last few weeks," said Michael Pascale, a spokesman for the Bank of New York Company.


Vaccine Shortages in Flu Outbreak Show Gaps in Monitoring Program
No infection is more unpredictable than influenza.
Over the years, even the most respected experts have looked foolish in predicting the severity of the next epidemic and the number of Americans who will seek protection from flu shots.
This year seems no exception.
Unusually heavy demand for influenza vaccine has led to shortages in many areas of the country.
Leading distributors and all four manufacturers say they have run out of stock.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Advest Group Inc., Hartford, a financial services concern, announced that Allen Wintraub, chief executive, had assumed the additional position of president.
He succeeds Arnold E. Amstutz, who resigned. *
Ashland Oil Inc., Ashland, Ky., named J. Marvin Quinn 2d chief financial officer and senior vice president.


Ex-Communist Wins in Ukraine; Yeltsin Recognizes Independence
Leonid M. Kravchuk was pronounced the winner today in Ukraine's first presidential election, and his republic's popularly endorsed independence received swift recognition from the neighboring Russian republic.
"Ukraine has been born," proclaimed Mr.
Kravchuk, a 57-year-old Communist Party official who converted to nationalist politics as the party collapsed this summer.
"It is a great historic moment."


U.S. Unruffled on New Mideast Talks
Senior American officials expressed confidence today that peace talks between Israel and its Arab neighbors would reopen within the next week, although Israeli diplomats here said their country would boycott the session scheduled for Wednesday.
The negotiations are likely to begin next Monday at the State Department, according to those handling the arrangements for the Bush Administration.
The Israeli diplomats said that "there will be no Israelis here before then" which means the Arabs will face empty chairs on Wednesday, the date set by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.


Visa Widens Right to Offer Credit Card
Visa USA announced plans yesterday to change its membership rules to make it easier for companies other than banks, like department stores, to issue Visa cards.
Although Visa, the leading general-purpose credit card company, has not announced the specific rules governing such companies, it said it would end a 13-month moratorium next week on accepting new members owned by companies that are not banks.
The move by Visa also makes it more competitive with Mastercard, which has been gaining market share because it has been more willing to allow non-banking companies to join its system.


CHRONICLE
Where, oh where is LUIS PAUTA, last seen playing the saxophone in the Queens Plaza subway station?
DOUG VARONE, head of his own contemporary dance troupe, wants Mr.
Pauta to play for the company's performances next month at the Joyce Theater in Manhattan, but despite two searches of the subway station, he has been unable to find him.


Rochester Residents Unite In an Effort to Save Trees
Residents here couldn't do much to help when an ice storm last March damaged thousands of trees.
But when they thought the trees faced a further assault -- from city government -- they took action.
Alarmed by reports that as many as 75 percent of the trees in some neighborhoods might be cut down, someone secretly painted over the large yellow dots that city crews used to mark trees destined to be removed.


By Design; The Feminized Necktie


Times's New Ink Less Likely to Rub Off
After a year of testing, The New York Times has introduced new printing inks substantially less likely to rub off on readers' fingers.
Copies of The Times printed at its Manhattan and Carlstadt, N.J., plants, which account for about 80 percent of the paper's total circulation, are using the inks.
The inks will also be used when The Times opens its new printing plant at Edison, N.J., which is expected to begin operating next year.


Noll May Not Return
CHUCK NOLL said yesterday that this was the most disappointing of his 23 seasons as the Pittsburgh Steelers' coach and he hasn't decided whether he would return next season.
The Steelers' 5-8 record has increased speculation that this may be Noll's last season.


Europeans Warn Libya of Possible Sanctions
The European Community today raised the possibility of imposing sanctions on Libya if it did not extradite several senior Libyan Government officials accused of planting bombs that destroyed an American and a French airliner in 1988 and 1989.
France, the United States and Britain had demanded that six senior Libyan officials be handed over for questioning on the accusations.


U.N. Report Warns of Crisis in Eastern Europe
A United Nations commission warned today that the shattered economies of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union could soon reach the breaking point, saying that their economic output had declined to the point that their slide should be called a depression.
The Geneva-based United Nations Economic Commission on Europe said economic output in Eastern Europe would plunge by almost 15 percent this year, which it said would bring the decline in production over three years to almost 25 percent.
It said that in the United States Depression, output from 1929 to 1933 fell by 29 percent.


Judge's Order Bars Effort to Start Agency
A circuit court judge in Chicago yesterday put a temporary hold on the efforts of two former top executives of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Direct, who left the agency last week to start their own shop.
Judge Monica D. Reynolds granted Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications, Chicago, a 10-day restraining order against Jim Tennant and Mark Weinstein, the former president and senior vice president, respectively, of the agency's direct-marketing unit.
The order temporarily prohibits them from soliciting business from their former clients, recruiting former employees to their new firm and using files they might have taken when they left.


In Shift, O'Connor Urges Appeal in Murder Case
The Supreme Court's refusal today to hear an appeal by a convicted murderer on Virginia's death row prompted an unusual statement by three Justices urging the Federal courts in Virginia to give "careful consideration" to the inmate's challenge to the constitutionality of his sentence when he files one.
There is often dissension within the Court over the death penalty or over the ability of death-row inmates to file Federal habeas corpus petitions to request review of their sentences or convictions.
What was striking about today's action was that one of the Justices urging the Federal courts to conduct an inquiry into the case was Justice Sandra Day O'Connor.


Bridge
The most prestigious title in the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals, the Reisinger Board-a-Match Team Championship, was won Sunday night by a team led by Clifford Russell of Miami, Fla.
The premier event of the 10-day tournament was not decided until the last three deals, as some 300 spectators stared at the Vugraph screen about midnight Sunday.


TJX Names President Of Hit or Miss Division
Herbert Yalof, formerly president of R. H. Macy &amp; Company's important northeast division and a Macy's director, was named president of the Hit or Miss division of the TJX Companies Inc. to restore the women's discount clothing chain to profitability.
Hit or Miss has not made a profit since 1989, said Bernard Cammarata, president and chief executive of TJX, which is based in Framingham, Mass.


Wales Journal; Big Classes and Little Hope at School
Lisa Valle looked in the school room, saw her daughter and about 70 other small children sitting row after row, coloring their work sheets, and seethed.
"This is disgusting," she said.
"My blood is boiling just standing here."
Ms.
Valle and other parents hovered in the hallways today, watching anxiously as 199 children were prompted, cajoled and herded by only three teachers into classes considered to be the largest in the state, if not the country.


Careers; A College's Intense Push To Find Jobs
CAMPUS recruiting is down at many colleges, and the job outlook for seniors next spring is not very good, says Vicki Lynn, director of the career development center at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y.
Still, she said Rensselaer's graduates, most of them engineers and scientists, were faring better than those of other colleges.
"We have seen the number of companies sending corporate recruiters decline in recent years," she said last week.
She forecast that recruiting this school year would be down by about 10 percent from last year's level.


A Deep Split In Attitudes Is Developing
Despite increasing disagreements between Japan and the United States, most people in the two countries say relations between them are friendly, and that their alliance is dependable, according to a poll by The New York Times, CBS News and the Tokyo Broadcasting System.
But the opinion poll also shows a deep cleavage between fundamental attitudes of the two countries, with Americans pessimistic about competing with Japan, and Japanese seeing America as a nation that is declining as a world power and blaming Japan for its own economic problems.


How Bonilla Got Mets to Empty Their Pockets
In the end, Bobby Bonilla wanted to stay in the National League East and he used an American League West team to get there.
The California Angels, borrowing a clause from the Minnesota Twins' deal with Jack Morris last winter, made Bonilla such an irresistible offer that his agent, Dennis Gilbert, tried to get the Philadelphia Phillies or the Mets to match it yesterday.
Neither did, declining to offer the type of option years the Angels did.
But the Mets made up for their reluctance with money, and last night secured the free agent's services for $29 million over five years.
The contract makes Bonilla the highest-paid player in baseball history.
The $5.8 million average of the deal exceeds the $5,380,250 average of Roger Clemens's contract with the Boston Red Sox, which has been baseball's highest since last Feb. 8.
Until now, the most lucrative contract for a player other than a pitcher had been Jose Canseco's five-year, $23.5 million deal with the Oakland Athletics, which averages $4.7 million a year.


WASHINGTON WAITS FOR BUSH DECISION ON CHIEF OF STAFF
President Bush met with John H. Sununu on Sunday to discuss the chief of staff's future and other issues as the President edged closer to decisions on his 1992 campaign staff and a possible shake-up of White House aides, White House advisers said today.
The meeting heightened the sense of expectation today among Washington Republicans.
It was one of several gatherings over the weekend, including a discussion on Saturday at Camp David between Mr.
Bush and Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, his closest friend, and a session at the White House on Sunday night between the President and Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner, a longtime associate of Mr.
Bush who is widely regarded as the leading candidate to replace Mr.
Sununu.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Nov. 19 about Cambodian refugees in the United States misidentified a Cambodian-language newspaper in Long Beach, Calif.
It is Jati Khmer News.


Lincoln Center Gallops to the Rescue of the Art Film
One by one, the lights have dimmed at New York City's repertory cinemas, leaving a dark hole that the new Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center hopes to illuminate.
The theater, which will become the first permanent home of the Film Society of Lincoln Center when it opens to the public on Monday, has seen its mandate change since it was first floated as an idea in the early 80's, a time when the city had numerous art houses offering classic and foreign films.
"In the past, the latest films from Germany, Italy, France and Japan were shown fairly regularly," said Richard Pena, the programming director for the Film Society.
"That's come to seem more a glaring need than when we first embarked on this project."
Striking a note of hope and hubris, the Film Society will open the Walter Reade, at 165 West 65th Street, with a series titled "Great Beginnings." Read as a statement of intent for the society's future programs, it promises something old, something new, something exotic and something obscure.
The run-up to the opening begins tonight, with an invitation-only preview screening of Pedro Almodovar's new film, "High Heels," to be followed by three more nights of special showings for donors tomorrow,Thursday and Friday. 35 Debut Films
"Great Beginnings" consists of 35 debut films by directors ranging from Stanley Donen, whose 1948 musical, "On the Town," will open the series, to Almodovar's "Pepi, Luci, Bom and Other Girls on the Heap" and Jim Jarmusch's "Permanent Vacation." It will also include the debut film by Euzhan Palcy of Martinique, "Sugar Cane Alley," made in 1983, the kind of film that reflects what Mr.
Pena said was his commitment "to bring films from China, Africa and Latin America into the general discourse, to make them part of what we talk about when we discuss film."
The 268-seat theater will screen as many as 4 films a day year-round, at a ticket price of $7 ($5 for Film Society members and for elderly at matinees).
It is one of the last cultural organizations to take up residence in the newest building at Lincoln Center, the Samuel B. and David Rose Building, which is also occupied by the Juilliard School, the New York City Ballet, the School of American Ballet and the performing arts division of the New York Public Library.
For the most part, programming will be organized around themes, as with an "Italian Cinema Now" series, which will run at the same time as "Great Beginnings." Comprising 10 Italian films made between 1989 and 1991, the series includes the American premiere of "The Station," by Sergio Rubini.
Panel Discussions and Lectures
To promote the overlooked, marginal films that he holds dear, Mr.
Pena described a kind of sneaky missionary strategy.
From Dec. 20 to 28, for example, the society will honor Marlene Dietrich, who turns 90 years old on Dec. 27.
"You'll see that on Dec. 27, 'The Devil Is a Woman' is playing with 'Rio 100 Degrees,' a Brazilian classic," said Mr.
Pena.
"Normally the audience for one would not watch the other. We're hoping people will stay for both, and in that way build some bridges."
To supplement its screenings, the society will also offer a full package of such ancillary events as scholarly lectures, panel discussions and informal talks by film professionals.
For its January program on films of the Depression, Mr.
Pena said by way of example, the society will provide a historical and social context by having assorted scholars speak.
The theater is named for Walter Reade Jr., who was president and chairman of the theater chain that bore his name.
In 1985, the Walter Reade Foundation donated $1.5 million for construction of the theater, which was designed by the New York architectural firm of David, Brody &amp; Associates.
The cost was $7.5 million, said Joanne Koch, the executive director of the Film Society, but 40 percent of that amount was offset by the sale of air rights on the site.
The society still has an $800,000 gap to close.
For their $7 moviegoers will get the latest projection and audio technology, a 35-by-19-foot screen (large for the size of the theater), good sight lines and comfortable seats.
For the record, the first projected image to hit the screen was the helicopter sequence from "Apocalypse Now," shown to staff members on Nov. 22.
Because the theater is above a library and below dance studios of the American Ballet School, it was built on the complicated box-within-a-box method used for recording studios.
The floating ceiling, for example, hangs from the primary ceiling by springs attached to hooks set into steel beams, creating a sound-absorbing air cushion. 12 Musical Events Each Year
Since Lincoln Center plans to borrow back the theater from the film society to hold 12 musical events each year, the cloth-wrapped acoustical panels lining the walls can be removed to expose wood paneling, and folding wooden panels can be extended on the stage in front of the movie screen to create a performance shell.
The small size of the Walter Reade Theater means that the Film Society will continue to hold its biggest events elsewhere, with its annual film festival remaining at Alice Tully Hall, the New Directors/New Films series at the Museum of Modern Art, which co-produces the series, and the society's yearly actor's tribute at Avery Fisher Hall.
The theater will cost $1.5 million to run annually, said Ms.
Koch, who estimated that ticket sales will provide about two-thirds of that amount.
Lincoln Center will cover the rest, a fact that Ms.
Koch says she considers "with trepidation, because we just don't know, with this kind of esoteric programming."
The theater will offer some mainstream fare.
To complement a Film Society gala on April 13 honoring Gregory Peck, for example, 20 Peck movies will be shown at the Walter Reade.
But the basic philosophy is high-minded, as in a March series that will look at French cinema through the eyes of the pioneering film journal Cahiers du Cinema, with a dozen films selected by Mr.
Pena and the journal's editors.
"We will be testing the audience as we go," said Wendy Keys, the executive producer for programming.
"But it's always been that way. We showed Fassbinder for five years before anything clicked with the audience."
She added: "I think there will be an initial flurry, with everyone coming to see the theater out of curiosity. Then, I hope, they'll settle into our rhythm, and we'll come to seem an important part of the culture of New York."


The Talk of Hollywood; Studios Campaign For an Early Edge In the Oscar Stakes
Why are postal trucks delivering thousands of ominous-looking black boxes containing videocassettes of the thriller "The Silence of the Lambs?" Why are executives at Warner Brothers and 20th Century Fox holding strategy sessions that focus on generating last-minute support for forthcoming films like Oliver Stone's "J. F. K." and Lawrence Kasdan's "Grand Canyon"?
Why have Robin Williams, Jodie Foster and Kevin Costner suddenly decided to attend a charity lunch next week sponsored by the Hollywood Women's Press Club?
The answer is Academy Award fever, which is rapidly enveloping Hollywood.
Fully aware that the award for best picture gave an extraordinary box-office lift to recent winners like "Driving Miss Daisy," "Rain Man" and "The Last Emperor," studios are planning campaigns that include expensive parties to meet Robin or Kevin or Bette or Barbra or Jodie or other potential nominees, holding screenings all over town and spending hundreds of thousands of dollars for advertisements in Daily Variety, and The Hollywood Reporter.


Connecticut's Tax Brawl, Cont'd.
Connecticut's Legislature has reconvened in special session to repeal, revise or do nothing about the state's new personal income tax.
The wisest course would be to do nothing.
The die-hards who seek repeal have been ferocious.
They drew 40,000 people to an anti-tax rally at the State Capitol.
Some legislators who voted for the tax have received death threats.
All have been warned of stiff opposition in next year's elections; indeed, even Senator Christopher Dodd, running for a third term in Washington, not Hartford, has been scared into calling the tax "inequitable."


Cicippio Free After 5 Years And Eager for a 'New Life'
Joseph J. Cicippio, looking thin and haggard and managing to smile only weakly, was released to American officials in Damascus today after more than five years in captivity in Lebanon.
"I am happy it's over," he said at a news conference at the Syrian Foreign Ministry here.
"I'd like to put it all behind me, to get going to the next day. It's my first new day in my new life."


Shackleford Lands on His Feet, Sometimes With Ball
The wrong people keep watching Charles Shackleford.
There are those stubborn investigators at the Division of Criminal Justice in Trenton who have empaneled a grand jury in a three-year-old gambling investigation.
There is Harold Katz, the impatient owner of the Philadelphia 76ers, who sits in the bleachers at St.
Joseph's College during practices and asks his starting center to play every night the way he did that time in Orlando last month.


Observer; Bush-Bashing Shunned
I was going to bash Bush until the latest poll figures arrived.
You have to bash somebody these days, and bashing Bush sounded like an amusing idea.
The alliteration of the two "b's" combined with the paired "sh" sounds made bashing Bush almost irresistible.
What's more, the cruelty of the bashing would be softened, even made to seem harmlessly comical, by those two terminal "sh's" with their suggestion of air hissing out of a flat tire.
It did not sound at all like a typical press mugging of the day's more bashable politicians.
It sounded like a Laurel-and-Hardy exercise, which is to say, like a bashing that would make witnesses feel jolly rather than sour or homicidal.


Fresh Kills Makeover; Beauty and One Big Beast of a Dump
As a student he dreamed of the great lawns of history, from the formal beauty of Versailles to the terraced approach to Castle Howard.
He was enchanted by the Villa Borghese and humbled by the severity of the Zen rock formations of Japan.
For a landscape architect, Bill Young had healthy ambitions.
But it never occurred to him that he might influence the final shape of one of the world's most challenging and contested urban landmarks, the Fresh Kills Landfill on Staten Island.


Growing With a Neighborhood
Claude Sanz was once Leona Helmsley's executive chef.
His cheesecake was so admired by Vice President Walter F. Mondale that Mr.
Sanz sent some to the White House.
He has served the likes of Salvador Dali, Nancy Reagan and three Presidents.
Now he will be preparing haute cuisine in the restaurant of a new hotel -- in Flushing, Queens, once a quiet residential neighborhood sprinkled with mom-and-pop stores.
The 16-story postmodern structure will float above the rush of downtown Flushing on one side and Shea Stadium and La Guardia Airport on the other.


Dow Up 40.70 as Late Rally Erases Losses
The stock market closed sharply higher yesterday, bouncing back briskly late in the day after a steep decline earlier.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which at mid-morning was down nearly 30 points from Friday's close, finished 40.70 higher at 2,935.38.
Various forces converged to drag prices down in the morning: weakness in the Japanese and London markets, a lower-than-expected November index from the nation's purchasing managers that the market took as further evidence of a weak economy, and poor showings by I.B.M. and Digital.


Scattered Bones
Bones that lay misidentified for more than a century in scattered collections appear to be the oldest well-documented fossils of any backboned creature to walk on land, a researcher says.
The bones, found in Scotland before 1850, are 367 million to 370 million years old, said Per Ahlberg of the zoology department at Oxford University.
That compares with the previous record of 360 million years for fossils found in Greenland, he said.
He reported his findings in the current issue of the journal Nature.


Lives Back On Track With Help Of Neediest
The six gouges in Juanita B.'s apartment door recall robbery attempts by drug addicts, who she said are as plentiful in her Brooklyn neighborhood as the rats and the roaches.
Had they broken in to the Bedford-Stuyvesant apartment, the robbers would not have found much: a television next to the pull-out bed she shares with her daughter, two more small beds in her sons' room and pictures of her children.


Family of Captive Rejoices at Release
Soon after hearing that Joseph J. Cicippio had been released in Lebanon, a half-dozen members of his family gathered for an early morning ceremony on the lawn outside a brother's stone-fronted house here.
They stood in front of a large white sign stenciled with the names of eight past and present American hostages in Lebanon.
Each day for five years Mr.
Cicippio's brother had changed the number on the sign to reflect the time Mr.
Cicippio was in captivity.
But today, members of his family took turns hammering a new sign over the number 1,908.
It said, "Free At Last!"


New Top Management At CSX Railroad Unit
The CSX Corporation yesterday made important management changes at its railroad, naming a new chairman whose background is in aerospace and turning to two longtime railroad men as president and chief operating officer
Robert L. Kirk, the current president of the railroad, CSX Transportation Inc., was named its chairman.
Alvin R. Carpenter was appointed president and chief executive, and Jerry R. Davis was named chief operating officer of the unit.


Quotation of the Day
"Ukraine has been born." -- LEONID M. KRAVCHUK, its President-elect.  [ A1:4. ]


3 Women's Testimony on Smith Is Barred
Testimony began today in the rape trial of William K. Smith, after the judge ruled that three women would not be allowed to testify that Mr.
Smith had sexually attacked them years ago.
In their opening arguments, lawyers for the State of Florida and for Mr.
Smith presented drastically different accounts of his late-night encounter with a local woman on the Kennedy family estate here on Easter weekend.


Purchasers Index Fell Last Month
The nation's manufacturing economy, hurt by lower production and new orders, grew far more slowly in November than October, according to a monthly survey of the nation's purchasing managers.
Economists saw the figures as an indication that the overall economy was recovering more slowly than they had expected.
The National Association of Purchasing Management said yesterday that its monthly index fell to 50.1 percent in November from 53.3 percent in October.
The November reading was lower than many economists had predicted.


Co-Defendant Denies Conflict as Miller Trial Nears End
Jay Adolf, the co-defendant in the trial of Mel Miller, denied yesterday that he had put his own financial interests ahead of a client's interest in buying and selling a cooperative apartment.
Responding to questions by his lawyer, Victor J. Rocco, Mr.
Adolf testified that he acted properly as a lawyer for a 72-year-old tenant, Mary Langowski, when she sold her right to buy the apartment in a Manhattan building that was being converted into a cooperative.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, said yesterday that it planned to offer $700 million of seven-year debentures today priced at 99.90625 to yield 7.067 percent with a 7.05 percent coupon rate.
Proceeds will be used to redeem $550 million of series 1991 debentures carrying 11.75 percent interest and due Dec. 10.


Hanson to Settle Charges by F.T.C.
The Federal Trade Commission said that Hanson P.L.C. had agreed to settle charges that its proposed acquisition of Beazer P.L.C. would reduce competition in the Northern California cement market.
Hanson owns the Kaiser Cement Company in Permanente, Calif., a competitor of the Cencal Cement Company, which is 50 percent owned by Beazer.
The F.T.C. contends that Hanson's proposed takeover of Beazer would eliminate competition between Kaiser and Cencal.


Topics of The Times; America's First First
France's Davis Cup victory over the U.S. was certainly unusual: it last happened in 1932.
But America's disappointment in tennis was softened by an even greater surprise in soccer: an upset win by the U.S. team in the first women's World Cup.
This was the first world championship for an American soccer squad of either sex.
It was especially delicious because the U.S. will play host to the next men's championship, in 1994, even as it struggles for respect in the world's most popular sport.
The men's squad, with a new coach, has improved remarkably since losing in the first round of the 1990 World Cup.
But it won't easily match what the women pulled off in China, edging favored Norway in the final minutes of the final game.


M. Keith Munroe; Clothing Executive, 71
M.
Keith Munroe, senior vice president of Nautica International Inc. and a longtime New York clothing executive, died on Saturday while on vacation in Lakeside, Mich.
He was 71 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack, the company said.


Breast Implants Should Halt, Pending Study; A Registry Exists
To the Editor:
"The Case
for
Breast Implants" (Op-Ed, Nov. 14) calls for the Food and Drug Administration to establish a national registry that tracks patients with breast implants.


Books of The Times; Debunking Some Myths About Mozart's Life
The Mozart Myths A Critical Reassessment By William Stafford 285 pages.
Stanford University Press. $24.95.
The popular picture of Mozart that has come down to us -- through biographies, oral history and such fictionalized works as Peter Shaffer's "Amadeus" -- is one of a childish genius, inept at managing the day-to-day responsibilities of life.
According to versions of this myth, he was a libertine with a scatological sense of humor, a self-absorbed artist inept at managing his finances and his career, who'd been incongruously chosen as a vessel for the voice of God.
Misunderstood by his contemporaries, he fell victim to prejudice -- and, perhaps, outright conspiracies -- and died penniless at the age of 35.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
CHICAGO (NL) -- Claimed George Pedre, catcher, off waivers from the Kansas City Royals.
Designated Steve Carter, outfielder, for reassignment.
CINCINNATI (NL) -- Claimed Bob Geren, catcher, off waivers from the New York Yankees, and Cesar Hernandez, outfielder, off waivers from the Montreal Expos.
Named Doug Spreen, trainer, for Cedar Rapids of the Midwest League and Mark Mann, trainer, for Billings of the Pioneer League.
PITTSBURGH (NL) -- Named Roger Wilson equipment manager; Carlos Ledezma assistant equipment manager and coordinator of minor league trainers, and Michael Hurd grounds superintendent at their Pirate City complex in Bradenton, Fla.
Basketball
ROCKFORD (CBA) -- Signed Everette Stephens, guard. Football
INDIANAPOLIS (AFC) -- Waived Bubba Paris, tackle. Colleges
BROOKLYN COLLEGE -- Named Stephanie Roberts men's volleyball coach.
COLGATE -- Announced that Terry Slater, hockey coach, will be out indefinelty after suffering a stroke.
Named Brian Dorocher, assistant hockey coach, interim coach.
PACE -- Announced the resignation of Bob Baker, football coach.
TEXAS -- Announced the resignation of David McWilliams, football coach.


Don't Turn a Theater Into a Criminal Court
To the Editor:
I hope your support in "Spotlight on Justice in Times Square" (editorial, Nov. 17) for conversion of the Longacre Theater on West 48th Street into a criminal court is provisional.


Sports of The Times; The 'Myth' Of the Giants
EVERYBODY knows what the problem with the Giants is: it's the coach.
Last year at this time the team had an 11-2 record; now it is 7-6.
Last year the coach was Bill Parcells; this year it is Ray Handley.
Last year at this time the Giants were on their way to a Super Bowl championship.
This year, after Sunday's 27-24 loss to the bumbling Bengals, the Giants have a terrific chance of not even making the playoffs.
So it's all there in black and white.


Sugar Growers Seek Cleaner Image
The annual harvest of sugar cane from South Florida's mucky flatlands is in full swing.
The horizon is flecked with smoke from fields being torched to clear leaves, and by steam from the mills that grind endlessly.
The grunts and sullen chatter of cane cutters who sever the singed stalks inches from the ground vie with the whining of mechanical harvesters.
There is one surprising difference this year: the cane growers, long envied for their Government subsidies and vilified for their labor and environmental practices, aim to shed their image as an industry that fears publicity.
That image, the industry has concluded, has undermined its clout in Washington and Florida and made it hard to attract public sympathy on issues like water management that threaten the growers' future.


Study of Canine Genes Seeks Hints on Behavior
IN 1860, an Austrian monk named Gregor Mendel founded the science of genetics.
Today, his namesake, a border collie in Berkeley, Calif., is preparing to further the cause.
Early next year Gregor Mendel (the dog) will be mated with a female from another breed, a Newfoundland or a bloodhound, and the couple's genes, as well as those of their puppies, will be analyzed in the first step of a venture known as the dog genome project.
The goal is to detemine the genetic roots of complex physical traits, diseases, and even behaviors.
With this knowledge, it may one day be possible to understand why Great Danes are so large, Lassie was so loyal and Asta was so smart.


Better Discipline? Train Parents, Then Children
FEW chores of child-rearing are more frustrating or fraught with emotional conflict than discipline.
Now some researchers believe they know why: discipline is being applied to children when it should first be applied to their parents.
"Most parents lack a good grasp of what to do when there's a problem," said James Windell, a clinical psychologist in Waterford, Mich.
"Their instincts aren't always useful, and when they rely on their emotions they often end up feeling guilty."


U.S. Bonds Top List
The investment return on United States Treasury bonds outpaced that of other governments' debt securities in November, posting a return of 1.09 percent, J. P. Morgan's Government Bond Index Monitor said yesterday.
The study said bonds rallied on anticipation of a further easing in interest rates.
Australian bonds turned in the second-highest return last month, 0.91 percent, while bonds of Canada and Germany both registered returns of 0.85 percent.


Struggling Giants Caught Offside
The problem with the Giants is not the quarterback because they have played well with Jeff Hostetler and Phil Simms and have played poorly with both.
The problem is not the coach because Ray Handley, as conservative as he sometimes is, does not miss blocks or tackles.


Slaying May Be Tied To Witness
Four days before the start of a murder trial, a gunman fired into the Bronx home of the key witness's parents early yesterday, killing a woman who was visiting.
Police officers had been paying "special attention" to the house because of recent threats, and a patrol supervisor had stopped by minutes before the shooting, the police said.


Experts Clash on Risk At Nuclear Waste Site
A SCIENTIFIC panel has failed to agree whether it would be safe to store the nation's high-level nuclear wastes at the Federal Government's proposed site in Yucca Mountain, Nev.
The panel of five geologists split 3 to 2 on whether an earthquake might drive water that is deep beneath the mountain upward to flood the proposed dump.
In theory, such flooding might crack hot waste canisters and spew radioactivity into the environment.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Robert Kasanof, former chairman of the New York City Board of Correction, referred incorrectly to Allyn R. Sielaff.
He is the city's Commissioner of Correction; he has not resigned.


Terminology Of Nationalism
The White House spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, dropped the article "the" today when he referred to "the people of Ukraine."
And Adrian Karmazyn of the Ukrainian National Association, explained, "Ukrainian-Americans prefer it without the 'the.' "


KIDNAPPERS SHIFT RELEASE STRATEGY
The release of Joseph J. Cicippio today revealed the kidnappers' new strategy of freeing all foreign hostages by Christmas in return for a promise for the release of the Arabs detained in Israel, southern Lebanon and Europe, Muslim fundamentalist officials and diplomats said.
The strategy is a departure from the old policy of the hostage-takers, which involved the simultaneous trading of hostages for Arab prisoners.


A Surprise in an Expected Victory
One Ranger defenseman carried the puck in deep along the boards and got pinned against the boards.
The other defenseman plowed ahead on offense, taking a position by the far post just outside the crease.
Clearly, this was some kind of Roger Neilson nightmare. A bad joke.


Topics of The Times; Mr. Bush, Behind Closed Doors
If President Bush really wants to develop a domestic agenda, he's going about it in a strange way.
Imagine agreeing to meet with the Mayor of the largest city in the country -- and then insisting on seeing him in secret.
Sounds like a bad joke, but that is precisely what Mr.
Bush did last week when he saw New York City's Mayor, David Dinkins.
Mr.
Dinkins had asked for a meeting a year ago, and renewed his request in September.
The White House agreed, but chief of staff John Sununu set up conditions.
Mr.
Dinkins could not mention the meeting in advance, had to keep it off his public schedule and had to enter and leave by the "diplomatic" door -- the one with no press present.
It is a tribute to Mr.
Dinkins's patience that he agreed to go along with what other politicians might have considered an insult.


On My Mind; A Haitian Father
Almost always now, when I read about Haitians who risk the seas to get to this country but wind up on distant shores behind barbed wire, I think of an illegal immigrant I happened to know myself, and of his daughters and his son.
Then a shiver of shame and embarrassment goes through me, for a particular and large group of Americans.


Knicks Come to Life With Juggled Lineup
Thanks to daring coaching by Pat Riley and clutch play by Patrick Ewing, the Knicks escaped Charlotte tonight with a victory they will long remember.
Trailing by 17 points late in the third quarter, New York stormed back for a dramatic 99-97 victory over the Hornets at the Charlotte Coliseum, extending their season-high winning streak to six games.


The Dollar Is Mostly Lower; Gold Up Abroad, Off in U.S.
The dollar ended mostly lower yesterday against key foreign currencies, weakened at first by anxiety over an early drop in United States stock prices and later from pessimism over the American economic outlook.
Gold prices fell domestically after rising overseas.
At the Republic National Bank of New York, gold was quoted at $366.05 an ounce as of 4 P.M., down $1.45 from Friday's level.
At the New York Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery fell 90 cents an ounce, to $367.


Bonilla Is Glad to Be Back Home Again
Bobby Bonilla, of course, promised he would bring his smile to Shea Stadium.
Bonilla, of course, said he would bring his bat, too.
And the Mets, of course, said the combination was worth their spending $29 million over the next five years.
"It's kind of scary, in a way," said Bonilla, the free-agent slugger, whom the Mets made the highest paid player in baseball late last night.
"I'm from the South Bronx. I'm getting a chance to play out a dream."


Teevens to Get Post
BUDDY TEEVENS, who coached Dartmouth College to its second consecutive Ivy League championship this year, will be named head football coach at Tulane University, according to broadcast reports.
Tulane would not comment on the reports by WWL-TV in New Orleans and WNNE-TV in White River Junction, Vt., but scheduled a news conference for today.


Chess
When you have first prize in the bag before the last round begins, you are paired with a rival of renown and you have the white pieces, you might be expected to go through the motions for about 20 moves and then perform the perfunctory handshake that halts hostilities.
But that is not the way the 14th-round game between the world champion, Gary Kasparov, and his perpetual challenger, Anatoly Karpov, went in the Interpolis International Tournament in Tilburg, the Netherlands, on Nov. 4.
Kasparov has wanted for some time now to prove that his superiority over his Soviet countryman is greater than the minimal margins by which he has concluded their five title matches.
So it is a good guess that this was the motive behind his sharp, hard-driving play after the prize money already belonged to him.
That this was the 159th confrontation between the two (including both match and tournament play) did nothing to put Kasparov in a mellow mood.
The game took 4 hours and 9 minutes.
The overall score between the two now stands at 81 1/2 for Kasparov and 77 1/2 for Karpov.


Market Place; Ray of Optimism From Dividends
EVEN as pressure grows in Washington to do something to help the economy, the pace of dividend declarations by American companies is starting to improve slightly.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation reported yesterday that 105 companies announced increased dividends in November, slightly more than the 100 companies that made similar declarations in November 1990.
It was the second time in three months that the figure showed a year-over-year improvement, but the increases are not nearly enough to prevent 1991 from being the worst year, in that regard, since 1972.


Charles D. Breitel, Chief Appeals Judge in 1970's
Charles D. Breitel, Chief Judge of the Court of Appeals in the mid-1970's, under whom New York State's highest court grew in prestige, died on Sunday at Mary Manning Walsh Nursing Home in Manhattan.
He was 82 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Judge Breitel's death was caused by heart failure, his family said.
He had a stroke in September 1990 and entered the nursing home two months later.


World Bank to Let Salomon Handle Its Business Again
In one of the firm's first signs of recovery from the Treasuries market scandal, Salomon Brothers Inc. has won back the business of the World Bank after three months of suspension, the firm announced yesterday.
The World Bank was one of the first and most prestigious clients to suspend its dealing with Salomon after the bond trading house disclosed in August that it had submitted a number of illegal bids in Treasury market auctions.
The loss of business with the World Bank, whose global bond issues Salomon helped manage for the last several years, was the most stinging client rebuke Salomon suffered.


Knoxville Paper to End Daily Publication
The Knoxville (Tenn.) Journal, an evening paper long dominated by its morning rival, The Knoxville News-Sentinel, said yesterday that it would stop publishing as a daily on Dec. 31.
Knoxville will then join a host of other mid-sized cities that have lost their second-ranked newspaper during the newspaper recession.
These cities include San Diego, Little Rock, Ark., and Roanoke, Va.


Released Hostage Celebrates 'First New Day'


Equipment Smashed by School Vandals
Vandals tipped over desks and smashed computer equipment and typewriters at three schools over the weekend, causing thousands of dollars of damage, the police said.
The vandalism occurred at Bloomfield Junior High School and the Metacomet and Laurel elementary schools.
The junior high school has been vandalized three times since classes began this fall.


Pants, for an Era of Vacillating Hemlines
Hemlines are no problem, right?
Spring collections, on average, showed about 10 percent of skirt lengths passing the knees, the rest baring them.
Retailers are picking the styles that appeal to them on grounds other than length.
There is absolutely no talk about short skirts being made obsolete by the downward hemline movement, except perhaps by some nervous women who worry whether their short skirts will be viable next year.
The conventional wisdom is that long and short skirts will coexist for the next season or two, that short skirt wearers will be able to switch to long skirts when the mood hits them and that there is no reason to be concerned.
All that has happened since the spring fashion openings began two months ago is that very short skirts, the kind that barely clear the hips, look hopelessly passe.


NCR to Buy Data Company for $520 Million
The NCR Corporation, which was bought recently by A.T.&amp; T., said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire a California computer company that specializes in parallel processing, an arcane computer skill that is especially useful in manipulating huge amounts of data.
NCR is exchanging $520 million worth of A.T.&amp; T. stock for the company, the Teradata Corporation.
Teradata made its name in managing data, and its largest customer is the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, which last year spent nearly $100 million on its services.
It is one of the largest and fastest-growing companies in the field.


Coleman to Face 76ers
DERRICK COLEMAN, the Nets' forward who has missed most of the season with an ankle injury, practiced yesterday with the team, and is expected to return to action tonight against the Philadelphia 76ers at the Meadowlands.


George Joseph Stigler Dies at 80; Nobel Prize Winner in Economics
George Joseph Stigler, a Nobel Prize winner and intellectual anchor of the movement known as the Chicago school of economics, died at the University of Chicago's Bernard Mitchell Hospital on Sunday.
He was 80 years old and lived in Chicago.
Mr.
Stigler died of heart failure, said the university, where he taught economics for the last 32 years.


Quotation of the Day
"I assure you that in pit bull mode or pussy cat mode (your choice as always), I am ready to help." -- JOHN H. SUNUNU.  [ A1:4. ]


Ellis Puts Penny-Ante Dates in Past
At 4:30 in the morning, the limousine was waiting outside the Peppermill Hotel Casino to take Jimmy Ellis to the stadium where he would do his roadwork.
"Can you imagine -- a limousine to take me to my roadwork?" said an incredulous Ellis, who fights George Foreman here Saturday.


Missing in Talk of Right to Die: Depression's Grip on a Patient
A SIGN painter was just 31 years old when he found out he had AIDS; the diagnosis led to an emotional tidal wave that left depression in its wake.
Soon after he learned of the diagnosis, and well before he experienced any debilitating symptoms, he confided to his therapist that he was stockpiling Seconal, a powerful sedative, and he added that he knew the fatal dose.


Bernard M. Halbstein, A Surgeon, Dies at 81
Dr.
Bernard M. Halbstein, an orthopedic surgeon, died last Wednesday at the home of his daughter in Oceanport, N.J.
He was 81 years old and lived in Interlaken, N.J.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Books of The Times; A Cold War Continued, Even With Gorbachev
An Agent in Place  By Robert Littell 302 pages.
Bantam Books. $21.50.
Paramour  By Gerald Petievich  294 pages.
Dutton. $19.95.
Robert Littell has created such a fascinating Russian character in "An Agent in Place" that he almost makes the reader forget that he's writing a highly professional cold-war thriller set in the Gorbachev era.


George Lott, Tennis Coach, 85
George Lott, the DePaul University tennis coach, who won three Wimbledon doubles titles and five United States national doubles titles, died yesterday in Chicago.
He was 85 years old.
The cause of death was not reported.


'Pit Bull' at the White House Falls Victim to His Own Role
No one expected John Sununu to go gently. And he didn't.
As his final act, the man hired by George Bush to be his political hatchet man took a swipe at the boss.


Once More, Germany Tries to Obliterate an Uncomfortable Past; Neo-Nazi Gains
To the Editor:
The rise of the neo-Nazis in Germany, which you discuss in "The Neo-Nazis: How Quickly They Remember" (The Week in Review, Nov. 17), should not come as a surprise.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a holiday assembly at Public School 139 in Flatbush, Brooklyn, misstated the number of Samuel and Daria Schwartz's children.
The couple have three, of whom two attend the school.


Once More, Germany Tries to Obliterate an Uncomfortable Past
To the Editor:
"Berlin's Denkmal War" (Editorial Notebook, Nov. 17), Karl E. Meyer's comment on the fate of Berlin's political monuments, is timely, particularly in view of the accumulating instances of neo-Nazi violence in the new Germany.


Turmoil for Maxwell Means Anxiety at the Daily News
Kevin Maxwell sent word yesterday to employees of The Daily News that the paper, which is owned directly by the Maxwell family, would not be affected by his decision to resign as chairman of the Maxwell Communication Corporation.
But the circumstances behind Mr.
Maxwell's resignation prompted renewed speculation that the Maxwell empire could be pushed into bankruptcy, which could put far heavier pressure on the family to sell or abandon any businesses that are unprofitable, like The Daily News.


Northwest Gave Midway Airlines Five Weeks More of Life
To the Editor:
Your coverage of the relations of Northwest Airlines with Midway Airlines omits key issues.
Midway Airlines ceased operations Nov. 14 (Business Day, Nov. 14) after Northwest terminated acquisition talks.
That is how this chapter of the Midway story ended.
Here is how it began:


Review/Television; Finding the Physical Causes of Mental Disorders
Tonight "The Infinite Voyage" journeys to hospitals and laboratories where researchers are learning how schizophrenics, manic-depressives and others get that way and what can be done about it.
"Prisoners of the Brain," at 8 on Channel 13, is a surprisingly upbeat trip.
With the help of strangely beautiful photographs and illustrations, the program shows how chemicals in the brain send electric signals through neurotransmitters into nerve cells.
Too much or too little of the chemical and you may be in trouble.
An overdose of the chemical dopamine, for example, may cause symptoms of schizophrenia; a shortage may cause symptoms of Parkinson's disease.


Memorial for Irving Bieber
A memorial for Dr.
Irving Bieber, a psychoanalyst and professor who died on Aug. 27 at the age of 80, will be on Friday at 5:30 P.M. at the New York Marriott East Side Hotel at Lexington Avenue and 49th Street in Manhattan.


W. R. Stephens, Political Leader And Arkansas Investor, Dies at 84
W.
R. (Witt) Stephens, an Arkansas political leader and financier who helped build one of the largest investment houses off Wall Street, died on Monday at the St.
Vincent Infirmary Medical Center in Little Rock, Ark.
He was 84 years old and lived in Little Rock and Prattsville, Ark.
Mr.
Stephens died of natural causes after being hospitalized since Nov. 15, said Melissa Bowman, a spokeswoman for St.
Vincent.


Bijagua Journal; Graves Called Witness To Sandinista Atrocity
Down a steep slope and across a creek from a hilltop farmhouse, eight pits are waiting to offer up bitter fruit from Nicaragua's long war between the Sandinistas and the contra rebels.
For 14-year-old Hector Gaitan, carrying a visitor to the site on his horse, the recollection is still vivid of the time in 1984 when he was sent fleeing into the mountains by Sandinista security forces and came back the next day to find that his father and dozens of other men had been slain and their bodies thrown into the excavations and covered lightly with dirt.


Another West Bank Settlement Starts
On the eve of the scheduled resumption of Middle East peace talks, the Israeli Government took steps today toward starting a new settlement on the site where snipers killed two Jews recently in the occupied West Bank.
Soldiers from the army's Nahal unit moved into mobile homes that Israeli settlers had put overnight at Kefar Tappuah, 25 miles north of Jerusalem.


Mandela, at U.N., Urges Phased End to Sanctions
Nelson Mandela, the leader of the African National Congress, said today that the remaining international sanctions against South Africa should be relaxed in three phases linked to a political process ending white rule.
His address to the General Assembly today left the congress at odds with South Africa's white-dominated Government, which maintains that sanctions should be immediately lifted and that the interim government sought by Mr.
Mandela's organization is unnecessary.


Can Yale, With Budget Troubles, Still Be Great?
A few days after classes started last September, hundreds of Yale University students held a rally at Beinecke Plaza and ceremonially ate cake in mocking protest of a money-saving decision to end freshman dinner in the Commons dining hall, a move they said would cheapen the quality of life at Yale.
Today, such concerns pale in light of much deeper reductions under review at Yale.
The university is running an $8.8 million deficit, its first deficit in 11 years, and financial projections for the coming decade are so bleak that Yale plans to reduce the scope of its scholarly endeavors by paring, and possibly eliminating, several academic departments, including linguistics, sociology and engineering.
The specific cuts, under study for months, are expected to be made public in the next few weeks.


Giants Are In Squeeze
For Giants fans, the situation is worse than feared.
The defending Super Bowl champions face elimination from the playoffs next Sunday, according to National Football League calculations.
If the Giants lose to the Eagles at Giants Stadium, and the Atlanta Falcons defeat the Rams on the West Coast, it will not be possible for the Giants to win any of the tie-breaker situations to get them a wild-card berth in the playoffs.


Where, Oh Where, Have All the Fans Gone?
Through the 1970's and much of the 1980's, attendance figures for Ranger games at Madison Square Garden were pretty predictable: always around 17,500, a near-capacity crowd.
Every seat wasn't always sold and occupied, but most were.
And the money was in the bank, often well in advance, earning interest.
Then, as now, the National Hockey League was a business based on gate receipts, and business was pretty good.


Police Believe Slaying Suspect Stalks Gay Men
New York City police officials have linked the killing of one man and the attempted murder of another within the last five months to a man they say preys on homosexuals who frequent gay bars in the mid-Manhattan area.
The police believe that in both crimes the victims met their attacker in a gay bar and invited him to their apartments, where they had engaged in sexual activity.
Afterward, in both instances, the police said, the man attacked the victims by tying a telephone wire around their necks, and he also stole money and other valuables from their apartments.


Science and the Stain of Scandal
The resignation of Dr.
David Baltimore as president of Rockefeller University, which came to many as a surprise yesterday, occurred after weeks of debate among faculty members over a brilliant scientist and administrator who came with a mandate to make changes but also brought with him a festering problem of his own.
He was brought in a year and half ago to revitalize an aging faculty at the renowned research university, a task that would have been difficult and unpopular in any case.
But to compound matters, he brought a controversy of his own, his disputed handling of a case of a research fraud, to the travails already disturbing the quiet campus on the East Side of Manhattan.
A Colleague Withdraws Support
Dr.
Baltimore could not be reached by telephone yesterday and the full account of what prompted his resignation cannot be told until he and others are willing to describe their roles in the complex drama.
But according to friends, he had been to the brink of resignation several times before.
It was a few days before Thanksgiving, when Dr.
James Darnell, a close scientific colleague, decided he could no longer continue to support him, that Dr.
Baltimore finally decided to step down from one of the most prestigious posts in academic research.


Pan Am Loses Aid From Delta
Pan American World Airways may be forced to stop flying as early as today because a financing agreement with Delta Air Lines has collapsed, it was disclosed in bankruptcy court yesterday.
The once-powerful carrier has been trying to emerge from Chapter 11 bankruptcy-court protection as a smaller airline serving Latin America and the Caribbean.
It was saved from closing last night only by a last-minute cash infusion of $3 million to $4 million from a court-administered escrow account.


Made in Vermont: Myths You Can Eat
FOR the purposes of statehood, Vermont was born on March 4, 1791, in Windsor.
But for marketing purposes, Vermont was born on Nov. 11, 1984, in Manhattan, at the third annual Gourmet Products and Tabletop Show.
That's as far as Jerome Kelley is concerned, and he should know.
As director for marketing with the Vermont Department of Agriculture, Mr.
Kelley seven years ago shanghaied a motley assortment of specialty food producers and trekked with them to New York to help them display their wares, thus becoming midwife to the birth of a marketing concept that some artisans and specialty food producers call "Vermont Inc."


Met Drafts Dry Up, So Millions Flow Out
You can point to the exact date that the Mets came of age in the free-agent game.
It was not Dec. 2, 1991, the date the Mets and Bobby Bonilla agreed to an unprecedented five-year, $29 million contract.
Rather, it was Nov. 8, 1990, when Darryl Strawberry defected, signing with the Los Angeles Dodgers.
The Mets, who had never lost any of the young stars who were drafted by the team, raised by the team, thrived with the team, lost a big one on that day.
And while it cannot be said that it was a move that served to wake a sleeping, vengeful giant, it did help push the Mets into a market they had little reason to explore before.


Topics of The Times; Insuring Charities, Piecemeal
When Freedom National Bank of Harlem and Community National Bank on Staten Island went bankrupt, some nonprofit institutions were caught short.
Confused by the complex rules governing deposit insurance, they had set up multiple accounts in the mistaken belief that
each
would be insured up to $100,000.
They weren't.
The nonprofits saw millions of dollars disappear, along with the charitable programs the money made possible.
Senator Alfonse D'Amato made matters right by pushing through an amendment to the bank bill that recently passed, paying charitable and religious organizations at the two banks 100 percent of their original deposits.
The generosity will cost $6 or $7 million.


NEW PLAN ORDERED ON HAITIAN EXODUS
In a ruling that maintains a temporary ban on the forced repatriation of Haitians fleeing their country, a Federal District Court in Miami tonight ordered the Immigration and Naturalization Service to devise new procedures to screen refugees and assure that no Haitians with a legitimate fear of persecution are sent back.
The decision, which Justice Department and immigration officials said would immediately be taken to the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit in Atlanta, orders the Government to submit a screening plan for Haitians in American custody within seven days.
Many of those involved left their Caribbean country and ventured to the United States in small, rickety boats.


Warning On AIDS Surprises N.H.L.
A prominent Montreal AIDS specialist created an unintended health scare that swept through the National Hockey League yesterday and then worked into the night trying to put his alarming report in perspective.
The scare began Monday night when Dr.
Clement Olivier told an AIDS seminar in Montreal that one of his patients, a woman who died of AIDS two years ago, had told him that she had had sex with about 50 N.H.L. players, a figure equivalent to about 10 percent of the combined rosters of the 22 N.H.L. teams.


NBC Places First in Sweeps Despite CBS's Strong Week
Despite a strong final week by CBS, NBC wound up winning the November sweep month rating contest by exactly the margin it had predicted last week.
CBS had predicted that it would tie with NBC.
But NBC held on to win the sweep in what many in the television industry considered an upset.
As a joke, Robert Niles, the senior vice president of research for NBC, sent his counterpart at CBS, David Poltrack, a calculator, suggesting that it might help in future ratings predictions.


G.M. Executive to Fill Strategic Post at Isuzu
The General Motors Corporation, which is struggling to stem record losses at home, has for the first time dispatched a key executive to Japan to help its affiliate, Isuzu Motors Ltd.
The executive, Donald T. Sullivan, 48 years old, will be responsible for corporate planning, manufacturing and engineering activities and will report directly to the president of Isuzu.
Mr.
Sullivan, who has held many planning posts during his 26-year tenure at G.M., has been director of strategic planning for G.M.'s Chevrolet-Pontiac-Canada group since 1989.


Seminoles Can't Cope With Orangemen
Jim Boeheim has been called a lot of things during his 15-year career as Syracuse's head basketball coach.
Miracle worker has not been one of them, but it's beginning to look as though it should be.
With his best player from last season, Billy Owens, now in the National Basketball Association, and his biggest player from this season, Conrad McRae, declared ineligible, Boeheim finds himself behind the wheel of an undefeated team.


Washington Tries to Heal Ties to Israel
As Arab delegations arrived here for peace talks with Israel, the Bush Administration moved on several fronts today to repair frayed relations between Jersualem and Washington.
The United States and the Soviet Union announced a large-scale international meeting in Moscow late next month to discuss the Middle East, something Israel has long sought to demonstrate its full membership in the community of nations, and the State Department said the United States would press harder for repeal of the United Nations' condemnation of Zionism, also a key Israeli goal.


Chief U.S. Economist Forecasts a Recovery in Spring
In what could be a preview of the Bush Administration's testimony to Congress about the economy later this week, the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers acknowledged today that the economy was worse than he had expected early this year, but he said he foresaw improvement by spring.
Speaking at a conference here sponsored by the Agriculture Department, the official, Michael J. Boskin, offered no new proposals and suggested that President Bush would withhold initiatives on the economy until his State of the Union Message next month.


KHMER ROUGE AIDE PLEDGES TO RETURN
The senior Khmer Rouge leader who was attacked last week by a revenge-seeking mob in the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, said today that he would return to the city under terms of an agreement intended to salvage the United Nations-sponsored peace treaty for Cambodia.
The Khmer Rouge official, Khieu Samphan, who bore an inch-and-a-half scar on his forehead from the attack, smiled and answered "yes" when asked by reporters whether he intended to return soon to Phnom Penh.


Robert S. Fisher, 84; Headed Corn Refinery
Robert S. Fisher, who retired in 1975 as chairman and chief executive after 44 years with the Hubinger Company, a corn refiner in Keokuk, Iowa, died Nov. 15 at his home in Key Largo, Fla.
He was 84 years old.
His family said he died of cancer.


Doctor for Reds Quits
The Cincinnati Reds' team doctor for the last two years has resigned, accusing the club of failing to care for its players adequately.
"I cannot and will not continue to engage in a situation that has a front office which does not consider the medical team and its players' health a priority," Dr.
MICHAEL LAWHON said in a statement.


A.T.&amp;T. Sees Big Charge To Meet Rule
A.T.&amp; T. said yesterday that because of new accounting rules for retirees' health costs, it planned to take a one-time charge of as much as $7.5 billion in the first quarter of 1993, making a large loss inevitable for all of 1993.
Under the old industry accounting rules, companies did not have to report the likely financial effect of retiree health benefits, whose costs have grown rapidly in the last decade.
A.T.&amp; T. estimates that retirement benefits paid out in 1990 totaled $450 million, including those for the NCR Corporation, which A.T.&amp; T. bought earlier this year.


Publishing Group Sold
Patricof &amp; Company Ventures Inc. said it had sold Parenting Unlimited Inc., publisher of a group of magazines, to Time Warner Inc.'s Time Publishing Venture unit.
Terms were not disclosed.
Parenting Unlimited publishes Baby Talk; Baby on the Way; Basics, and Get Ready for Baby.


Economic Scene; Radio Waves Can Be Solid Gold
WANT to earn big money in your spare time?
You might take a flier on a sure-fire cold fusion stock recommended by that nice young broker on the telephone from Fort Lauderdale.
Or you could really strike it rich by doing what hundreds of lucky millionaires have done: enter one of Washington's bizarre lotteries for licenses to use the airwaves.
For years, economists have gnashed their teeth over the policy of giving away stunningly valuable rights to use the radio spectrum.
And for years, those who already control commercial licenses have successfully defended their sinecures by fending off attempts to end the giveaway.


High Interest Holds Up House of Credit Cards; Plastic Withdrawal
To the Editor:
I'm no economist, but I notice contradictions in "The Senate's Credit Card Blunder" (editorial, Nov. 20).


Maxwell Empire Is Near Collapse As Son Discloses Far Higher Debts
The publishing empire of the late Robert Maxwell seemed on the brink of collapse today as one of his sons disclosed that the debts of its private family-owned businesses were far greater than previously estimated, raising the prospect that the family would lose control of its vast holdings.
The Maxwell family's holdings are clustered into three spheres, two of which are publicly traded companies that the Maxwells control.
The third company is a collection of private companies and trusts controlled by the Maxwell family, and it owns, among other things, The Daily News in New York.


Into a Statistical Exile: the G.N.P.
At a time when no morsel of fresh information on the economy seems too exotic to be gobbled up by political interpreters, the Commerce Department is about to provide a feast.
On Wednesday the Government will begin emphasizing the gross domestic product instead of the gross national product as its most widely followed measure of the economy's performance.


EXECUTIVES
*
Calvin Klein Cosmetics Co., New York, a unit of Unilever United States Inc., the Unilever Group's holding company for businesses in the United States, named Suzanne Cassano vice president of marketing. *
Merck &amp; Co., Rahway, N.J., named Gerald S. Levey, M.D., senior vice president-medical and scientific affairs of its human health division.


Stocks Surge in Tokyo
Prices were up sharply on the Tokyo Stock Exchange today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 502.61 points, or 2.27 percent, to 22,669.44.
The index rose 174.54 points on Tuesday.


Fallen Crane on Tracks in Bronx Interrupts Metro-North Service


Goodrich Is Shutting 3 Vinyl Resin Plants
The B. F. Goodrich Company, citing adverse economic conditions, said yesterday that it planned to shut three plants that make vinyl resin, resulting in the layoffs of about 225 workers and a $117.8 million pretax charge against fourth-quarter earnings.
Goodrich, a leading producer of plastics and specialty chemicals, said the shutdowns would occur over the next two years.


Jets' Young Looking Forward To Getting Back Into Action
It doesn't matter to Lonnie Young that the Jets' playoff hopes got dimmer with their 24-13 loss to the Buffalo Bills on Sunday.
It doesn't matter that those hopes don't look any brighter with the Jets on the road for two of their remaining three games, the final home game of the season against New England sandwiched in between this Sunday's matchup against Barry Sanders and the Detroit Lions and the season finale at Miami.


Burmese Dissident's Spouse Seeks Verification on Letters
The husband of the Nobel Peace Prize laureate who has been under house arrest in Myanmar for more than two years has asked the Foreign Secretary of the Philippines, who is visiting the country formerly called Burma, to verify that his wife may now receive letters from him.
Last Wednesday, the Prime Minister of Thailand, Anand Panyarachun, said that officials in Myanmar had told him that Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, who won the Nobel Prize for her opposition to the military regime in her country, could begin receiving letters from her family on condition that they be sent unsealed.


Sununu as Symbol; Departure of Embattled Chief of Staff Removes Convenient Target of Critics
By at least indirectly soliciting and then promptly accepting John H. Sununu's resignation, President Bush sought today to halt his slide in the opinion polls, to mute criticism of his domestic and economic policies or lack thereof, and to clear the decks at last for his re-election campaign.
For all Mr.
Sununu's reputed arrogance and abrasiveness, for all his carelessness about appearances, even his bitterest enemies conceded that the chief of staff was not responsible for all of the manifold ills that have plagued Mr.
Bush recently.
But symbols often have to suffice when substantive change is too difficult or too slow in coming, and scapegoats are useful symbols to troubled Presidents.


Bridge
Several players who have won world champioships failed to reach the final of the Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams at the Fall Nationals in Inadianpolis during the weekend.
Of the 13 former world champions who did advance to that stage, only three made a serious challenge for the title, placing third.
They were George Rapee, who won the Bermuda Bowl in 1950, 1951 and 1953, John Solodar and Russ Arnold, who won the same title as teammates a decade ago.
Their teammates this time were players who have been strong contenders on the international scene in the past two years: Tony Forrester and Andy Robson of Britain, who played for Britain in the Bermuda Bowl event two months ago in Yokohama, Japan, and Michael Seamon, who was in the world team final a year ago in Geneva.


The 'Lemmies' Honor Dubious Achievement
It was not exactly with modesty that many of yesterday's winners of the seventh annual Harlan Page Hubbard Lemon Awards said they would rather not have won such an honor.
At a ceremony in Washington, a group of national consumer, environmental and health advocate organizations named 10 advertisers that created the "most misleading, unfair or irresponsible" advertising campaigns of the year.


Helmick Resigns from I.O.C.
Robert Helmick, the former president of the United States Olympic Committee, resigned today as a member of the International Olympic Committee in Lausanne Switzerland.
The action came as the I.O.C. was concluding an invesitgation into Helmick's business practice as the U.S.O.C president, a position he had held from 1985 through last September.
He resigned that position in the face of mounting pressure over his business practices.
An investigation by the U.S.O.C., which concluded two weeks ago, determined that Helmick had violated those provisions of the committee's bylaws governing conflict of interest.
In the wake of acknowledgements by Helmick that he served as a consultant to companies seeking to expand their ties to the Olympics, the I.O.C. began its own investigation of the matter.
It was widely expected that the results of the investigation would lead to a request that Helmick resign.
Rather than await the outcome of a report, expected to be delivered to the I.O.C executive board today or tomorrow, Helmick notified the I.O.C in Lausanne, Switzerland that he would step down.
Helmick, a 54-year-old attorney from Des Moines, Iowa, is a former president of the international swimming federation.
With the I.O.C., he became a member of the executive board in 1989.
He is one of the two members from the United States on the I.O.C.
As a country that has hosted the Olympics, the United States is entitled to two I.O.C. members.
It is unclear who would replace Helmick.


Miami Coach At Grand Jury
A Federal inquiry into financial-aid fraud in the University of Miami athletic program, started more than five months ago, came back into focus today when the university's head football coach, Dennis Erickson, answered questions for more than half an hour for a Federal grand jury.
Erickson, whose team is 11-0, was the fourth university staff witness of the day.


Baby's Nanny Set Fatal Fire, Police Charge
A 20-year-old woman from Switzerland was charged today with murder and arson in the death of the 3-month-old girl she had been hired to care for.
The police said that the woman, Olivia Riner, who had been in the United States only a month to work as an au pair, set three fires on the ground floor using a flammable liquid and poured the liquid directly on the baby girl, Kristie Fischer.
The police said Ms.
Riner told them she had tried to extinguish at least one fire, then called the fire department and the infant's father, William, who was at work.


Madeleine Martin, Artist, 69
Madeleine Martin, an artist and founder of the Peter and Madeleine Martin Foundation for the Creative Arts, died on Saturday in San Francisco.
She was 69 years old and had homes in San Francisco and Fair Harbor, L.I.
She died of liver disease, her brother, Nelson Doubleday, said.


Independent Ukraine Keeps Sight of Cooperation
The backyard roosters glared and crowed proud as ever this morning but seemed no match for the residents of this dirt-road hamlet as they took stock of the stirring new notion of an independent Ukraine being recognized as such by other nations.
"So, Yeltsin recognizes Ukraine as free?" said Vera Melnik, a pensioned grandmother, focusing on the really important piece of the news about recognition from abroad.


Prison for Huey Newton Killer
A 27-year-old man was sentenced today to 32 years in prison for killing Huey P. Newton, co-founder of the Black Panther Party.
The body of Mr.
Newton, 47, shot three times in the head, was found Aug. 22, 1989, in an impoverished Oakland neighborhood known for drug dealing.
The defendant, Tyrone Robinson, said he had shot Mr.
Newton in self-defense, but prosecutors contended that he had wanted to bolster his standing with a prison gang.


Larger Number Of New Mothers Are Unmarried
The Census Bureau reported today that increasing numbers of new mothers are unmarried, and it said the trend was particularly marked among teen-agers.
The report shows that nearly one of every four women who had a child in the last year -- 913,000 of 3.9 million women -- was not married.
More than two-thirds of the teen-agers who had babies last year were unmarried, and among black teen-agers having babies, only 10 percent were married, the Census Bureau reported.


British Keep Hard Line On Europe's Integration
In diplomatic maneuvering leading to the crucial summit conference next week on the future of Europe, Britain has staked out what is by now a familiar position: it is digging in its heels on key proposals to shape a closer monetary and political union with their European Community partners.
In Brussels today, Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd even speculated that differences between Britain and the rest of the European Community on the details of a possible political union remained so great that a deal may be out of reach when the leaders of 12 European nations sit down together in the Netherlands on Monday and Tuesday.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 12 about the artist Christo reversed the numbers of umbrellas erected at two sites in his recent work "Umbrellas Joint Project for Japan and U.S.A." There were 1,760 yellow umbrellas in California and 1,340 blue umbrellas in Japan.


Public &amp; Private; Trials and Truth
The statements are damning.
One woman says he threw her over a couch and pinned her to the floor, using his weight to hold her supine.
Another said he had a "ferocious . . . almost animal like kind of look to him" as she tried to push him off while he penetrated her.
A third remembers an ordinary conversation in his parents' apartment when suddenly he tackled her: ". . . he put all his weight on me, and he tried to kiss me and he put his hands on my breasts and up my dress."


The Pop Life
Linda Ronstadt's Songs
Linda Ronstadt, who has taken a number of artistic risks in her career, has once again defied conventional commercial wisdom and released her second album of Mexican mariachi songs sung in Spanish.


Esther Lloyd-Jones, Retired Professor, 90
Esther McDonald Lloyd-Jones, a retired professor of education at Teachers College of Columbia University, died on Nov. 25 at her home in Millbrook, N.Y.
She was 90 years old.
She died of cancer, said a Teachers College spokesman, Roy Campbell.


Once More, Germany Tries to Obliterate an Uncomfortable Past; Neo-Nazi Gains
To the Editor:
The rise of the neo-Nazis in Germany, which you discuss in "The Neo-Nazis: How Quickly They Remember" (The Week in Review, Nov. 17), should not come as a surprise.


Corrections
An obituary on Nov. 9 about the cellist and performance artist Charlotte Moorman misattributed three works she performed.
"Cello Sonata No. 1 for Adults Only," "TV Bra for Living Sculpture" and "Global Groove" were all by Nam June Paik, not by Ms.
Moorman.


High Interest Holds Up House of Credit Cards
To the Editor:
In "The Senate's Credit Card Blunder" (editorial, Nov. 20), you join those denouncing efforts to reduce interest rates on credit cards.
Amazingly, in the public debate over whether or not to cap interest rates on bank and retail credit cards, there seems little acknowledgment that interest rates on credit cards are too high now and have been too high for a decade.


Intractable Trade Issues With Japan
For nearly a decade, Japan and the United States have labored to bridge their economic differences through a series of unusually intense trade negotiations.
Despite occasional bitterness on both sides, they shared a belief that only a few barriers stood in the way of an even deeper economic alliance from which the whole world would benefit.
Now, however, there is a growing belief that some of those differences may be irreconcilable.
For the first time since these former enemies bound their destinies together after World War II, there is a sense that the world's two largest economies are drifting apart.


Raising the Stakes For New York Wine
WITH a little imagination, a visitor standing in front of Millbrook Vineyards' Dutch barn-style winery can see over the undulating Dutchess County hills and across the Hudson River to the spot where French Huguenots planted the region's first vines in 1677.
The Huguenots were, alas, a bit premature.
It took almost 300 years for the Hudson Valley to get its wine act together, and the current group of vintners have no intention of going under like the Huguenots.


FLIES TO GERMANY
Alann Steen, one of the two remaining American hostages in Lebanon, was freed today and handed over to American officials in Damascus after nearly five years in captivity.
He was released as news reports here and in the Lebanese capital quoted unidentified sources as saying that the last American hostage, Terry A. Anderson, could be freed as early as Wednesday.


Fund Shift in New York Could Hold Fare to $1.30
Transit officials say they have found a way to hold down the increase in the New York City subway and bus fare by taking money from the commuter railroads.
The proposal would limit the fare increase in the city to 15 cents, raising the current $1.15 fare to $1.30.
Transit officials have been saying for months that some fare increase on Jan. 1 is inevitable.


Putting Conservation in the Shower
In a combination of "green" marketing and German hydraulics, Teledyne Water Pik has developed an environmentally correct version of its aging Water Pik shower head.
Water Pik, a unit of Teledyne Inc., says it is the largest manufacturer of shower heads in the United States.
Its updated product, the company says, offers a "high performance" shower while conforming to new water-conservation standards.


In the Salary Standings, Mets Making Big Progress
The Mets next season will pay Bobby Bonilla, Dwight Gooden and Eddie Murray more money than either the Houston Astros or the Cleveland Indians paid their entire teams this year.
"They'll pay Murray and Bonilla just about more than I'll pay my whole team next year," John McMullen, the Astros' owner, said yesterday, obviously disgusted with the continued escalation of player salaries as exemplifed by the free-agent contracts the Mets have given Murray (two years, $7.5 million) and Bonilla (five years, $29 million).


Philip S. Pepe, Author, 80
Philip S. Pepe, an author of books about typewriting, died on Thursday at the Wesley-on-East retirement community in Rochester, where he had lived for four years.
He was 80 years old and had previously lived in Blue Bell, Pa.
He died of complications from Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


2 Bronx Men Are Charged With Murder In Death of 4
Two Bronx men were arrested yesterday and charged with the execution-style murders of two children and two women in a Brooklyn apartment Saturday night, the police said.
One of the women and one of the children "just happened to be visiting," said Capt.
Richard Ward, commander of Brooklyn's 12th Detective Division, when the killers forced their way into the apartment, took one woman into one bedroom, the other woman and the children into another bedroom, and then fired more than 15 shots.


Bonilla Gives the Mets a Whole New Outlook
Jeff Torborg, the manager of the Mets, said there were sheets upon sheets with lineups upon lineups on the floor of his office yesterday.
Amid it all, though, there was only a single truth.
"The lineup for the Mets with Bobby Bonilla is a whole lot better than the one without him," said Torborg.


A Men's Fragrance Responds to the Winds of Change
THOUGH it is often overshadowed by its better-publicized rivals, Drakkar Noir is one of the country's best-selling men's fragrances.
Still, in response to rising competition and rapidly changing consumer attitudes, its maker is overhauling the brand's advertising.
Cosmair Inc., owned by the French cosmetics giant L'Oreal S.A., is introducing revamped television commercials and print advertisements by McCann-Erickson New York.
A $10 million campaign begins tomorrow in 45 large markets across the country, timed to arrive at the start of the key holiday fragrance-buying season.


Cubs Sign Morgan For $12.5 Million
Mike Morgan, who has a 67-104 career record and just completed his first winning season, agreed last night to a $12.5 million, four-year contract with the Chicago Cubs.
Morgan, 32 years old, was 14-10 in 1991 with a 2.78 earned run average for the Los Angeles Dodgers, then became a free agent.
Having made $650,000 last season, he now gets a $1.5 million signing bonus, $2.5 million in 1992, $3 million in 1993, $2.5 million in 1994 and $3 million in 1995.


Sports of The Times; Beast of the Knicks Dusts Off the Bean
AS the Giants and the Jets stumble, their playoff chances growing ever bleaker, New York fans turn their lonely eyes to the Knicks, with particular focus on Patrick Ewing, the Beast of the East.
"Beast, Beast, Beast!" shouted Gerald Wilkins, free at the top of the key, while Ewing, in the low post Saturday was being double-teamed by the Pistons.
Ewing passed the ball out to Wilkins, who hit a jump shot.
It was one more nail in the Detroit coffin as the Knicks, with Ewing scoring 45 points and giving out 4 assists, came back from an 18-point deficit in the second period to win, 103-96.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY T.A. WEIGHS PLAN FOR $1.30 FARE
Three weeks after saying they would have to raise bus and subway fares 25 cents to $1.40 without new money from City Hall or Albany, transit officials said they had found a way to hold down the increase to 15 cents.
The proposal, one of several under consideration, would involve shifting $90 million from the commuter railroads.
Proponents say the plan would restore the sensitive political balance between the city and its suburbs.
A1.
BRINKSMANSHIP AT CUNY
Seeking to put pressure on City Hall, the City University is threatening to halt admission to its seven community colleges this spring unless proposed budget cuts are restored.
B3.


Milken's Brother Barred
The New York Stock Exchange yesterday barred Michael R. Milken's brother for refusing to testify in the exchange's investigation of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
The Big Board said Lowell Milken, who worked alongside his brother at Drexel's Beverly Hills, Calif., junk bond division, did not respond to two requests to testify before the exchange in March.
Michael Milken is now serving a prison term for securities-law violations.
The exchange barred Lowell Milken from working for any member Big Board firm until he testifies in the investigation.
He had been barred in March from working in the securities industry as part of a settlement of civil charges with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


New Pact for Luginbill
Saying it was important to have continuity, San Diego State has given Coach AL LUGINBILL, rumored to be a candidate for the vacant position at Arizona State, a contract extension through 1996.
Luginbill succeeded DENNY STOlZ three years ago and has led the Aztecs to a record of 20-13-2. (AP)


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
The Maxwell publishing empire seemed on the brink of collapse with the disclosure that the debts of its family-owned businesses were far greater than previously estimated.  [ Page A1. ]  Kevin Maxwell sent word to employees of The Daily News that the paper would not be affected by his decision to resign as chairman of Maxwell Communication.  [ D6. ]
There is a growing belief that some of the economic differences between Japan and the U.S. may be irreconcilable.  [ D1. ]


Florida Passer's Surgery
Florida quarterback SHANE MATTHEWS underwent arthroscopic knee surgery yesterday to repair cartilage damage.
"Everything went as good as can be expected," said the team physician, Dr.
PETE INDELICATO.
"Shane will immediately begin his rehabilitation process." Indelicato said he was "cautiously optimistic" that Matthews would recover sufficiently to play in the Sugar Bowl on New Year's Night. (AP)


Viola's Agent Critical of Mets
The agent for Frank Viola said yesterday that he thought the Mets were actively fueling rumors that the left-handed pitcher was "damaged goods." The agent said he thought the Mets were trying to limit interest in the free agent, and perhaps force Viola to ultimately accept a less lucrative deal with the Mets.
"I am angered that Frank Cashen is spreading the word that Frank Viola is damaged goods because of the bone spurs in his elbow," said Craig Fenech, the agent for Viola.
"It's not true, and he knows it."


Pepsi, Lipton Form Venture
Pepsi-Cola, the nation's second-largest soft-drink company, and the Thomas J. Lipton Company, the country's biggest tea company, yesterday announced a new venture to develop and market tea-based beverages.
The joint venture, which will begin in January, will also expand distribution of existing Lipton ready-to-drink products through Pepsi bottlers, the companies said.


Topics of The Times; El Al D'Amato
Two versions of a letter sent out by Senator Alfonse D'Amato, Republican of New York, during the Persian Gulf war have now come to light.
Both versions were mailed to constituents at taxpayer expense and began with the words "Dear Fellow American."
One version went on to say, "I am writing you on an airplane returning from the Middle East." The version sent to many Jewish constituents said, "I am writing to you on an El Al flight returning from Israel." The general letter raged against the Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein.
The version geared to Jewish supporters emphasized U.S.-Israeli relations and referred to Israel a dozen times.


Court Considers States' Power to Fine U.S. Agency
The State of Ohio argued before the United States Supreme Court this afternoon that the Department of Energy should pay fines the way anybody else would for dumping radioactive and chemical poisons from a bomb plant into rivers and letting other wastes leak into the soil.
But the Bush Administration argued that it made no sense for the Federal Government to fine itself, despite the fact that environmental laws, designed to be enforced by the states, have been rewritten by Congress to cover Federally owned plants.


Suit Over Warhol's Death to Begin Today
Nearly five years after Andy Warhol died in New York Hospital, the survivors and estate of the 58-year-old Pop artist will argue today in State Supreme Court in Manhattan that his death was wrongful and caused by a series of medical mistakes that were covered up by the hospital.


As Annual Price War Begins, Caviar Business Is in Turmoil
THE cold war may be over but the annual caviar war is flaring up again.
Macy's and Zabar's are sniping at each other's bottom lines on beluga.
In the next few weeks, the price for a 14-ounce container of this most prized grade of sturgeon eggs is likely to fall well below last year's price of just under $400.
This year, there is also plenty of undercover maneuvering worthy of John le Carre.
The breaking up of the Soviet Union has thrown a once orderly business into turmoil.
Lack of central government control there has opened the door for all kinds of entrepreneurs: on the fishing boats, in the processing plants and in the marketplace.


Just the Ticket For Armchair Trips
IF cookbooks are anything to go by, Americans are almost insatiably curious about the foods and food ways of other parts of the world.
Maybe the motley of American ethnic backgrounds is responsible for the appeal of other places, or maybe it's just dissatisfaction with the familiar and a longing for something exotic to spice up these dreary times.
Certainly it's a lot cheaper, often a lot more satisfying, too, to settle down for some armchair travel with one or more of the current crop of books -- as long as the armchair is conveniently set next to a stove so you can try out a recipe or two.
Among the offerings this holiday season, the armchair adventurer-cook can trek to South America with the late Felipe Rojas-Lombardi, to Greece with Rosemary Barron and Turkey with Ayla Algar, to Vietnam with Binh Duong and to Thailand with Vatcharin Bhumichitr.
Go even farther afield with a nonrecipe book about food, Raymond Sokolov's entertaining discourse on the effects of Columbus on Old and New World foods.
If all that sounds too exotic, France, always high on cooks' and diners' priority lists, is well represented among the new books, and there are even a couple of offerings from the South and the Midwest for unregenerate stay-at-homes.


Bronx Slaying Is Linked to 2-Year-Old Trail of Violence
A fatal shooting at the Bronx home of a murder witness early Monday has been linked to a web of deadly violence growing out of a fight over a girl in an armory party two years ago, investigators said yesterday.
"We're talking about a lot of shootings over two years," said one law-enforcement official who spoke on condition of anonymity, citing the sensitivity of the investigation.


The Tuberculosis Counterattack
New York's tuberculosis epidemic poses immediate threats to public health and public finances.
It can be effectively met with familiar public health practices; expanding them on the necessary scale requires a coordinated response from Albany and City Hall.
Between 1950 and 1978, New York State's investment in tuberculosis prevention and treatment reduced the number of cases from more than 12,000 to 2,060.
Public health officials began giving more resources to AIDS and substance abuse.


A Report Finds Many Students Not Immunized
Many children who entered the New York City school system this year have not been tested for tuberculosis or inoculated against other diseases because of problems in a city program that gives medical examinations to students, the city's Comptroller's office said yesterday.
The program, run by the city's Health Department, was supposed to examine about 48,000 new students at the start of the school year.
But the Comptroller's office said in a report that because of financial constraints the program would take almost the full school year to complete the job.


Wine Talk
THERE are vintages in wine books just as there are in wine.
The flowering comes in early spring, when the first delicate press releases appear.
The galleys follow soon afterward, just in time to while away the hours stuck in summer traffic.
Later, a good-sized galley is just the thing to hold open a window at the beach house.
In fall, at harvest time, the finished books arrive: hard covers, numbered pages and, look, real pictures ("Funny, from the text I thought she was much younger").


In Harlem, Cake Man Creates
Cake Man Raven, as Raven P. D. Dennis 3d is known professionally, has been up all night, blasting gospel tapes in his Harlem kitchen and baking cakes, and more cakes.
A chocolate poundcake for Mildred Heyward to take to Sunday dinner at the St.
Luke African Methodist Episcopal Church on Amsterdam Avenue, where she and Mr.
Dennis both sing in the choir.
A birthday cake in the shape of a doll for Sarah Anderson of the Bronx, who is about to turn 6.
A spongecake with a stork sculpted out of icing for the baby shower Sheryl Yarborough is giving her niece, Lisa Smothers, at her home in Harlem.


Review/Film; Jeremy Irons as the Writer With a Day Job
Steven Soderbergh's "Kafka" is a very bad well-directed movie.
The film, the director's first since making his splashy debut with "Sex, Lies and Videotape," opens a one-week engagement today at the Cinema 2 to qualify for the Academy Awards.


Leading Indicators Barely Rose in October
The Government's main economic forecasting index edged up one-tenth of 1 percent in October, the third straight month of essentially flat performance after a string of solid advances from February through July.
The result was still more evidence that whatever recovery began to take shape this summer may be about to disappear -- or may have vanished already.
The index of leading indicators, which failed to predict the onset of the recession that began in July 1990, has been viewed by some as having become more useful as a gauge of current economic activity than as a predictor.


As the Ruble Plummets, Hard Currency Is King
For a measure of the madness bedeviling Soviet consumers and business in the twilight of Communism, consider the Soviet ruble.
Today, its value plummeted again, by almost 50 percent.
A little while ago, a dollar was worth 32 rubles; a day ago, it was worth 47 rubles.
Today, after a decree that allowed banks to trade hard currency freely, Vneshekonombank, the Foreign Economic Bank, said it would exchange 90 rubles to the dollar, effectively making the ruble worth a little more than a penny.


Sports of The Times; The Mets' $29 Million Investment
NOW that Bobby Bonilla is baseball's highest-salaried player with a five-year, $29 million Mets contract, the question is: can he possibly be worth the investment?
Maybe not at first.
With all that money, Bonilla might be susceptible to the burden of every expensive free agent: trying too hard to prove he's worth it.
In the free-agent era, that burden has affected just about every slugger in his first few months with a new team, from Reggie Jackson with the Yankees in 1977 to Darryl Strawberry with the Dodgers last season.


Using the Recession As a Selling Tool
Grace &amp; Rothschild, New York, is using the recession as a selling pitch for its client Range Rover vehicles.
"Buy something," is the headline of a print advertisement scheduled to appear in USA Today and other publications starting next Tuesday.
The ad goes on: "Our preference, of course, would be that you buy a Range Rover. But if that's not in the cards, buy a microwave. A basset hound. Theater tickets. Because if we all wait for the recession to be officially declared over to start spending again, the problem will simply keep feeding on itself."


Florio Backer Wants to Void Tax Package
One of the leading proponents of Gov.
Jim Florio's $2.8 billion tax package, Senator Laurence S. Weiss, said today that he would introduce five bills this week to rescind the entire package.
Mr.
Weiss, the Democratic chairman of the Senate Revenue, Finance and Appropriations Committee, also said his panel will hold a public hearing on the repeal plan next week.
"The voters sent a clear and resounding message rejecting last year's tax increases," said Mr.
Weiss, a four-term legislator who was defeated Nov. 5 in his largely Democratic district in Woodbridge.
"Lawmakers should be responsive to public sentiment by fully exploring the feasibility of repealing the new taxes."


Stocks Mostly Up, but Dow Is Off a Bit as Blue Chips Lag
Stocks ended yesterday's session mostly higher in narrow trading, but blue chips lagged behind the rest of the market, as the Dow Jones industrial average slipped 5.82 points, to 2,929.56.
Blue chips erased opening losses to move up, before slipping back in choppy trading for most of the session.
Traders said some investors were encouraged by a report that new-home sales for October rose slightly more than expected.


Champagne Suit Is Settled
A WINERY in the Finger Lakes region of New York, sued by 11 Champagne producers, has agreed to stop using the name Chateau de Rheims on its sparkling wine and to refrain from using the name of any French city or geographical area on its products.
Under the settlement registered in Federal District Court in Rochester in October, the DeMay Wine Cellars, in Hammondsport, also agreed to sell or otherwise dispose of its 10,000-bottle inventory of wine bearing the trademark by the end of last month.
Neither Phillippe Guermonprez, DeMay's owner, nor Frederick H. Ahrens Jr., his lawyer, returned calls yesterday to learn whether this was done.


W.B.A. Vacates a Title
The World Boxing Association vacated the middleweight title held for the last two years by MIKE MCCALLUM of Jamaica because the fighter had violated association rules, the organization said yesterday from its headquarters in Panama City.
The W.B.A. called on the two top challengers, STEVE COLLINS of Ireland and REGGIE JOHNSON of the United States, to fight for the title.
The two have 30 days to arrange a bout.


Computer Executives Seek Broader Federal Support
In what may be the next battle over Government support for a specific industry, a dozen top computer executives asked the Bush Administration today to broaden its current efforts to develop technology for a nationwide high-speed computing network.
At a news conference led by the chief executives of Apple Computer, Hewlett-Packard and Cray Research, the group said Federal programs were too narrowly focused on linking high-speed computers at leading research centers.
A better focus, they said, would be to develop the technologies to make advanced computer services widely accessible.


Salmon Return to an Old Spawning Spot, Two Centuries Later
It might not seem like earth-shattering news that salmon were seen spawning in Connecticut's Salmon River this fall, but to fisheries biologists, anglers and environmentalists, the sighting has assumed a profound symbolic importance because Atlantic salmon had virtually disappeared from southern New England rivers two centuries ago.
"Since our salmon-recovery program began in the 1960's, we've seen individual salmon on the Connecticut River as far up river as Vermont, but we've never before seen a male and female together spawning," said Ted F. Meyers, a United States Fish and Wildlife Service official who oversees the program to bring salmon back to the 410-mile-long river and its tributaries, including the Salmon River.


The Keating Shuffle
To the Editor:
"The Keating One Hundred" (editorial, Nov. 21) states: "Two years after five senators were caught red-handed browbeating Federal regulators on behalf of Charles Keating, a big political giver, the Senate administered a flogging yesterday to the most guilty of the Keating Five."


Shift at Pacific Enterprises
Pacific Enterprises, a holding company for a large utility and a retailing operation in Southern California, said today that its 54-year-old chairman and chief executive, James R. Ukropina, has resigned for health reasons.
Pacific's board named Willis B. (Bill) Wood Jr., the company president, to the additional post of chief executive but it did not fill the chairman's position.


Review/Piano; Shura Cherkassky, Last of the Romantics
Ten years ago, on the occasion of his 70th birthday, Shura Cherkassky told me in an interview that he found recordings cold-blooded: objective, calculated, frozen.
But Mr.
Cherkassky, as anyone knows who has heard the pianist since his American career belatedly blossomed in 1976, is just the opposite: impulsive, whimsical, heated.
This is partly why he is often thought of as the last Romantic.
His playing recalls an era before pianists heard themselves, when virtuosity meant acrobatics without a net and individuality was the only authenticity.
In an exuberantly eccentric concert on Monday night in Carnegie Hall, Mr.
Cherkassky, who was celebrating his 80th birthday, still seemed the last survivor of the ante-recording age.
No cold-blooded playing here.
This was an extraordinary demonstration of pianism: anything could happen, and sometimes anything did.
The program included hyphenated compositions once common to the Romantic piano recital: Bach-Busoni (Busoni's magisterial transcription of the D-minor Chaconne), and Tchaikovsky-Pabst (the 19th-century German pianist Paul Pabst's paraphrase of themes from "Eugene Onegin").
But so impulsively improvisatory and indulgently whimsical was the playing that everything should have been hyphenated yet again to include the pianist's name.


Texas College System Awaits Ruling in Hispanic Bias Case
In a case similar to those brought by black groups in Mississippi and Tennessee, a Texas judge is expected to rule this month on whether the state's public university system discriminates against Hispanic students.
The Texas lawsuit, filed in 1987 by the Mexican-American Legal Defense and Education Fund charges that state officials, through uneven state appropriations to universities, deprived the public universities nearer the Mexico border, where the student population is largely Hispanic, of a fair share of state resources.


Tapping the Young for Messages to Their Peers
By blending the conventional wisdom of advertising executives with the creative impulses of young minds, a Boston-based advertising agency has generated award-winning public interest advertisements that have been appearing this fall.
In one newspaper advertisement, the young people wrote the slogan, "If you thought the marks you made in school were bad, just look at the ones you'll make in a gang." The message is sprawled above a sketch of a chalk outline of a body, similar to the outlines that police officers draw around murder victims.


Bank Funds, C.D.'s Lower
Yields on certificates of deposit and bank money market accounts dropped steadily through the week, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, the publication that specializes in covering interest rates.
"Because of the certainty of even lower savings yields ahead, Citibank and other large institutions are positioning themselves by cutting passbook rates now," said Robert K. Heady, The Monitor's publisher.
"Although that account is not so rate sensitive, it represents a significant percentage of total core deposits in the banking industry.


In a Mailing, Ritter Seeks Funds to Aid India's Poor
The Rev.
Bruce Ritter, who built Covenant House into the nation's largest shelter network for runaway youngsters before resigning amid accusations of financial and sexual improprieties, is now soliciting donations for a Connecticut charity.
A spokeswoman for the New York State Attorney General's office, Leslie Gersing, said yesterday that the solicitation, first reported in The New York Post, did not violate an agreement that Father Ritter made last February with the state.
She said Father Ritter had agreed not to work as a trustee for a charitable group but was not prohibited from raising money for such an organization.


Fee Proposal Attacked at a Landmarks Hearing
Rather than cut 10 more employees from its already depleted staff, the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission has proposed raising $300,000 by imposing work-permit fees for the first time in its history.
But the plan was attacked yesterday at a commission hearing as a suicidal measure that would undermine any future regulation and designation efforts.


Wheat Up to 18-Month High After Soviets Disclose Plans
Wheat futures prices soared to an 18-month high yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after the Soviet Union earmarked about 40 percent of $1.25 billion in United States food aid for wheat.
The Soviet purchases could lower America's wheat stockpile to one of its lowest levels ever and raise wheat prices above $4.25 a bushel, analysts said.


Few Seem to Notice 'E.T.' Precedent
In one of the least noticed precedents in recent television history, a familiar scatological term appeared for the first time in a network entertainment program on Thanksgiving night, and in a most unexpected place: the movie "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial."
CBS executives said yesterday that the film's director, Steven Spielberg, had insisted that the movie, in its first appearance ever on television, run uncut and uncensored.
He was backed by Sears, which had bought broadcast rights to the film.
The CBS broadcast was labeled a "Sears Family Classic."


I.B.M., Bull Reported In Talks
I.B.M. is negotiating with Bull, France's largest computer maker, about possible cooperation in advanced microprocessor technology, a French business newspaper reported today.
According to the newspaper, La Tribune de l'Expansion, the talks might lead to an agreement by the end of the year that would give Bull access to the International Business Machines Corporation's fast RISC microprocessor technology.


Ellen Harnett Has Wedding
Ellen Regina Harnett and J. Michael Parish were married yesterday at the Terrace atop Butler Hall at Columbia University in New York.
Judge Kimba M. Wood of Federal District Court in Manhattan officiated.
The bride, 38 years old, is the executive director of the New York office of Clinical Partners Inc., which provides home care for AIDS victims.
She graduated from Lehman College and has a master's degree in public health from Tulane University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Harnett of Jupiter, Fla.


Steen, in Germany, Awaits a Reunion With Family
From now on "when the phone rings it will just be a normal call," Becky Monday said today as she celebrated the release of her father, Alann Steen, from nearly five years of captivity in Lebanon.
From now on, her friends will not have to hem and haw each time they see her, unsure whether to ask or avoid asking if she has any news from the State Department.


Cuomo Seems Closer to Decision on Running for President
Although classically cryptic, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo seemed to be accelerating toward a decision today on entering the Presidential race as he backed away from the notion that he needed a state budget solution to run.
He said he would like to compete in the New Hampshire primary but would not have to.
And he cast himself as an underdog despite polls that show him as the front-runner among Democratic contenders.
Mr.
Cuomo, who said in October that he would have to make such a decision by the end of November, entered December by suggesting that he would announce his plans in time to meet the Dec. 20 filing deadline for the New Hampshire primary.


Eagles Roll Along, and Giants Hope for a Roadblock
Give Rich Kotite some time to savor Monday night before he contemplates playing the Giants on Sunday.
"Let me think about this one," the Eagles' first-year head coach pleaded yesterday.
"You know, I don't remember if I slept this morning."


60-Minute Gourmet
JUST because my firm, colorful garden vegetables are a memory until next summer is no reason to forget about some of my favorite quick, light recipes.
In the summer, my family can't get enough variations of simple pastas with different vegetable sauces.
A request recently had me poking through the produce bin of the local supermarket, where most of the vegetables, while smaller and less vibrant looking than a few months ago, were in relatively good shape.


HOSTAGE RELEASES ARE LINKED TO U.N.
Iran said today that the release of the two American hostages within 24 hours and the expected freeing of Terry Anderson resulted from an arrangement worked out through United Nations mediation including a pledge by the United States and German governments not to retaliate against the kidnappers.
Teheran radio monitored here said the agreement was reached at secret talks in Damascus, Syria, on Saturday by Giandomenico Picco, the United Nations' special hostage negotiator.


Kenyan Leader Explains Reversal to Party
President Daniel arap Moi reversed nine years of national credo today, delivering two speeches to members of his ruling party explaining his decision to allow multiparty politics in this East African nation.
"From today, everyone is allowed to register their party," declared Mr.
Moi, to cheers of the delegates, many like the President wearing red shirts, the uniform of the ruling party, the Kenya African National Union.
"Let the opposition go and get the mandate from the people. They will get zero."


Jerome J. Donovan, Executive, 51
Jerome J. Donovan, a regional executive of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company offices in New Jersey and New York, died on Saturday at the Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 51 years old and lived in Princeton.
He died of stomach cancer, said a Merrill Lynch spokesman, Fred Yager.


Chief of Domino Sugar Will Retire as of Jan. 1
The Domino Sugar Corporation, the country's largest refiner of cane sugar, announced yesterday that Jack F. Lay would retire as president and chief executive, effective Jan. 1.
Mr.
Lay, 62, said his decision to retire after nearly 40 years with Domino comes at a time of near-record sales for the company.
The New York-based company had annual sales of $850 million in 1991.


Downpours Cause Flooding in Four States


The U.N. Today
General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Kimberly, Times Sell Mill Operation
The Kimberly-Clark Corporation and The New York Times Company completed the sale of the Spruce Falls Power and Paper Company, their former joint venture based in the northern Ontario town of Kapuskasing.
The Spruce Falls power plant on the Mattagami River about 50 miles from Kapuskasing was sold to Ontario Hydro, the state-owned public utility, for approximately $125 million, netting the two companies about $93 million after taxes.


Japan Weighs Peacekeeper Role
Japan moved a step today toward sending military forces abroad for the first time since World War II as the lower house of Parliament approved a bill calling for Japanese participation in United Nations peacekeeping forces.
The measure, backed by Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, still has to be approved by the opposition-controlled upper house of Parliament.
At present, it commands a majority of votes there, but the Socialist and Communist Parties have threatened to disrupt the proceedings to prevent its passage.


CHRONICLE
Vice President DAN QUAYLE, whose obfuscations have made news in the past, has received a Golden Bull award from a British organization, the Plain English Campaign, for what it deemed an incomprehensible remark.
The prize was announced on Monday at a ceremony at Marylebone Council House in London.
Prizes also went to eight corporations whose public pronouncements were judged to be fuzzy.


Smith Accuser Was 'Very Shook Up' After Incident, Her Friend Testifies
The woman who has accused William K. Smith of raping her last March was "hysterical" and "very shook up" immediately after the incident, the friend whom she summoned to the Kennedy estate told a Florida jury yesterday.
"She was literally shaking and she looked messed up, her hair and makeup was running," the witness, Anne Mercer, told the prosecutor on the second day of Mr.
Smith's sexual battery trial in Palm Beach County Circuit Court.
"She said she had been raped." Moments later, the witness added, she encountered a "disheveled" Mr.
Smith and asked him how he could have done what he did.
His response, she said, was simply to shrug his shoulders.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Nelson Mandela's visit to New York City referred incorrectly to the security agents with him.
They were from the State Department, not the Secret Service.


CHRONICLE
Another occupant of City Hall, former Mayor JOHN V. LINDSAY, is scheduled to be back there, albeit briefly, this afternoon for the presentation of the 19th annual MOLLIE PARNIS Dress Up Your Neighborhood awards to 56 volunteer organizations.
Miss Parnis, the fashion designer, donates $50,000 a year for the prizes, which are given to groups that improve the appearance of their surroundings, often by planting gardens.
The awards are now sponsored by the Citizens Committee for New York City.


The Art of Car Styling Adapts to Computers
Auto makers have long embraced computers to help shave months from the design and production cycle for new models.
But many car stylists -- the artists whose daydreams are realized in sheet metal and steel -- have resisted the technology for fear that replacing their sketch pads with computer screens will dull their creativity.
Lately, however, software has been developed that offers speed and image-making capabilities better attuned to artistic demands.
Detroit's auto makers, in particular, have special incentives to speed up their stylists and pare their design cycles closer to the shorter turnaround times of Japanese car makers.


Gorbachev Warns Soviets About 'Crisis of Statehood'
While Ukraine reveled in its freshly affirmed independence, an unusually dejected President Mikhail S. Gorbachev issued a grim warning today to his compatriots of the fate they face if the union falls apart.
In a statement to the republics' parliaments and an address televised nationwide, Mr.
Gorbachev argued that "without any exaggeration the country is threatened, the fatherland is threatened, and the greatest danger is the crisis of statehood."


The President's Man
John Sununu's resignation as White House chief of staff may swiftly improve President Bush's image and tattered relations with Congress.
It could even help his urgent effort to be seen as more sensitive to domestic needs.
But if he wishes now to be understood as changing policy, he'll have to do more than change his chief of staff.
Mr.
Sununu's departure cannot alter one unalterable fact: George Bush is the President, and Mr.
Sununu was
his
man.
Indeed, Mr.
Bush chose Mr.
Sununu in a conscious effort to assert his independence from his campaign handlers, notably James Baker, whom he named Secretary of State.
"There will be no deputy President," he told friends shortly after the 1988 election.
So he chose John Sununu -- his choice, and his alone.


Corrections
An article on Monday about President Bush's rejection of any suggestion that the United States owed Japan an apology for the dropping of atomic bombs in World War II misstated the type of plane he was flying when he was shot down in the South Pacific in 1943.
A Navy aviator during the war, Mr.
Bush was piloting a torpedo bomber, not a fighter.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.68
5.00
7.43
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.36
4.37
7.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.35
4.41
6.88
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.81
6.85
8.07
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.89
7.90
8.31
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.90
8.93
9.66
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.87
6.86
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Kellogg Stock Split
The Kellogg Company said shareholders had approved an increase in the number of authorized common shares to 330 million, from 165 million.
The move clears the way for a 2-for-1 stock split, payable to holders of record as of Dec. 4.
Each share of Kellogg stock will be worth two shares as of Wednesday.
Kellogg's shares ended the day up $2.25, to $112.125, on the Big Board.


Dinkins and Mayors Back Abortion Pill
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he and 29 other mayors from around the country had organized a coalition and written to President Bush, urging the Federal Government to allow the import and testing of RU-486, the French-made abortion pill, in the United States.
With Dr.
Etienne-Emile Baulieu, the inventor of the pill, at his side at a City Hall news conference, Mr.
Dinkins said American women were being denied access to RU-486 because "a small but loud minority of anti-choice activists have scared away" the manufacturer, Roussel Uclaf, "by threatening to boycott their products if RU-486 enters our country."


Lasmo Increases Bid for Ultramar
Lasmo P.L.C. said it was raising its offer for Ultramar P.L.C. to 317 pence a share, or $:1.18 billion, about $2.08 billion.
Lasmo is offering 23 new common shares for every 20 Ultramar shares.
There is an alternative offer of one new Lasmo share plus 40 pence cash for every Ultramar share.


French Bank in Russia
The French bank Credit Lyonnais said today that it had set up a Russian subsidiary to be called Credit Lyonnais Russie.
It said that the first branch would be opened in St.
Petersburg, where Credit Lyonnais had a branch between 1878 and 1917.


Registry of AIDS-Virus Carriers Is Begun
The New Jersey Health Department has quietly established rules requiring that those who test positive for the AIDS virus be identified and that their names and addresses be reported to a central registry.
But those who want to remain anonymous may still be tested at 17 state-designated centers.
Cases of fully developed AIDS, or acquired immune deficiency syndrome, have been reported by name in New Jersey for several years, health officials said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-18  ANOTHER U.S. HOSTAGE IS FREED
Alann Steen was freed after nearly five years of captivity in Lebanon, and there were reports that the last American hostage, Terry A. Anderson, could be freed today.
A1  Mr.
Steen's family has grown and changed in his absence.
A10  Iran asserts pledge on hostages.
A11  U.S.
MOVES TO MEND ISRAEL TIES
As Arab delegations arrived in Washington for peace talks with Israel, the Bush Administration moved on several fronts to repair frayed relations with Jersualem.
A3  Israel prepared to start a settlement where snipers killed two Jews.
A3  AS RUBLE FADES, DOLLAR IS KING
The ruble, now worth a little more than a penny, is fading as fast as the Soviet Union itself.
Everyone in Moscow wants dollars, a fact that many, particularly the older generation, find painful and embarrassing.
A1  GORBACHEV WARNS OF CHAOS
While Ukraine reveled in its freshly affirmed independence, an unusually dejected President Gorbachev issued a grim warning to his compatriots of the fate they faced if the Soviet Union fell apart.
A18  Ukrainian villagers see no conflict with Russia.
A18  MAXWELL EMPIRE SHAKEN
Bankers for the London-based publishing empire of the late Robert Maxwell said the debts of its family-owned businesses were far greater than estimated, raising the prospect that the family would lose control of its vast holdings, including The Daily News in New York.
A1  RULING ON HAITIAN EXODUS
A Federal District Court in Miami ordered U.S. officials to devise new procedures to assure that no Haitians with a legitimate fear of persecution are sent back.
A6  KHMER ROUGE LEADER TO RETURN
The Khmer Rouge leader who was attacked last week by a revenge-seeking mob in the Cambodian capital said he would return under stronger official protection.
A7  MANDELA: LIFT SANCTIONS SLOWLY
Nelson Mandela told the United Nations General Assembly that the remaining sanctions against South Africa should be relaxed in three phases linked to a political process ending white minority rule.
A9  Troops backing a former military ruler seized Togo's premier.
A8  Japan moved a step toward allowing military forces abroad.A5  Some U.S.-Japan economic differences may be irreconcilable.
D1  Kenya's leader explained his decision to allow multiple parties.
A17  Britain is digging in its heels on key proposals for European unity.
A12  An aide to Chancellor Kohl resigned over German arms shipments.
A18  National A20, B12-15  SUNUNU STEPS DOWN
John H. Sununu resigned as White House chief of staff after months of bruising political attacks in which he had become the symbol of increasing disarray in President Bush's domestic policy team.
In submitting his resignation, Mr.
Sununu said he had feared he would become "a drag" on the President's 1992 campaign.
A1  In departing, Sununu took an oblique swipe at Bush.
A1  News analysis: Clearing the decks for the '92 campaign.
B13  GRAY SKIES, BRIGHTER HORIZON
The chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers acknowledged that the economy was worse than he had expected, but said he foresaw improvement by spring.
B13  OHIO'S DAY IN COURT
In a case involving the leaky Fernald nuclear weapons plant near Cincinnati, the Supreme Court heard arguments on whether the Energy Department should pay fines for radioactive and chemical pollution.
A20  OUT OF WEDLOCK
The Census Bureau reported that increasing numbers of new mothers around the nation were unmarried and that the trend was particularly marked among teen-agers.
A20  DAY 2 IN PALM BEACH
The woman who has accused William K. Smith of raping her was "hysterical" after the incident, the friend whom she summoned to the Kennedy estate testified.
A20  'WE'RE ONE PEOPLE'
A representative of the Chukchi people of the Soviet Union visited a northwestern Alaska port to sign an agreement of cultural cooperation with Eskimos that is expected to bring the long-isolated Chukchi further into the global mainstream.
B15  BIG RECALL BY G.M.
General Motors said it would recall every Chevrolet Corsica and Beretta built from 1988 through 1990 -- a total of 830,000 cars -- to replace defective seat-belt parts that could cause injury in an accident.
B14  Noriega trial judge considered a mental exam for Lehder.
B14  Education B16  Yale University is debating the costs of academic excellence.
The government plans to issue new rules on minority scholarships.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 CURBING RISE IN FARES
By shifting money from the commuter railroads, transit officials propose to limit the increase in the New York City subway and bus fares.
A1  Neediest Cases B8  Business Digest, D1  The Living Section C1-14  Raising the stakes for New York wine.
C1  Made in Vermont: myths you can eat.
C1  Kitchen Bookshelf.
C1  Health Page C19  U.S.
DROPS AIDS RULES  The Federal Centers for Disease Control is dropping its plan to list procedures that health workers infected with the AIDS virus should not perform.
A1  Personal Health: teaching children to behave.
C19  Arts/Entertainment C20-28  Film: "Kafka." C21  Music: Cherkassky piano recital.
C21  Word and Image: Book Notes C21  An update on research into mental disorders.
C21  Suspense novels set in Moscow and Washington.
C25  Gumbel signs new contract with "Today." C26  Sports B17-23  Baseball: Bonilla gives Mets new outlook.
B17  Bronx kid makes very, very good.
B18  Basketball: Nets beat 76ers.
B21  Orangemen rout Seminoles.
B21  Columns: Anderson on Bonilla.
B17  On Baseball.
B18  Football: Jets' Young looking forward to playing again.
B22  Obituaries D24  W. R. Stephens, political leader and Arkansas investor  Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials A26  The President's man.
In Ukraine: Ban The Bomb.
Tuberculosis counterattack.
Topics: Insuring charities.
Letters A26  Anna Quindlen: Trials and truth.
A27  Francis M. Bator, Robert Solow: Two ways to wake the economy.
A27  Stanley Weintraub: Three myths about Pearl Harbor.
A27


Volvo Expanding On Safety Theme
Despite criticism that includes a complaint filed by the Chrysler Corporation with the Federal Trade Commission, Volvo Cars of North America is expanding a safety-focused advertising campaign for its 1992 models.
A new print advertisement introduces Keith Heavenridge, a member of the "Volvo Saved My Life Club," who survived a head-on crash in January 1990 in his Volvo GLE station wagon.


Theater in Review
Rags  American Jewish Theater 307 West 26th Street Manhattan Book by Joseph Stein; music by Charles Strouse; lyrics by Stephen Schwartz; directed and choreographed by Richard Sabellico; set design, Jeff Modereger; lighting, Tom Sturge; costumes, Gail Baldoni; sound, Randy Hanson; stage manager, Kim Vernace.
Presented by American Jewish Theater, Stanley Brechner, artistic director; Lonny Price, associate artistic director.
WITH: Rachel Black, Ann Crumb, Philip Hoffman, Jonathan Kaplan, Crista Moore, Jan Neuberger, David Pevsner, Robert Tate and Alec Timerman.
For its last two musical revivals, "The Rothschilds" and "I Can Get It for You Wholesale," the American Jewish Theater reached into Broadway's past for shows that had respectable original runs.
For its current revival, the company turns back just a few theatrical pages to "Rags," which lasted for only four performances on Broadway in 1986.
As it turns out, "Rags" is by far the most old-fashioned and least original of the three shows.
Even with revisions -- and despite the substantial accomplishments of the musical's creative team -- it reduces the American immigrant experience to simplistic dramatic terms.


NCNB Plans a Quick Sale of Bad Loans
The NCNB Corporation is planning for rapid sales of bad loans after its year-end merger with the C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation, and has promised to concentrate on improving profits of its existing businesses rather than continuing the rapid expansion of the last decade.
"Our growth goals have been achieved," said Hugh L. McColl Jr., NCNB's chairman, who will be chairman of the merged bank, to be called Nationsbank.
"Now is the time for running what we have built."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Svensson Advances Jonas Svensson of Sweden on beat Emilio Sanchez of Spain, 6-2, 4-6, 6-4, and advanced to the second round in the European Community Championships in Antwerp, Belgium yesterday.
In other matches, Jaime Yzaga beat Michael Chang, 6-4, 2-6, 6-4, and Henri Leconte of France beat Marc Rosset, 6-1, 6-4.
Organizers announced the withdrawal of top-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden, who was reported suffering from knee and arm injuries.
Patrick McEnroe replaces him. (AP) N.H.L.
Hat Trick for Yzerman Steve Yzerman scored twice in a four-goal first period en route to his 13th career hat trick as the Red Wings defeated the Calgary Flames, 5-2, in Detroit.
Yzerman's first hat trick since Jan. 26 helped Detroit extend its home-ice winning streak to six games.
The Red Wings are 9-1-2 in their last 12 games.
The jumped to a 4-0 lead in the first period.  (AP)
Nordiques 3, Canucks 0: Ron Tugnutt stopped 26 shots for Quebec's first shutout in nearly four years as the Nordiques won in Quebec, handing Vancouver its second straight shutout loss.
The shutout was the first of Tugnutt's career and the first by a Quebec goaltender since Mario Gosselin blanked Minnesota on Dec. 12, 1987.
The victory was the fourth straight for the Nordiques at the Colisee, their longest since 1987. (AP)
Blues 3, North Stars 3: Defenseman Brian Glynn of Minnesota, making a rare rush to the net, scored the tying goal with 7:04 to play in the third period in Bloomington, Minn.
Brett Hull ignited St.
Louis' sluggish offense with his league-leading 23d goal midway through the second period, and Bob Bassen gave the Blues a 3-2 lead 3:32 into the third.  (AP)
Oilers 5, Penguins 3: Craig MacTavish's tie-breaking goal with 3:37 remaining in regulation time led Edmonton to victory before the Oilers' smallest home crowd since joining the league.
MacTavish scooped up a loose puck in the Pittsburgh zone and unleashed a blast that beat goalie Wendell Young high to the far side.
Kelly Buchberger scored into an empty net with 35 seconds left in the game to snap Pittsburgh's six-game unbeaten streak.
The crowd of 14,622 was the smallest at the 17,503-seat Northlands Coliseum since the Oilers moved there 1979.  (AP)


How Many Bulbs Does It Take to Light a Tree in Rockefeller Center? 25,300


German Aide Quits Over Role in Sending Weapons to Israelis
One of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's senior aides resigned today, partly in reaction to criticism over his role in the secret shipment of weapons to Israel.
The aide, Lutz Stavenhagen, was in charge of coordinating the work of Germany's secret services.
Opposition figures said they would continue to press Defense Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg to quit also.


Dollar Mixed in Slow Day As Gold Posts Broad Decline
The dollar settled mixed on world markets yesterday in slow trading.
Gold prices fell worldwide.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold bullion for current delivery settled at $363.50 an ounce, off $3.50 from Monday.
The Republic National Bank of New York said gold had fallen $2.55 an ounce, to a late bid of $363.50.


Gumbel Signs New 'Today' Contract
Bryant Gumbel signed a new three-year contract yesterday to remain as anchor of the NBC News program "Today."
That announcement came a day after NBC News named Jeff Zucker, 26 years old, as the weekday program's new executive producer.


William A. W. Krebs, Consultant, Dies at 75
William A. W. Krebs, a retired vice president of Arthur D. Little Inc., died Nov. 26 at Massachussetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 75 years old and lived in West Newton, Mass.
He died of colon cancer, his family said.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
Somewhere near Lincoln Center I am sitting in my parked car on the passenger side when another vehicle begins backing into the smallish space in front of me.
The driver moves very slowly, very carefully.
There is the gentlest of bumps, followed by the sound of his bumper catching and flicking my license plate.
I am certain there is no damage but I get out to inspect as a caution.


Coleman's Return Makes the Difference
Derrick Coleman looked into the eyes of Armon Gilliam and he saw a turnover.
Then all he had to do was follow the ball.
Returning in a substitute's role after an eight-game absence due to a sprained left ankle, Coleman didn't make the Nets great tonight, not even terribly efficient.
He did make them winners, though, with, by Nets' standards, a week's worth of late fourth-quarter execution.


Ban on Race-Exclusive Scholarships Is Expected
After a seven-month review, Education Secretary Lamar Alexander is expected to issue regulations on Wednesday that ban race-exclusive scholarships for college students, Administration officials said.
A similar position, taken last December by Michael L. Williams, Assistant Secretary for civil rights at the Education Department, raised a firestorm of protest by colleges and universities and civil rights groups.
They argued that such a policy would undermine minority participation in higher education.


High Interest Holds Up House of Credit Cards; Curbing Usury
To the Editor:
A ceiling on credit card interest is a very conservative idea.
The usury laws were the first consumer protection laws.
New Jersey's general usury law has been in effect since English colonial times.
Usury laws are a centuries-old tradition because they have always been needed to protect people from interest gouging.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Abbott Laboratories Inc., Abbott, Ill., a maker of health care products, will acquire Sequoia-Turner Corp., Mountain View, Calif., a maker of instruments for hospitals and laboratories.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Ashland Exploration Inc., Houston, a subsidiary of Ashland Oil Inc., reached an agreement in principle with Onarep, the national oil company of Morocco, to explore for oil on approximately 1.3 million acres off the shore of Agadir, Morocco.


Nixon Awaits Decision
GEORGE NICOLAU, an arbitrator, said yesterday that he would decide on Friday whether to shorten the suspension of OTIS NIXON from 60 days to 42 days.
Nicolau was given the case yesterday, the fifth day of the grievance hearing involving the Atlanta Braves' free-agent outfielder.
Nixon was suspended for 60 days by Commissioner FAY VINCENT on Sept. 16 after testing positive for cocaine. (AP)


Carolco-Live Deal Is Off
Carolco Pictures Inc. said today that it had broken off merger talks with Live Entertainment Inc., weeks after the companies reached an agreement.
People in the entertainment industry said Carolco had killed the deal after its stock price fell sharply in the last month, making the merger less attractive for shareholders.


Doctor in Abortion Case Is Absent From a Hearing
The Manhattan doctor accused of severing the arm of a fetus during an attempted illegal abortion did not show up yesterday for the first day of hearings on whether his medical license should be revoked.
But the panel holding the hearings, the three-member Board of Professional Medical Conduct, went ahead despite his absence and began hearing testimony from eight patients and several expert witnesses.
The panel, part of the State Department of Health, is considering charges of gross negligence and moral unfitness to practice medicine against the doctor, Abu Hayat, who is 61 years old.


Finale to Zoning Opera
People here don't agree on how things got quite so far out of hand in the fight between the town (and its supporters) and Roger and Rhoda Scott (and their supporters) over the size of what until this morning was the Scotts' house on the shore of Skaneateles Lake.
But people here knew they had more going than a debate over zoning laws and the meaning of liberty.
There was the name-calling, the threats against officials, the recent fugitive life of Mr.
Scott, a Syracuse lawyer, and the jailing of Mrs.
Scott, who describes herself as just a regular "fat, middle-aged housewife."


A Likely Tax Bill Provision That Would Aid Takeovers
The tax fight of 1992 in Congress is likely to focus on whose taxes should be cut to spur the economy.
But if any tax bill passes, it appears likely that it will include an obscure provision that would greatly improve the tax advantages of many corporate takeovers.
"It would be a huge boon," said Bob Chapman, a vice president of arbitrage at County NatWest Securities.
"I would say you would see a billion-dollar deal announced in weeks if it goes through."


Bronx Kid Makes Good - Very, Very Good
He was still Roberto Bonilla back in 1981, prowling the halls of Lehman High School in the Bronx, ready to conquer the world with a baseball bat and a radiant grin.
He was rarely called Bobby back home.
He was Roberto, just like his father.
Not that he cared too much when people said Bobby; he was so carefree.
Some even referred to him as sweet.
Bonilla was as sweet as the swing that carried him out of the Bronx and brought him back home each summer on visits with the Pirates.


Visa to Open Card System
Visa USA announced plans on Monday to change its membership rules to make it easier for companies other than banks, like department stores, to issue Visa cards.
Although Visa, the leading general-purpose credit card company, has not announced the specific rules governing such companies, it said that next week it would end a 13- month moratorium on accepting new members owned by companies that are not banks.


Tulane Names Teevens To Head Coach Position
The resume was to Tulane's liking: BUDDY TEEVENS had revived floundering programs at the University of Maine and at Dartmouth.
So yesterday he was hired to replace GREG DAVIS, who had resigned as head coach at Tulane after his team won only one game this season and only 14 in Davis's four years.
Teevens, 35 years old, guided Dartmouth to consecutive Ivy League championships the last two seasons, taking a team that went 2-8 record in 1987 to a 7-2-1 finish this season.
He led Maine to two winning seasons -- 6-5 in 1985 and 7-4 in 1986 -- the first back-to-back winning seasons in 21 years. (AP)


CITES FEAR OF HURTING BUSH
John H. Sununu resigned today as the White House chief of staff, telling President Bush that he feared he would be "a drag" on the President's re-election campaign after months of bruising political attacks in which he had become the symbol of the increasing disarray in Mr.
Bush's domestic policy team.
Mr.
Sununu and the White House portrayed the departure as voluntary.
But it followed meetings in which Mr.
Bush listened to Mr.
Sununu's arguments that he should stay on and then decided to follow the advice of top-level Republicans who urged the removal of his chief of staff.
Cheney a Possible Candidate
Speculation about a successor to Mr.
Sununu centered this evening on Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner, a longtime political aide to Mr.
Bush who is known to want the job and has proved a popular newcomer among Washington Republicans.
Some White House officials and a top Republican strategist said Mr.
Skinner was Mr.
Bush's choice.


Commissioner Names an Aide To Heighten Baseball Fever
Determined to cultivate more fans and compete with other professional sports for the most talented athletes, major league baseball launched a program yesterday to market the game in new ways and rekindle interest in areas like inner cities.
Charged with the task was Leonard S. Coleman Jr., a former New Jersey commissioner of energy and of community affairs, who was appointed to the newly created position of director of market development by Commissioner Fay Vincent.
Coleman will hold the third-highest post in the commissioner's office, behind the commissioner and the deputy commissioner.


Using the Recession As a Selling Tool
Grace &amp; Rothschild, New York, is using the recession as a selling pitch for its client Range Rover vehicles.
"Buy something," is the headline of a print advertisement scheduled to appear in USA Today and other publications starting next Tuesday.
The ad goes on: "Our preference, of course, would be that you buy a Range Rover. But if that's not in the cards, buy a microwave. A basset hound. Theater tickets. Because if we all wait for the recession to be officially declared over to start spending again, the problem will simply keep feeding on itself."


Review/Film; Anatomical Model Joins the Family
Dummies in horror films have a tradition of malevolent behavior, and Pin is no exception.
Starting out life -- if it
is
life -- as a doctor's see-through anatomical model, Pin becomes the dominant member of the doctor's repressed, unhappy family.
The doctor's son, Leon (David Hewlett), is particularly susceptible to Pin's influence, and unlike his beautiful sister, Ursula (Cyndy Preston), Leon refuses to acknowledge the dummy's inanimate nature.
In "Pin," which opens today at the Film Forum, Leon's nature and Pin's eventually become hopelessly intertwined.


Pay-Per-View Pushes a Title Contest
The Home Shopping Network, best known for hawking cubic-zirconium rings on cable television, is now trying to sell another product: a pay-per-view college football national championship game.
The network and Rick Kulis, a pay-per-view entrepreneur, have offered the National Collegiate Athletic Association a $33 million package for a proposed Jan. 18 game in Tampa Stadium: $4 million to each team, $150,000 to each of the 106 Division I-A schools, $6.1 million to the N.C.A.A. and $3 million to stage the game.
The N.C.A.A. would also reap 25 percent of the pay-per-view receipts above $40 million
According to Kulis, Dick Schultz, the executive director of the N.C.A.A., flatly rejected the proposal, and said there was no legislative mechanism to approve the game so quickly.
"Jim Marchiony, a spokesman for the N.C.A.A., said the agenda for the Jan. 10 convention is already set and consideration of any proposal like Kulis's could not take place until 1993. "If and when the N.C.A.A. wants a playoff," said Marchiony, "we will bid them out like we would with any other TV rights."
But in a kind of end-around, Kulis and his network financiers, have sent letters to Division I-A coaches and athletic directors soliciting their support of the plan and urging them to lobby for a quick approval vote by the N.C.A.A.
Kulis said if no vote was taken, he would seek to gain approval for the game in 1993.
"Perhaps they don't understand the process of the N.C.A.A.," said Vince Dooley, the Georgia athletic director, who favors the concept of a national championship game.
"Right now, I see no possibility of an early meeting."
Kulis said the game would sell for between $35 and $40 per subscriber, about the price of major heavyweight boxing title fights on pay-per-view events.
The financial package being offered is certainly a lure, especially to colleges strapped for funds.
"But at what price do you extract energy and distract from the academic process for the student athlete?" asked Tom Hansen, the commissioner of the Pacific-10 Conference, whose unbeaten Washington Huskies would benefit from such a title game this season.
"The universities and student body have had enough games by the time bowls are finished." Hoping Someone Listens
Washington will play Michigan in the Rose Bowl on New Year's Day.
Miami, No. 1 in The New York Times's computer ranking, is also unbeaten and faces Nebraska in the Orange Bowl on New Year's Night.
Gene Corrigan, the Atlantic Coast Conference commissioner, said such a game would hurt the bowls.
But Dooley said he at least hoped "someone will listen."
Lou Holtz, coach of Notre Dame, added, "I'd pay to see it."


CUNY Hints Proposed Cuts May Delay Admission of 10,000 Students
The City University of New York is threatening to tell 10,000 prospective students that they will probably not be admitted to any of the university's seven community colleges for the spring semester unless the Dinkins administration drops its plans to cut $5.6 million from the university's budget, university officials said yesterday.
If City University follows through on the threat, it would be the first time the university has curtailed enrollment since it began its open admissions policy 21 years ago.
The admissions policy guarantees a place in the university to any high school graduate.


U.S. Backs Off on Plan to Restrict Health Workers With AIDS Virus
Overwhelmed by opposition from organized medicine, the Federal Centers for Disease Control is dropping its plan to list procedures that health workers infected with the AIDS virus should not perform.
The change amounts to agreement with critics that there is no scientific reason to list procedures that should not be performed by infected health workers since there is no evidence that any procedures are more dangerous than others.
Instead, draft guidelines by the Federal agency suggest, emphasis should be placed on identifying infected health workers who do not meet standards of infection control or whose stamina or mental state makes them unfit to practice.


Accounts
*
Ohio State Lottery to Marcus Advertising Inc., Cleveland, the incumbent, for the $22.8 million account, after the lottery's first review in eight years. *
Benetton Services Corp., New York, the North American unit of the Italian apparel maker Benetton Group S.p.A., to Media Buying Services International Inc., New York, from J. Walter Thompson New York, for media-buying and planning on its account of up to $10 million.
Creative work remains in-house.


Theater in Review
Big Frame Shakin'  Ensemble Studio Theater 549 West 52d Street Manhattan Through Dec. 15 Written and performed by James G. Macdonald; directed by Shirley Kaplan; stage manager, Dathan Manning.
Presented by Ensemble Studio Theater.
"Big Frame Shakin' " is James G. Macdonald's kaleidoscopic chronicle of growing up in America in the 1970's.
The apparently autobiographical character in this monologue survives a multitude of familial dysfunctions.
His father has gone away and his mother has gone awry.
A bisexual druggie with a severe mental disorder, the mother tows her two small sons around the country, racing from the Midwest to California.
Finally she heads to the Pacific, searching for a vision of Christ ("Our Father Who art in Hawaii").


INSIDE
Fewer Mothers Married
Nearly a fourth of the women who gave birth last year were not married, according to Census Bureau numbers.
Page A20.
Conflict at Rockefeller U.
Dr.
David Baltimore was brought in to renew Rockefeller University, but found he couldn't withstand a pair of controversies.
Page B1.
Yale Examines Excellence
At Yale University, a budget debate has raised a profound question: how much academic excellence can the university afford?
Page B16.
The Sticky Differences
There is a growing belief that some economic differences between the United States and Japan may be irreconcilable.
Page D1.


Court Clears Sale Of Cetus Division
The vice chancellor of the Delaware Chancery Court said she would not block the proposed sale of a division of the Cetus Corporation to Hoffman-LaRoche Inc. if Hoffman-LaRoche agreed to abide by pending arbitration.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Nov. 29
Nov. 22
Nov. 30
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.0
7.1
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.1
3.1
Gasoline stocks
206.5
202.7
221.1
Distillate stocks
140.1
138.6
132.9
Crude imports, daily
4.4
5.6
4.9
Product imports, daily
2.5
1.9
2.3
Crude stocks
341.4
346.9
335.5
Crude production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
83.9
85.5
88.0
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Foster Girl Gets Care With Help Of Neediest
Ida Edwards smiles in triumph when she recounts the day her foster child, Vanessa, defied the doctors and walked.
"She pulled herself up by the couch and moved on, dragging along her little bent leg," she said. 'I cried out to my husband, 'Jacob, she's walking, walking, I told you she would walk.' "


The Art of Car Styling Adapts to Computers
Auto makers have long embraced computers to help shave months from the design and production cycle for new models.
But many car stylists -- the artists whose daydreams are realized in sheet metal and steel -- have resisted the technology for fear that replacing their sketch pads with computer screens will dull their creativity.
Lately, however, software has been developed that offers speed and image-making capabilities better attuned to artistic demands.
Detroit's auto makers, in particular, have special incentives to speed up their stylists and pare their design cycles closer to the shorter turnaround times of Japanese car makers.


Gorbachev Warns Soviets About 'Crisis of Statehood'
While Ukraine reveled in its freshly affirmed independence, an unusually dejected President Mikhail S. Gorbachev issued a grim warning today to his compatriots of the fate they face if the union falls apart.
In a statement to the republics' parliaments and an address televised nationwide, Mr.
Gorbachev argued that "without any exaggeration the country is threatened, the fatherland is threatened, and the greatest danger is the crisis of statehood."


In Ukraine: Ban The Bomb
The former Soviet republic, en route to independence, now insists that others call it simply Ukraine, dropping the definite article.
The besetting problem, however, is still The Bomb.
What will become of the nuclear weapons still on its territory?
Ukraine's leaders are now trying to reassure the world they intend it to become nuclear-free.
Swift action by Secretary of State Baker can help them attain that goal.
Most of the thousands of warheads now based on Ukrainian territory are already slated for the scrap heap.
But destruction will take time; besides, Ukraine has no facilities for that, and Soviet facilities are stretched to the limit.


Corrections
An article in the Business People column on Thursday about the promotion of John Goldwyn at the Paramount Pictures Corporation misstated his new title.
He was named president of the Motion Picture Group /Production; his position combines duties previously held by a president of the motion picture group and a president of production.


CHRONICLE
Last year, Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS donated the coat he wore for his inauguration to a campaign to collect coats for the poor and homeless.
So what could he give this year?
The Mayor, who is known for his elegant wardrobe, dug into his closet and came up with a single-breasted cashmere overcoat.
"It could have been used when he is inaugurated for the second time, but we'll just get another coat for that," the Mayor's press secretary, Leland T. Jones, said yesterday.
"This is an old coat, so he was very pleased that he could still fit into it."


Cuomo Seems Closer to Decision on Running for President
Although classically cryptic, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo seemed to be accelerating toward a decision today on entering the Presidential race as he backed away from the notion that he needed a state budget solution to run.
He said he would like to compete in the New Hampshire primary but would not have to.
And he cast himself as an underdog despite polls that show him as the front-runner among Democratic contenders.
Mr.
Cuomo, who said in October that he would have to make such a decision by the end of November, entered December by suggesting that he would announce his plans in time to meet the Dec. 20 filing deadline for the New Hampshire primary.


Book Notes; Summit May Fold As Dismissed Founder Moves to Little, Brown
James H. Silberman, who was abruptly removed last month as president and editor in chief of Simon &amp; Schuster's Summit Books division, will join Little, Brown &amp; Company as a vice president and senior editor.
Mr.
Silberman's dismissal, couched in diplomatic parlance that said his contract was not being renewed, caused a stir among writers, agents and other publishers, who said they were at a loss to understand why such a popular and respected editor had been let go.
Simon &amp; Schuster never gave a specific reason for ending its relationship with Mr.
Silberman, contributing to the unease and confusion among people involved with Summit.


G.M. to Recall 830,000 Cars to Replace Seat Belts
The General Motors Corporation said today that it would recall all the 830,000 compact Chevrolet Corsicas and Berettas built from 1988 to 1990 to replace seat-belt parts that could break, preventing the driver's or front passenger's shoulder harness from retracting in an accident.
John Dinan, a G.M. spokesman, said an investigation by the company had uncovered two defective parts, one of which resulted in the failure of a shoulder harness to retract; in that instance a harness failed to restrain a front-seat passenger involved in an accident.


In Arctic, Warm Reunion Ends Cold War Division
Last August, six wooden boats carrying residents of Uelen, at the northeastern tip of the Chukchi Peninsula in the Soviet Far East, sailed across the Bering Sea into this northwestern Alaskan port that is home to about 2,700 Eskimos.
The Chukchi passengers came to attend a trade fair and sell some of their coveted scrimshaw and other art works.
But, said Yuri Tototto, a former deputy of the region, sometimes called Chukotka, to the Congress of Peoples Deputies in Moscow who is director of the Association of Chukotka Native Businesses, every third or fourth Chukchi ended up discovering an Alaskan relative.


Vietnamese Rights Advocate Is Said to Get 20-Year Term
Vietnam has sentenced Nguyen Dan Que, a physician who tried to form a human rights movement, to 20 years' imprisonment and 5 years of house arrest on subversion charges, according to reports from the Vietnamese national press agency.
Dr.
Que's trial and sentencing took place on Nov. 29 in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.
Dr.
Que's arrest on treason charges earlier this year brought protests from members of Congress and many professional organizations in the United States and Europe.


Personal Health
WHAT is wrong with these pictures?
A 5-year-old boy wanted the car his younger sister was playing with, and when she would not give it to him, he hit her.
As the girl began to wail, their mother wheeled around and whacked the boy, snarling, "I told you a hundred times, don't hit."


U.N. Envoy in Croatia Tours Contested Town
Cyrus R. Vance, the United Nations envoy, toured the Croatian front-line town of Osijek today and said he had seen evidence of cease-fire violations by the Yugoslav Army that would affect peace talks.
Mr.
Vance was on the third day of a mission to check conditions for sending a peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia, which is torn by fighting between the secessionist republic of Croatia and the Serbian-led federal army and Serbian militias.
He met Croatian officials in Osijek after talks with federal soldiers and Serbian militiamen who have been shelling the town for weeks.


Percy Max Apfelbaum, Professor, 90
Percy Max Apfelbaum, who retired as a professor of organic chemistry in 1966 after a 42-year teaching career at City College of New York, died last Wednesday at New Rochelle Hospital.
He was 90 years old and lived in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He died after a short illness, his family reported.


Move to Longer Issues Lifts Prices
Prices of Treasury securities moved modestly higher in light trading yesterday, as the economy's poor performance and lackluster prospects began to lure traders and investors into longer-term notes and bonds.
For the last several weeks, credit market participants have largely ignored reports of how weak the economy has become, preferring instead to worry about what policy makers in Washington might do to reinvigorate it.
But with Congress in recess until next year, the focus is shifting, analysts said.


University Threat Reflects Anger Over Cutbacks
The City University's threat to curtail admissions this spring because of proposed city budget cuts is part of a political struggle between the Dinkins administration and city agencies over how to divide ever-shrinking resources.
At issue are two intertwined questions: whether the city agencies can cut their budgets for supplies by up to 20 percent to help close a $210 million gap in the current budget, and whether, in the long term, they can find ways to shrink their operations enough to close widening gaps between future revenues and spending.


Theater in Review
Deposing the White House  Ensemble Studio Theater 549 West 52d Street Manhattan Through Dec. 10 By Dan Isaac; directed by Christopher A. Smith; stage manager, Randal Fippinger; assistant director, Anders Wright; dramaturg, Michael Winks.
Presented by the Ensemble Studio Theater.
WITH: Jay Barnhill, Stephanie Cannon, Chris Ceraso, Jude Ciccolella, Eric Conger, Sam Gray, David Konig, Pirie MacDonald, J. B. Martin, T. L. Reilly, Jaime Sanchez and Anders Wright.
The purpose of the Ensemble Studio Theater's yearlong festival "In Pursuit of America" is to present "a collage of thinking about our national character." That aim is provocatively explored in "Deposing the White House," Dan Isaac's gathering of testimony from the Congressional investigation of the Iran-contra affair.


Food Notes
Food From Afar
One of the year's more engaging cookbooks, "The Ellis Island Immigrant Cookbook," did not come off the slick presses of a big publishing house but grew from two years of loving effort by Tom Bernardin, who compiled and published it himself.


For One Brooklyn Gang, Restoration Is the Cause
PETER ROMEO took his daughter to the carousel in Prospect Park one sunny day last summer.
He noticed an old building nearby.
It was the Lefferts Homestead, a 200-year-old house that combines Dutch Colonial and Federal details to quite pleasing effect.
Too bad the architectural treasure was falling apart.
Mr.
Romeo also focused on the people pulling weeds.
They looked like farmers, but said they were volunteers -- a vague concept to this energetic lighting entrepreneur who routinely puts in 17 hours a day.


Northrop Loses Korea Suit
A civil court in Seoul today rejected a $6.5 million lawsuit filed by the Northrop Corporation against the family of a former Government official who acted as a sales agent for the United States aircraft maker.
A three-judge panel of the Seoul District Civil Court ruled that Northrop had no right to recover the money from the family because it was paid for the agent's influence in selling aircraft to South Korea.
The dispute involves allegations of a 1983 deal between Northrop and Park Chong Kyu aimed at selling South Korea an undisclosed number of F-20 jet fighters produced by the American company.


Camps Can Smooth Trail Route
Andy Boyland's idea of a great ski vacation is five days of lectures, morning exercises, races, videotape analysis and strategy that concentrate on finding the fastest line through the course.
Boyland is one of a growing number of skiers who start the season with a week of racing instruction at a ski camp.
A Manhattan resident and management consultant, Boyland, 27 years old, is planning to attend his sixth race camp at Killington, Vt., this month.
"Being told where to turn, that's what race training is all about," he said.
"It forces you to turn in a particular spot. It's also a great way to prepare for the ski season."


Duke Takes His Anger Into 1992 Race
David Duke, the former grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan who polarized Louisiana politics with his angry campaigns against welfare and affirmative action, announced today that he was entering the race for the Republican Presidential nomination.
Mr.
Duke, who declared his candidacy in a packed news conference at the National Press Building here, accused President Bush of "selling out" the Republican Party by signing a new civil rights bill, by raising taxes and by failing to protect American workers from foreign competition.


Diversicare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


I.B.M. Plans To Detail Plan Today
I.B.M. plans to disclose today the first steps it will take on the road to fundamental change in its operations.
The International Business Machines Corporation announced its new strategy in broad terms last week.
Among the details to be specified today, industry executives said, are the granting of autonomy to I.B.M.'s San Jose, Calif., disk-drive unit and the creation of both a wholly owned printer company and a subsidiary to handle I.B.M.'s hiring and recruiting.


Carolco Cuts Staff by 25% And May Scale Back Films
It made the biggest hit movie of the year, "Terminator 2: Judgment Day," and it is pressing ahead with other expensive films, including "Basic Instinct," a thriller starring Michael Douglas.
But Carolco Pictures Inc. is being buffeted by the same problems that killed most of Hollywood's smaller production companies in recent years.
Carolco said today that it had laid off 50 people from its staff of 200 and that it was considering whether to end or scale back deals with a number of film makers.
And there were widespread reports in Hollywood that Peter M. Hoffman, Carolco's chief executive, was preparing to resign after clashing with Mario Kassar, the chairman and largest shareholder, over the company's financial strategy.
Carolco would not comment on those reports.
Back to Basics


Now It's Yankees' Turn to Make Some Moves
While the Mets have clearly wrestled any portion of the spotlight the Yankees still possessed in New York by lavishing $36.5 million upon the free-agent power hitters Eddie Murray and Bobby Bonilla, General Manager Gene Michael of the Yankees is having to use trades rather than huge contracts to solve the team's many problems.
Among the options Michael has discussed with other members of the Yankee front office is trading second baseman Steve Sax and his four-year, $12.4 million contract, outfielder Jesse Barfield and a minor league prospect to the Angels for left-handed pitcher Chuck Finley.


Digicon Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


M.T.A. Is Turning to Itself on Fare Increase
Unusual forces are pushing transit officials toward a reluctant but inevitable conclusion: If they want to limit the size of the New York City subway and bus fare increase, they must find the money themselves, within the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Increasing the fare -- never a simple political decision -- is complicated this year by three unusual elements.
One is that neither the city nor the state has any new money to put into the system.
Another is that cooperation from suburban legislators was undercut when the M.T.A. decided in October against raising fares on commuter railroads, severing a traditional link between city and suburban fares.


State Sues Potamkin, Citing Tactics in Car Sales
The Potamkin group of car dealerships routinely used "bait-and-switch tactics" and other deceptive sales practices, the New York State Attorney General charged in a suit filed yesterday.
Bait-and-switch tactics involve promises made in advertisements that are not kept when the customer arrives to buy the product.
Customers arriving at Potamkin dealerships, Attorney General Robert Abrams said, were told "that they don't qualify for the offer, that the company just ran 'out of stock,' or that the advertisement was a 'mistake.' "


Treasury Prices Continue to Rise
Prices of Treasury securities continued to rise and interest rates moved lower again yesterday, as investors eager to capture higher yields concentrated their purchases on longer-term notes and bonds.
A number of developments during the session seemed to reduce the risk of buying longer-term, higher-yielding securities, which because of their maturity are generally seen as speculative investments.


Critic's Notebook; For TV, It's a Little Bit of Everything
It's "Dallas." It's "Perry Mason." It's "Rashomon." With the Palm Beach partyland ambience, the Kennedy name and faces, the dramatic opening testimony of the woman known to television audiences as "the alleged victim," the trial of William K. Smith is proving to be a television spectacular.


Brendle's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


CHRONICLE
So where does that leave the organizers of the dinner-dance, which is to be attended by 900 people at the Winter Garden in the World Financial Center?
The highlight of the evening was to have been the entry of Miss Taylor carrying a mask called "Lachrymosa," designed by HENRY DUNAY and valued at $2 million.
It is studded with 936 diamonds, weighing 135 carats or so altogether.
"You punt," said LAURA POMERANTZ, who with her husband, JOHN POMERANTZ, is heading the benefit.
"We were very fortunate to have three stars booked: Elizabeth Taylor, the mask and HARRY CONNICK JR., who will perform. The mask is still star of the evening, with its extraordinary workmanship and interplay of stones."


BRIEFS
*
Dixieland Food Stores Inc., a unit of Fleming Cos., Oklahoma City, a wholesale food distributor, has reached an agreement to sell substantially all of its supermarket operations to Piggly Wiggly Mid-SouthInc., a supermarket operator.
No terms were disclosed. *
Eastman Chemical Co., Kingsport, Tenn., has formed a venture with Rhone-Poulenc S.A., the French chemical maker, make cellulose acetate. *
Genicom Corp., Waynesboro, Va., a maker of computer products, said it had signed a letter to acquire Rastek Corp., an engineering company.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Rubbermaid Inc., Wooster, Ohio, has reached an agreement to buy Cipsa, a Mexican plastic and rubber housewares maker.
The seller is Grupo IRSA S.A. of Mexico.
No terms were disclosed.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
MASONS know that the beauty of brickwork is only skin deep.
To save money where the strength of structural bricks is not needed, they often use facing or veneer bricks, which are thinner and purely decorative.
Applying them requires the same skill as structural bricklaying and is beyond most amateurs.
But imitation facing brick, sold at home centers, looks almost exactly the same and is easily applied.
Several types of imitation facing brick are made.
The one that is most realistic and durable and is easiest to apply is mineral-based and contains Portland cement and vermiculite.
Unlike imitation brick made of plastic or containing gypsum, it can be used outdoors as well as indoors.
And unlike gypsum-based brick, it can be washed with soap and water.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Arlo Guthrie  Carnegie Hall
Arlo Guthrie has been performing "Alice's Restaurant" for more than 25 years, yet he always succeeds in giving a fresh spin to the comic saga of a Thanksgiving Day mishap that fortuitously led to his being rejected for the draft.
In introducing the song at his solo concert at Carnegie Hall on Friday evening, Mr.
Guthrie reminisced amusingly about having attended Jimmy Carter's inauguration and being told by the new President's son Chip that the White House's previous occupant, Richard M. Nixon, had left behind an opened copy of "Alice's Restaurant" in the library.
Remembering that the song was 18 minutes long -- about the length of the notorious gap in one of the Watergate tapes -- Mr.
Guthrie speculated wryly that there might be some mysterious connection between the two that might have helped precipitate the downfall of the Nixon Presidency.
Mr.
Guthrie gave the story just the right tone of self-deflating irony.
He has always been a superb raconteur, but in recent years his yarn-spinning has become at least as important as the songs in his shows.
His White House story was just one of several delightful tales he spun during a concert in which he alternated between playing an acoustic guitar and an electric keyboard.
Introducing his father Woody Guthrie's folk classic, "This Land Is Your Land," he recalled being unaware of its popularity until he was sent to a private school where all the students knew the words except him.
Embarrassed, he told his father, who then taught him some verses his schoolmates didn't know.
To the delight of the children in the audience, Mr.
Guthrie also tore apart his much-loved gardening song, "Inch by Inch," and focusing on the image of a beady-eyed crow, analyzed the lyric as the scenario of a monster movie.
Remembering a European folk festival at which he performed with Pete Seeger, he recalled leading Elvis Presley's hit, "Can't Help Falling in Love With You" as a sing-along, much to Mr.
Seeger's disapproval, although Mr.
Seeger seemed know to all the words and sang along too.
Mr.
Guthrie used the last story to illustrate his thoughts today about folk purism.
"A folk song doesn't have to be about anything," he asserted before leading the audience in a sing-along of the Presley hit.
"It's got to do with who's singing and where their hearts are."


Lixor Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Mets' Search For Pitchers Is Strictly Top of Line
For the Mets, the hunt is for pitching, top-caliber pitching.
The landscape, to their chagrin if not surprise, isn't rich with targets.
Nonetheless, the Mets insist that recent preliminary conversations with a handful of teams have led them to believe that there is reason for hope.


CBS Adding an Overnight News Program
CBS News announced yesterday that it would begin an overnight news program early next year, replacing "Nightwatch," a news interview program that has been broadcast since 1982.
The move will result in layoffs in CBS News's Washington bureau, the network said.
CBS would not disclose the number of people who would lose their jobs, but a CBS News executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity, estimated that up to 50 people would be affected and that only a few of them were likely to be hired for the new program.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; New Campaigns
*
DDB Needham Worldwide is promoting itself with print advertisements in Chicago, Los Angeles and New York that showcase a variety of its clients' products as "gift ideas for a merry Christmas." In a memo to agency employees, Keith Reinhard, chairman and chief executive, said the ads symbolize the agency's belief that in a soft economy advertising is "not a discretionary cost to be reduced or eliminated." The ad appears in The New York Times today on pages D12 and D13.


Review/Theater; After Ceausescu, Another Kind of Terror
Three months after the 1989 fall of the Ceausescus, a theatrical brigade including the British playwright Caryl Churchill, a director named Mark Wing-Davey and 10 of Mr.
Wing-Davey's acting students went to Romania on what promised to be a preposterous mission.
Their aim was to become instant experts on a nation in post-revolutionary turmoil and to make a play about what they had seen.
Their visit was scarcely longer than a week.
Can you picture the results already?
The acting students, being by definition romantics, would create a let-a-thousand-flowers bloom pageant.
Miss Churchill, being an archetypal Royal Court Theater ideologue of her day, would insist on equating Ilena Ceausescu with Margaret Thatcher.


Bagging a 10,000-Pound Twig House in the Wilds of Maine
THE old adage says, "Never shop when depressed."
But Judyth van Amringe was depressed. Very depressed.


Accuser in Smith Trial Tells of Fear and Rape
Choking back tears, the 30-year-old Florida woman who has accused William K.  Smith of raping her on the front lawn of the Kennedy compound took the witness stand today and offered her anguished recollections of that night.
Referring to him first as "Mr. Smith" and later simply as "that man," she recalled what she described as a "surreal" evolution in the defendant that night.
He began, she said, as a gentle and interesting person in an oxford shirt and khaki pants that she had met at the nightspot Au Bar a few hours earlier and became a fiend who knocked her to the ground, forced himself on her and flippantly told her afterward that if she ever accused him of rape, no one would ever believe her.


Review/Television; Pearl Harbor, as Both Sides Saw It
Let no one charge that the 50th anniversary of Pearl Harbor caught television by surprise.
During a week on location in Hawaii in November, NBC's "Today Show" packaged a minute-by-minute recounting of the Japanese attack between scenes of Hawaii today, including Willard Scott doing the hula and a visit to a leper island.
PBS delivered its early strike last month with an "American Experience" account of the attack titled "Pearl Harbor: Surprise and Remembrance," which will be repeated on Saturday, at 2:30 P.M. on Channel 13.


Bonilla Brings Joy to Bronx, But Old School Strikes Out
When Bobby Bonilla signed a $29 million dollar contract with the Mets this week and became the highest paid athlete in professional team sports, the South Bronx native was quick to say he wanted to go home to his old neighborhood and start giving something back.
The one place in the Bronx that will not be getting anything back any time soon is Mr.
Bonilla's alma mater, Herbert H. Lehman High School.


Accuser in Smith Trial Tells of Fear and Rape
Choking back tears, the 30-year-old Florida woman who has accused William K. Smith of raping her on the front lawn of the Kennedy compound took the witness stand today and offered her anguished recollections of that night.
Referring to him first as "Mr. Smith" and later simply as "that man," she recalled what she described as a "surreal" evolution in the defendant that night.
He began, she said, as a gentle and interesting person in an oxford shirt and khaki pants that she had met at the nightspot Au Bar a few hours earlier and became a fiend who knocked her to the ground, forced himself on her and flippantly told her afterward that if she ever accused him of rape, no one would ever believe her.


Review/Theater; An Early 30-Year Black Struggle
"Zion," Beverly Trader's epic play with music by the New Federal Theater, depicts the 30-year struggle of parishioners in Marietta, Ga., to establish one of the earliest black churches in the United States.
The play, a sprawling hybrid of historical drama and gospel pageantry, begins in 1836 and spans the Civil War.
Although it embraces a lot more material than it can comfortably assimilate, it still conveys a pungent sense of history's wheels grinding painfully forward.
Unwieldy and weakened by an abrupt ending, "Zion" still churns up a lot of pertinent thoughts about race relations and religion.
And the interpolation of nearly a dozen traditional spirituals, sung either a cappella or with minimal accompaniment, goes a long way toward binding up the show's loose ends.
The superb cast of singing actors is led by Ronald E. Richardson, who gives what may be his strongest performance since the Broadway musical "Big River." Portraying Ephraim B. Rucker, a preacher who leads his black followers to separate from the white Baptist church, he acts and sings with a majestic oratorical fervor.


Furon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


PARENT &amp; CHILD
EACH December, Frank Gresham's two daughters provide him with a measure of the time left until Christmas that's as accurate as any calendar.
The ritual begins when the girls, now 9 and 10 years old, hand him a few sheets of paper.
"This year, my kids came up with a list of toys they want that's as long as the Dead Sea Scrolls," said Dr.
Gresham, a professor of school psychology at the University of California at Riverside who studies how children develop social skills.
If things go as they have in previous years, every day over the next few weeks the girls will rush over and count the number of packages underneath the tree, carefully comparing the size and weight of the ones bearing their names.


Unregistered Aliens Have Right to School
To the Editor:
Your report on the economic fears of Long Islanders refers to a case in which an elementary school principal reported to Federal authorities two illegal immigrants, children who had come to register at his school (news article, Nov. 5).
The case illustrates how immigrants become scapegoats in times of economic distress.
The school principal's action reflects not only a blatant disregard for the law, but also widely prevalent misconceptions that immigrants are a drain on our economy.


Hearings on Economy Opening Today
The Congressional hearings on the state of the economy that begin Thursday will spotlight the fundamental difference between Republicans and Democrats over tax policy and what makes the economy tick.
The basic Republican principle of the last half-century has been that if rich people's taxes are reduced they will invest more money.
That, in the Republican view, will cause the economy to grow, leading to more jobs and prosperity for all Americans.


Sports of The Times; Business Disguised As a Game
SOMEONE asked Lou Carnesecca the other day if he liked the Big East-Atlantic Coast Conference Challenge.
The venerable St.
John's coach hesitated, then winced as if he were about to tell a painful truth.


Genesis Health Ventures reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
National team titles are very rarely won by players unknown to fame, but it happened during the weekend at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals in Indianapolis.
In a strong field that included several former world champions, the victor was a squad from Kentucky: Keith Wilson, Gary Peterson, Dennis Hesthaven, Ralph Letizia, John Ambach, all of Louisville, and Benton Wheeler of Lexington.
The final standings were:


When Casey Could Have Met Iranians in '80
To the Editor:
"A Book Asserts Reagan Slowed Hostage Release" (news article, Nov. 8), on "October Surprise: America's Hostages in Iran and the Election of Ronald Reagan" by Gary Sick, contains errors about William Casey's attendance at the Anglo-American conference on the history of the Second World War in London in July 1980.
It states that the conference was held at a British air base.
It was held at the Imperial War Museum headquarters building in the heart of London.
The article also asserts that the records of Mr.
Casey's attendance are "ambiguous." May I give you some facts?


Autodie reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


On L.I., the Anti-Tax Prophets Come In From the Wilderness
At Pat Friedman's house, the green-shingled Cape Cod on Roxbury Road South, the one with the tiny lot where the trees are bedecked with blue ribbon, property taxes have been rising, but not without a fight.
For most of the last three decades -- as her property taxes have gone from $550 a year to nearly $5,500 -- Mrs.
Friedman has been one of a small band of activists who have crisscrossed Long Island, railing, often in vain, against slothful government and soaring property taxes.


Grad Students At Yale Strike To Get a Union
More than 1,000 Yale University graduate students went on strike today, joined by several thousand of the school's clerical, custodial, food-service and other workers.
The strike caused dozens of classes to be canceled or rescheduled, closed student dining halls and disrupted many university offices.
Amid the crowd of Ph.D. candidates and blue-collar workers gathered in front of Yale's Sterling Library during late-morning snow flurries, Beth Handler, an arts-history graduate student and teaching assistant, expressed one of the day's central themes, "Graduate students need to have a voice in decision-making and policies that affect them both as students and employees."


J. I. Case Plans to Cut Work Force by 4,000
J.
I.
Case, the faltering maker of farm and construction equipment, will eliminate 4,000 jobs by the end of next year, paring its work force to about 21,000, its parent, Tenneco Inc., said today.
The cutbacks will be split evenly among plants in the United States and abroad, primarily in Europe, but the specific number of jobs to be eliminated at each of Case's 23 plants has not been determined, the company said.
Case has more than 11,000 employees in North America, at nine plants in the Midwest and Canada.


Soviets Postpone Some Payments to Foreign Banks
The Soviet Union told commercial banks it owes money to today that, effective Thursday, it is postponing the repayment of principal on all loans made before Jan. 1, 1991.
Payments due to the banks over the next 13 months total nearly $4 billion.
An agreement in Moscow last month between the world's seven largest industrial democracies and the Soviet Union to allow the postponement of $3.6 billion in debt payments covered loans from governments, and while the agreement also called for a postponement of payments to banks, no such deal was actually negotiated.


Castro, in Talk With U.S. Senator, Calls Fuel Crisis 'the Biggest Test'
President Fidel Castro told a visiting United States Senator this week that Cuba was struggling with a fuel and energy crisis that he regarded as "the biggest test of the survival of our revolution."
The Senator, Larry Pressler, a South Dakota Republican and member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said Mr.
Castro and his aides told him in a meeting that began Sunday night and stretched over more than five hours into Monday morning that Cuba would receive less than a third of the oil it was expecting from the Soviet Union this year.
Work on a Soviet-built nuclear power plant, which Cuba planned to open in 1992, has been stalled because the Russian republic is not sending equipment, Mr.
Pressler was told.


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, the Kitchen Bookshelf column in The Living Section yesterday misstated the price of "American Game Cooking" by John Ash and Sid Goldstein (Aris/Addison-Wesley).
It is $25.


LIBYAN MAINTAINS HE HOLDS SUSPECTS
The new chief of Libyan intelligence services asserted in an interview published today that he had ordered the detention of two Libyan officials accused by the United States and Britain of carrying out the bombing of a Pan Am airplane in 1988.
The statement appears to be an unusual Libyan attempt to diffuse growing tensions with the United States and Western Europe over the charges during what Arab and foreign diplomats say is a growing fear by Libya that it may be subject to a military attack or a stringent economic boycott.


Stocks Are Mixed as Dow Declines 17.89
Stocks closed mixed for the second consecutive day, as blue-chip issues again failed to keep pace with the overall market.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 17.89 points to end at 2,911.67.
The number of shares traded on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 187.9 million, compared with 188.3 million on Tuesday, with losers holding an advantage over gainers by 854 to 763.


J. F. Knott, 55, Chief Of Recycling Company
Joseph F. Knott, president and chief operating officer of the Safety-Kleen Corporation of Elgin, Ill., died Monday morning at his home in Oak Brook, Ill., a Chicago suburb.
He was 55 years old.
He died of an apparent heart attack while exercising on a treadmill, said a company spokesman, John Feeley.


Pacificare Health Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Words of Care Go With Gifts To Neediest
"This year more than last year, more than previous years, the need for your fund is apparent to any person who observes our city," Arthur Tenenholtz of Brooklyn wrote to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"Although my employer has not granted a pay raise this year, I am increasing my donation."
Those words by Mr.
Tenenholtz, who sent $50, echo the concerns of hundreds of people who have contributed to the Neediest Cases, which began its 80th appeal this week.
The letters of those people reflect a mood of despair brought on by the recession.


Book Writing by Maya Is Put Centuries Earlier
A ceramic vessel bearing rows of Maya glyphs and scenes of mythological events has been identified by scholars as the earliest known evidence of book writing in pre-Columbian America.
Scholars said yesterday that the illustrations on the sides of the 10-inch-high rectangular vessel represent pages from a Maya book, showing that the great but mysterious pre-Columbian civilization in Central America produced books as early as the eighth century, at least 500 years earlier than previously known.


Nylund Needs Surgery
GARY NYLUND, the Islanders' veteran defenseman, needs new surgery on his left heel and will be out for two to three more months, the team announced yesterday.


Maria Benitez at the Joyce Theater


Accuser in Smith Trial Tells of Fear and Rape
Choking back tears, the 30-year-old Florida woman who has accused William K.  Smith of raping her on the front lawn of the Kennedy compound took the witness stand today and offered her anguished recollections of that night.
Referring to him first as "Mr. Smith" and later simply as "that man," she recalled what she described as a "surreal" evolution in the defendant that night.
He began, she said, as a gentle and interesting person in an oxford shirt and khaki pants that she had met at the nightspot Au Bar a few hours earlier and became a fiend who knocked her to the ground, forced himself on her and flippantly told her afterward that if she ever accused him of rape, no one would ever believe her.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; People
*
Justin L. Harrington has been named a senior vice president and director for operations and strategy at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York.
He had previously been senior vice president and group director at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York. *
Philip Davidson has been named a senior vice president and co-creative director at Ketchum Advertising New York.
He previously had been senior vice president and associate creative director at Cadwell Davis Partners, New York.


Review/Dance; Spanish Traditions, but With Individualism
The Maria Benitez Spanish Dance Company, which opened on Tuesday night for two weeks at the Joyce Theater, takes a creative approach to dance idioms, especially flamenco, that other Spanish troupes treat more straightforwardly.
Miss Benitez is a striking dancer, angular, assertive, as explosive in the sudden thrust of her gestures as she is haughty in her carriage.
One might see her as the equivalent of a modern dancer searching for an individual form of expression, exploring movement rather than accepting its traditional forms.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Maurice John Vaughan  Chicago Blues 73 Eighth Avenue, at 13th Street Manhattan Through tonight
Maurice John Vaughan called his debut album "Generic Blues" (Alligator-Independent), but he was being self-deprecating.
In current Chicago blues, it's downright eccentric for Mr.
Vaughan to play a hollow-body electric guitar, plucking the strings with his fingernails, and to include a trombonist in the four-piece band he has brought to Chicago Blues.
Nor does Mr.
Vaughan stick to tried-and-true lyrics.
One of the toughest songs he sang on Tuesday night was "Computer Took My Job Away," a new version of the no-work blues carried by a modal vamp akin to John Lee Hooker


Cuomo Advisers Discuss Possible Campaign Aides
Three advisers to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today began compiling a list of political professionals who could fill top staff jobs in a Cuomo Presidential campaign.
But they said the project was their own initiative, did not have the Governor's formal approval and did not reflect a decision by Mr.
Cuomo to run.
Two of the three advisers -- John A. Marino, the chairman of the State Democratic Committee, and Brad Johnson, Mr.
Cuomo's Washington lobbyist -- met today in Mr.
Marino's office in Manhattan.
The third -- Michael Del Giudice, a former chief of staff for Mr.
Cuomo who now works for the New York City investment banking concern of Lazard Freres &amp; Company -- was out of town but participated in the meeting by telephone.


Hunt, Peck and Repairs
Midtown Typewriter
124 West 23d Street, New York, N.Y. 10011; (212) 255-4752.
"They're dinosaurs," said Harmon Rangell, pointing to a wall of old typewriters.
But these dinosaurs are not extinct quite yet.
And Mr.
Rangell's Midtown Typewriter is one of the increasingly few places that sells, services and repairs aging manual and electric typewriters.


Joffrey Won't Play New York in Spring
The Joffrey Ballet has canceled its spring season at City Center, its New York base, in what Robert Yesselman, the company's executive director, described yesterday as a move toward fiscal stabilization.
"A New York season incurs a debt," Mr.
Yesselman said.
"A repertory season had been under discussion for some time, but no contract was ever signed." He said the dancers will lose two weeks of work but will make that time up later in the year.
A Surplus, but . . .
Mr.
Yesselman said the financially pressed troupe had ended the fiscal year on June 30 with an operating surplus and "a paper deficit." An anonymous benefactor has lent the company $1.25 million that must be matched three to one by June 30, 1992.


CHRONICLE
QUEEN ELIZABETH II will bestow a knighthood on Secretary General JAVIER PEREZ DE CUELLAR of the United Nations in recognition of his international achievements, the British Mission to the United Nations has announced.
Mr.
Perez de Cuellar will become an honorary Knight of the Grand Cross of the Order of St.
Michael and St.
George (G.C.M.G.), one of Britain's highest orders of chivalry.
Established in 1818 to honor service overseas, the award has traditionally been given to distinguished British diplomats and is rarely given to citizens of other countries.


National Beverage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Changing of the Goal Guard for Devils
After starting only once in the first 20 games, Craig Billington is emerging as the premier goaltender for the Devils.
That statement is the kind of thing Tom McVie hates to hear because the New Jersey coach is adamant about his view that Billington and Chris Terreri are equal.


With Americans Free, Former Hostages Tell of Endurance and Resistance
The Americans who had been held hostage in Lebanon started to tell their stories yesterday, pouring out a torrent of details that ranged from how they coped with the starchy food to how they endured conditions harsher than had previously been known.
Their statements made it clear that escape was never far from their thoughts, though they feared that the captives left behind would suffer more if they tried.
Even the telling of their stories in freedom was affected by that concern, as they began to discuss their ordeals only on the day word came that the last American captive, Terry A. Anderson, the chief Middle East correspondent of The Associated Press, had been let go.


Critic's Notebook; For TV, It's a Little Bit of Everything
It's "Dallas." It's "Perry Mason." It's "Rashomon." With the Palm Beach partyland ambience, the Kennedy name and faces, the dramatic opening testimony of the woman known to television audiences as "the alleged victim," the trial of William K. Smith is proving to be a television spectacular.


Lag in Cease-Fire in Yugoslavia Hindering U.N. Role, Envoy Says
The United Nations envoy, Cyrus R. Vance, said today that a cease-fire had so far failed to take hold in Yugoslavia, hindering the dispatch of a peacekeeping force to end five months of civil war.
"Clearly, obstacles remain," Mr.
Vance told journalists after meeting the Croatian President, Franjo Tudjman.
"The cease-fire hasn't taken hold and it must. The cease-fire is a very fundamental part of the problems we have to face."


As Helmick Resigns, His Familiar Rationale Misses the Ethical Point
Robert Helmick's resignation early yesterday as a member of the International Olympic Committee completed a spectacular two-month fall that left him stripped of any meaningful role in national or international sports.
Once an athlete, later the president of the International Swimming Federation and more recently a powerful and influential figure as the president of the United States Olympic Committee and member of the I.O.C.'s executive board, Helmick responded as he had in September, when he stepped down as the U.S.O.C. president after six years for similar reasons.
Amid evidence that he used his unsalaried position for personal gain, he chose not to inflict the body he served with the discomfort or embarrassment of asking that he resign.


Canadian Natural Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bert T. Combs, 80, Dies in Flood; Was Kentucky Governor in 60's
Former Gov.
Bert T. Combs of Kentucky, a Democrat who championed fiscal reforms and civil rights in his four-year tenure as the state's chief executive three decades ago, was found dead in a river in east-central Kentucky yesterday after his car was swept away by floodwaters.
He was 80 years old.
The police said Mr.
Combs's body was found in the Red River at Rosslyn, Ky., just downstream from his car, hours after he had been reported missing.
They said he had apparently driven the car onto a section of back road flooded by five feet of water a few miles from his home in rural Powell County.
Mr.
Combs also lived in Lexington, Ky., about 50 miles northwest of Powell County.


Seagram Profit Increases 2.1%
The Seagram Company said yesterday that its earnings edged up 2.1 percent in the third quarter as revenues rose seven-tenths of 1 percent.
The huge liquor, wine and fruit juice marketer said the results reflected improvement by its spirits and wine operations outside North America.


Gun That Was Found on Defendant Is Linked to Kahane Shooting
Police ballistics experts yesterday linked both the killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane and the shooting minutes later of a Postal Service police officer to the silver-plated gun found with the accused assassin, El Sayyid A. Nosair.
It was the first testimony at Mr.
Nosair's three-week-old trial to tie the .357-magnum Ruger revolver to bullet fragments recovered near Mr.
Kahane's body at a midtown hotel and to pieces of bullets retrieved from a nearby post office where Mr.
Nosair was wounded by the postal policeman.


Limits Proposed for Race-Based Scholarships
Education Secretary Lamar Alexander proposed rules today that would ban scholarships based exclusively on race except under specific circumstances.
But Mr.
Alexander said race could still be used as one factor in awarding scholarships to achieve diversity on college campuses, along with other factors like geographic origin and economic background.


Possis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Radiomutuel Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 26


Foreman Is the People's Choice
Up on the second floor of the Eldorado Hotel Casino here, just outside the convention center in which George Foreman trains daily, there is a life-sized photo of Foreman and an opponent fighting at close quarters.
Where the opponent's head ought to be is a hole for someone to put his face through so that he can be photographed trading punches with big George.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY OLD SCHOOL TIES THAT DO NOT BIND
When Bobby Bonilla signed a $29 million dollar contract with the Mets and became the highest-paid professional team athlete, the South Bronx native was quick to say he wanted to start giving something back to his old neighborhood.
The one place that will not be getting anything back anytime soon is Mr.
Bonilla's alma mater, Herbert H. Lehman High School.
A1.
DRUG-TREATMENT SLOTS GOING UNFILLED
Despite a chronic shortage of drug treatment programs, hundreds of treatment slots go unfilled because of a failure to match clients with available services, a new survey has found.
B3.


Penn Traffic Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


White House Memo; Sununu Downfall: He Broke 7 Cardinal Rules
The White House is an easy place to lose perspective.
When George W. Bush, the President's oldest son, visited John H. Sununu's office in the West Wing a week ago to suggest that Mr.
Sununu might want to do the President a favor and resign, the chief of staff balked.


Marlins Interest Rose
PETE ROSE says he intends to seek reinstatement to baseball next year and that he would be interested in working for the Florida Marlins, one of the two National League expansion teams for 1993.


Critic's Notebook; For TV, It's a Little Bit of Everything
It's "Dallas." It's "Perry Mason." It's "Rashomon." With the Palm Beach partyland ambience, the Kennedy name and faces, the dramatic opening testimony of the woman known to television audiences as "the alleged victim," the trial of William K. Smith is proving to be a television spectacular.
The most powerful hours came yesterday afternoon, with the appearance of the woman -- her face obscured by a big gray dot on the Cable News Network and a blur by the Courtroom Television Network -- who gave in a direct, detailed and emotional way an account of what she said happened to her on the night of March 29.
"The man was raping me," she said.
Unforgettable Testimony
She still has to face Mr.
Smith's lawyer, the redoubtable Roy E. Black of Miami, who began his cross-examination only a half-hour before adjournment for the day.
But whatever happens in that confrontation, her testimony will be hard to forget.


Prison for Huey Newton Killer
A 27-year-old man was sentenced on Tuesday to 32 years in prison for killing Huey P. Newton, co-founder of the Black Panther Party.
The body of Mr.
Newton, 47, shot three times in the head, was found Aug. 22, 1989, in an impoverished Oakland neighborhood known for drug dealing.
The defendant, Tyrone Robinson, said he had shot Mr.
Newton in self-defense, but prosecutors contended that his motive was to bolster his standing with a prison gang.


On the 8th Day of Hanukkah, Children Will Give
LIGHT the Hanukkah candles and bring out the presents for the children.
That is the routine that has evolved in many Jewish homes on each of the eight nights of the holiday that began Sunday with the lighting of the first candle on the menorah.


CUNY Fails in Move to Ease Budget Cuts
A day after threatening to curtail enrollment at seven community colleges because of city budget cuts, the Chancellor of the City University met with Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday but failed to persuade him to restore the $5.6 million in funds.
"The Mayor said we've got to scour every cupboard," Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel said after the meeting at City Hall yesterday.
"He made it clear we don't have the money."


Bob Evans Farms reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Tax-Exempt Funds Post A Slight Increase in Yields
Yields on tax-exempt money market funds tended to rise a little during the last week, but yields on taxable money market funds showed a moderate decline, according to IBC/ Donoghue's, which monitors the funds and issues The Money Fund Report.
"We would expect the tax-exempt yields to rise a little during the short term because of the heavy supply of municipal bond offerings coming to market," said Walter S. Frank, chief economist for IBC/Donoghue's.
He said many municipalities were rushing to issue securities before the year ended.


Economy Expands Sluggishly
The Government reported today that the economy grew at a 1.7 percent annual rate during the quarter that ended in September, an advance considerably less than initially estimated and a disappointment to both private analysts and the Bush Administration.
The bad news, coming just before the beginning of an election year, is sure to increase the political pressure on the Bush Administration to take steps to spur the economy.
In a speech today to the American Enterprise Institute, President Bush promised to offer a package of common sense economic proposals in his State of the Union Message next month.


John C. Miller, 83; Writer and Professor Of American History
John C. Miller, a retired professor at Stanford University who wrote several major books about early American history that won praise for their scholarship and analysis, died Sunday at Stanford University Hospital in Palo Alto, Calif.
He was 83 years old and lived in Palo Alto.
He died of liver cancer, his family said.


Aspirin Linked to Aid in Colon Cancer Fight
Aspirin, which is being widely used in low doses to prevent heart attacks and strokes, may also prevent deaths from colon cancer, according to new findings from a large nationwide study.
The study, being published in today's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine, found that men and women who took 16 or more aspirins or related drugs each month had only half the death rate from colon cancer as those who were infrequent users of these medications.


M.G.A. Honors Beard
ANN BEARD of Essex Fells, N.J., the chairwoman of the United States Golf Association Women's Committee, was honored with the Metropolitan Golf Association's Distinguished Service Award last night.
JOHN BALDWIN of the Meadow Brook Club on Long Island received his second consecutive M.G.A. player-of-the-year award.


Now You See Snow, Now You Don't


Books of The Times; Mice, Parrots, Hippos, And Children, Too
"Children are entitled to their otherness, as anyone is," wrote Alastair Reid in "Places, Poems, Preoccupations" (1963), "and when we reach them, as we sometimes do, it is generally on a point of sheer delight, to us so astonishing, but to them so natural." With the idea of furthering such contact, here are 10 delightful children's picture books that one hopes will seem both astonishing and natural.
They are described in roughly ascending order of sophistication.
MOUSE AROUND,
by Pat Schories (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $11.95).
A water leak develops in a dark brown cellar, attracting from its nest a baby mouse who, in the act of trying to catch a droplet, falls into the pocket of the plumber fixing the leak.
In wordless pictures, you follow the mouse's progress around a bustling town, back to the house and into its cozy nest again.
If you can't find the mouse in the big pictures, close-ups in the border zoom you in.


School Administrators Aren't All Teachers
To the Editor:
"Too Many Supervisors" (letter, Nov. 7), on the New York City school system, states, "Something is fundamentally wrong with a system of 65,000 teachers and 26,200 supervisors and administrators." As president of the union representing supervisors and administrators in the city's schools, I assure you our membership is 4,000 and was never in excess of 4,700.


Killings at a Record Pace as Other Crimes Drop
Killings in New York City are running above last year's record pace, despite a drop in other kinds of violent crime, Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said yesterday.
Mr.
Brown, who said he expects the murder tally to rise above last year's total of 2,245, called the increase in murders "no surprise" and said its cause is no mystery.
"Drugs and guns," he said.
"That's it."


New York's Nonresident Tax Rule Is Struck Down
An appellate court has struck down a New York law requiring many nonresidents to file joint income-tax returns, but tax officials in New York and New Jersey predicted today that few commuters would benefit from the ruling.
On Nov. 27, the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Albany invalidated a provision in the state's 1987 tax law.
The provision required a nonresident with no New York income to file a joint New York income tax return if the person's spouse earned New York income.
The law applied only to couples who filed joint Federal tax returns.


The Christmas You Never Had
QUITE possibly it's the Christmas no one ever had -- the Christmas of Andy Hardy and Beaver Cleaver, of a tree whose lights bubbled, of a new sled and a snowfall that came right on schedule.
This year you have another chance: Have yourself a retro little Christmas.


Americans Will Sing in a Generation or So
To the Editor:
Russell Baker laments (column, Nov. 2) that nowadays everybody listens to music but nobody sings: "Nowadays Whitman would not hear America singing. He would hear Japanese technology singing almost perfectly. He would write, 'I hear America listening to nearly perfect Japanese technological reproduction.' "


Mugged Officer's Life Saved by His Necktie
A retired New York City police officer who was mugged yesterday in the Wall Street area owes his life to his necktie, the police said.
The mugger fired point blank at the victim's neck, but the bullet from a 22-caliber pistol was apparently deflected by the knot of the victim's necktie.


'Boys' Film Leaves Studio Wondering
Holiday decorations are splashed around the offices of 20th Century Fox, but the studio is probably the gloomiest in town.
After weeks of elaborate and expensive promotion of "For the Boys," the musical drama starring Bette Midler and James Caan, it has proved to be an unexpected box-office disappointment and perhaps the first major casualty of the holiday season, when moviegoing reaches a peak.
The film, a sentimental and elaborately emotional story about two U.S.O. performers over 50 years, received mixed to good reviews, and in the studio and in the film industry it was seen as a potential winner.


Quotation of the Day
"You do what you have to. You wake up every day, summon up the energy from somewhere. You think you haven't got it and you get through the day and you do it. Day after day after day." -- TERRY A. ANDERSON, explaining how he got through his ordeal.  [ A20:5. ]


Review/Film; Homage to a Partnership In Life and in the Arts
Among the tributes expressed in Elliot Caplan's beautifully filmed homage to the composer John Cage and the choreographer and dancer Merce Cunningham, the most sweeping comes from the poet and potter M. C. Richards.
Reflecting on a working relationship that has spanned half a century, during which Mr.
Cage and Mr.
Cunningham have fused their lives and art, Ms.
Richards imagines them as two benevolent angels.
In an era when many have begun to doubt whether human life will or should continue, she muses, their existence remains "an affirmation of life and ongoing working." Such words might sound grandiose when applied to other modern artists.
But within Mr.
Caplan's airy cinematic tribute, they resonate sweetly.


Events: Benefit Auction Of Miniature Rooms
Small Ideas
Christie's New York, 502 Park Avenue (59th Street); (212) 893-8600.
An auction of 19 miniature rooms by David Barrett, Susan Zises Green and other designers will be held at 6 P.M. on Monday.
Tickets, including reception, $60.
Proceeds will benefit Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club.


INTELLIGENCE CHIEF TELLS ABOUT PLAN FOR CHANGING ERA
Robert M. Gates, the new Director of Central Intelligence, said today that he intended to shrink America's espionage agencies by billions of dollars and thousands of employees and reorganize them for a world in which the Soviet Union was no longer the primary threat to world order.
In a sometimes blunt speech to intelligence employees, he warned that unless espionage agencies abandoned their lingering cold war bent and focused more on threats like nuclear proliferation and drug smuggling, the changes would be quickly forced on them by Congress.


E. J. de Margerie, Former Ambassador From France to U.S.
Emmanuel Jacquin de Margerie, a former French Ambassador to the United States and national museum administrator, died on Monday in Paris.
He was 66 years old.
Mr. de Margerie was posted in Washington from 1984 to 1989.
He was Ambassador to Britain from 1981 to 1984 and Ambassador to Spain from 1977 to 1981.


Samuel Dawson, 49; Was Defense Lawyer
Samuel H. Dawson, a prominent criminal defense lawyer in New York City, died Monday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 49 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Dawson was a founder and treasurer of the New York Council of Defense Lawyers and had been chairman of the City Bar Association's Criminal Advocacy Committee.


Working for the Japanese: Job Stability, but Long Hours
Until a few years ago, when Ghwee Kok Thai thought about Japan, it was through the stories of his father, one of the millions of Malaysians who were forced to learn the Japanese language, follow the commands of the Japanese Army and absorb Japanese culture after Japan ousted Britain as the colonial ruler of Malaya.
That was before Mr.
Ghwee, 31 years old, took a job as a personnel executive at Matsushita Television Company (Malaysia) a few years ago.
His father, he said, was "very proud."


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices were lower in Tokyo today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues lost 210.27 points, or nearly 1 percent, to close at 22,459.17.
On Wednesday, the index surged 502.61 points.


Added Cuts Are Planned By Du Pont
The Du Pont Company, hoping to make a substantial gain in profits, is planning a new round of belt tightening and productivity improvements, company officials said yesterday.
The program, which is still being prepared, will be different from a plan announced in July to cut costs by $1 billion and reduce employment by 5,500 jobs, in that the new plan does not have firm targets for cutting costs or the work force, said Edgar S. Woolard Jr., chairman of E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company.


Talking Deals; Reverse Buyouts Losing Appeal
THE market for initial stock offerings by debt-laden private companies appears to have taken a downward turn, leaving some investors and bankers openly wondering whether the opportunity for wild success in those deals has passed.
In such offerings, known as reverse leveraged buyouts, a company taken private returns to the public markets, allowing investors to buy a piece of the restructured company and its owners to profit handsomely.
Reverse buyouts have been among the most profitable deals on Wall Street in the last year, with the total dollar volume of offerings rising to $4.6 billion so far this year, from $583.3 million last year, according to IDD Information Services.


HAITIANS WIN STAY ON FORCED RETURN
In a ruling that maintains a temporary ban on the forced repatriation of Haitians fleeing their country, a Federal District Court in Miami has ordered the Immigration and Naturalization Service to devise new procedures to screen refugees and assure that no Haitians with a legitimate fear of persecution are sent back.
The decision, which Justice Department and immigration officials said would be taken to the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit in Atlanta, orders the Government to submit a screening plan for Haitians in American custody within seven days.


Corrections
A brief article by Reuters on Thursday about the folk singer Arlo Guthrie referred incorrectly to the building in Great Barrington, Mass., featured in his song "Alice's Restaurant." He does not own it; he is renting it while trying to raise money to buy it.


Tickets Honored By Some
Delta Air Lines, USAir and Continental Airlines yesterday offered to honor most tickets issued by Pan American World Airways, whose 64 years of aviation history ended in turmoil.
But the offers are for a limited time and contain an array of restrictions.
Moreover, American Airlines, which flies many of the same routes to the Caribbean and Latin America that Pan Am flew, said it would not accept any tickets from Pan Am or its commuter line, Pan Am Express.


Corrections
A news analysis article on Monday about Bridgeport University misstated the admissions policy of another Connecticut university.
Wesleyan, in Middletown, continues to admit students without regard to financial need.


G.O.P. Senator Opposes Using Rail Funds to Limit Subway Fare
With a fight looming in the Legislature over fare increases for mass transit in New York City, a powerful Republican Senator said today that he would adamantly oppose any attempt to transfer money from construction funds used for commuter railroads to the city's subway and bus lines.
The transfer is one method being explored by Metropolitan Transportation Authority officials to limit the fare increase in the city to 15 cents, from $1.15 to $1.30, rather than the 25-cent increase to $1.40 that the M.T.A. had proposed earlier.


Vintage McKim, Mead &amp; White
THE last period room that the American Wing of the Metropolitan Museum of Art can accommodate does not sound impressive: a vestibule and a staircase to nowhere.
But Peter Kenny, an assistant curator of American decorative arts, calls the 1884 oak-lined passageway "a really amazing early example of McKim, Mead &amp; White" as well as "a succinct style statement."
Rescued in 1980 from a Buffalo house on the verge of demolition, the room was installed last month between the museum's 1868-70 Renaissance Revival parlor and 1912-14 Frank Lloyd Wright living room.
Reflecting eclectic 1880's tastes, it features medieval-looking benches alongside an ornament-free fireplace, Georgian shell-topped niches, Japanesque lattice work and Moorish filigree.


New Jersey Called No. 1 in Northeast in the Cost of Political Races
Driven by the need to advertise in such high-priced markets as New York City and Philadelphia, by a proliferation of political action committees and by a lack of campaign contribution limits, New Jersey has become the most expensive state in the Northeast for state political campaigning, according to election officials and experts.
More than a dozen candidates in the Nov. 5 election for the Legislature spent $250,000 or more, making it the most expensive legislative race in state history.
Near the top of the list was Senator P. Thomas Foy, a Democrat who spent more than $413,000 in an unsuccessful bid to retain his seat representing a rural Burlington County district, according to incomplete campaign disclosure forms released today.
The final tally will not be available until January.


Bankruptcy Seen for Maxwell Companies
A top adviser to the Maxwell family's publishing empire said today that the family was preparing to put its collection of private companies into the British equivalent of bankruptcy.
The disclosure came in the wake of several developments that dealt what appeared to be a lethal blow to any last hope the Maxwells had of retaining control of much of their empire.


Gun Makers and Dealers Should Face Penalties; Mandatory Sentences
To the Editor:
"Voters' Courage on Guns" (editorial, Nov. 12) strongly approves strict liability by gun makers and dealers for injuries caused by assault weapons.
This will do little to control crime in the District of Columbia or elsewhere.
Every criminal who commits a crime with a gun must be assured that its mere use means a mandatory sentence of not less than five years.
Even if the lawyers plea-bargain the felony down to a lesser charge, the use of a gun to commit a felony or a misdemeanor would result in a mandatory sentence.


Corrections
A biographical sketch of Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum on Oct. 25 misidentified the law degree he earned at Ohio State University.
A reader's letter dated Nov. 20 points out that Mr.
Metzenbaum earned an LL.B., not an LL.D.


Toward a 'Family Friendly' Work Place
HER weekly calendar is a gridlock of meetings.
Some are with parents who utter a familiar lament: If only they had 28 hours in a day, perhaps they might find the energy to handle jobs and raise children at the same time.
Others are at corporations seeking ways to ease family stresses so employees can give their all when they are on the job.
Families and work.
These are the two worlds of Ellen Galinsky, a co-president of the Families and Work Institute, a nonprofit research and advisory organization in New York.
In the last decade, this 49-year-old educator and author has been a leader in efforts to bring the two together, to change corporate thinking so radically that American business might become what she calls "family friendly."


Hadco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Texas Medical School Gets 4 Gifts Totaling $85 Million
Four private gifts amounting to $85 million were announced today by the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center here, including three donations of $25 million or more each that are considered to be among the largest ever made to a public university.
Much of the money will be used to expand the institution's research in molecular biology, which in recent years has led to advances in treatments for arthritis, diabetes, heart disease and cancer under programs headed by two of the center's three Nobel laureates, Dr.
Michael S. Brown and Dr.
Joseph L. Goldstein.


Essay; Gulf-War Skeleton
A trifecta, as those who play the ponies know, is a bet on the order of finish: if you can predict win, place and show, you hit the jackpot.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo found himself "the subject of a journalistic trifecta," as he put it, when three columnists flashed by the Post on one day, all denouncing him -- one-two-three -- for trying to slip out of his opposition to using force in Iraq.


Between First and Second Wives, a Gulf
IN this quintessential suburb near Hartford, four women took a respite from their weekend chores one recent Saturday morning to attend a workshop on the increasingly necessary, yet awkward, relationship between the first and second wife of the same man.
On one side of the room sat two Firsts, a label they gave themselves.
On the other were two Seconds.
None in attendance had been associated with the same man: it was decided that this sort of encounter might be a bit too tense to be helpful, said Donna F. Ferber, the therapist who arranged and moderated the workshop in her office here.
Besides, exchanging fears and concerns with strangers in similar circumstances is often easier than with people you know, Ms.
Ferber said.


U.N. Envoy to Discuss German Hostages
The United Nations envoy who has been negotiating the fate of Western hostages in Lebanon is expected to visit Bonn on Thursday, officials said, in the wake of reports suggesting that the two remaining hostages, both Germans, may soon be freed.
Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher said in a statement that the envoy, Giandomenico Picco, would be here to discuss "the fate of German hostages."


Mary M. Phillips, 77, An Editor of Fashion
Mary McDonough Phillips, an editor who helped train a generation of fashion journalists, died last Friday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center after a long illness.
She was 77 years old and lived in New York City and Jupiter, Fla.
She had suffered from a blood disorder for more than 20 years, said her husband, Lynn Phillips.


Perrier Is Sued by a Rival
A Canadian beverage company has filed a multimillion-dollar lawsuit accusing Perrier of stealing its unique bottle design and violating trade agreements.
Nora Beverages Inc., of Mirabel, Quebec, said its lawsuit, filed Tuesday in United States District Court, stemmed from confidential negotiations it held with Perrier in 1988.


From Iran to U.S., a Hint of Good Will
The release of Terry Anderson closes a painful, eight-year chapter of America's experience with hostage taking in Lebanon and removes the most serious obstacle to an improvement in the relationship between Washington and Teheran.
Throughout the period when Americans were held hostage by Iranian-backed groups in Lebanon -- even during the ill-fated deals to exchange arms for hostages -- United States policy was to keep Iran at arms length, resolved that there could be no fundamental change in Washington's attitude until the last American went free.


Shaking Your Booty
STEPHEN VISAKAY has lent a chrome cocktail shaker, circa 1930, to the Broadway production of "Nick and Nora," and he hardly misses it.
In his Spring Valley, N.Y., home, he has 800 such shakers, and he is selling 50 more in the Nyack, N.Y., shop he runs with his fiancee, Arlene Lederman.
The couple met at a flea market six years ago, when both reached to claim the same shaker.
"So you know this is true love," Mr.
Visakay said.
Two years ago they opened their shop, Arlene Lederman Antiques, at 150 Main Street in Nyack.
There, they sell shakers that are duplicates of ones they own, from utilitarian $28 cylinders to $5,000 miniature airplanes that unfold to reveal decanters and 14 glasses.


Corrections
A sentence in a Nov. 21 letter on Africa by P. P. Lakshman appeared incorrectly because of the typographical error of "not" for "now." The sentence should have read: "It is ironic that Africans, who were the victims of colonialism and slavery by former European despots, are now seen as perpetrators of despotism."


The Gold Doesn't Shine: Untraditional Jewelry
Glitter is not to be found at "Things to Come: Jewelry Designs for the Future," a show featuring the work of 15 designers that opened yesterday at the Aaron Faber Gallery in Manhattan.
Instead, there are pieces made of rubber and touch fasteners, of metal oxidized and shaped to look like leaves, and of matte, rather than shiny, gold.
"A lot of pieces look like barren landscapes," said Patricia Faber, the director of the gallery, which is at 666 Fifth Avenue (53d Street).


Running for President: Hate and Fear
It's no surprise that the former Nazi and Ku Klux Klansman David Duke is running for President.
Mr.
Duke is a professional candidate.
He made a living that way for nearly 15 years, until 1988, when he was elected to Louisiana's legislature by the narrowest of margins.
Mr.
Duke's racist appeals did distressingly well in the Louisiana governor's race last month.
He received nearly 40 percent of the vote, a solid majority among all whites and strong support among upper-income whites as well.


Dodgers Put on Big Rush To Secure 2 Top Pitchers
In 15 minutes, the Los Angeles Dodgers solved their starting pitching shortage.
The Mets should be so efficient.
While the Mets look to unload some of their excess hitters for the pitchers they need to bolster their question- marked starting rotation, the Dodgers can sit back with relief and the knowledge that they have rebuilt theirs by signing two free agents, Orel Hershiser, their own, and Tom Candiotti.
Another of the Dodgers' free-agent pitchers, Mike Morgan, signed with the Chicago Cubs earlier Tuesday evening.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Della Femina Halts Miami Office Plan
With yesterday's shutdown of Pan American World Airways, Della Femina McNamee Inc., New York, has abandoned plans to open a Miami office to serve the airline's advertising account.
Billings had already dwindled to about $7 million this year from $45 million two years ago, said Jerry Della Femina, the agency's chairman and chief executive.
He predicted the loss will have "little financial impact," because billings were expected to be "tiny" next year.
The agency continues to handle the advertising for the Delta Shuttle, which was acquired from Pan Am in August.


The Christmas You Never Had


Theater Ads to Say if Play Has Officially Opened
Representatives of Broadway and Off Broadway producers reached agreement yesterday with the city's Department of Consumer Affairs in a controversy over whether advertisements should label as previews shows that have not officially opened.
As of Jan. 1, all display advertising must carry the word "preview" or announce the opening date of the play in clear and conspicuous type, Mark Green, the Consumer Affairs Commissioner, said yesterday in a statement.
The rule also applies to television and radio advertisements, but not to the so-called ABC listings, the classified directory of shows in daily newspapers.


Doctor Describes Death of a Girl Who Suffered Botched Abortion
A doctor from Kings County Hospital testified yesterday that a 17-year-girl died of infection after a botched abortion that may have involved dirty instruments.
Her testimony came on the second day of hearings on whether to revoke the license of Dr.
Abu Hayat, 61, who has been accused of botching eight abortions at his clinic at 9 Avenue A.


Keating Convicted Of Securities Fraud In S.&amp; L.'s Collapse
Charles H. Keating Jr., the Phoenix financier who has come to embody the troubles that decimated the savings and loan industry, was convicted today of securities fraud in connection with the collapse of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association.
A jury in a state court in Los Angeles found Mr.
Keating guilty on 17 of 18 fraud counts after deliberating for more than two weeks.
Mr.
Keating faces a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine.
Judge Lance A. Ito of the California Superior Court set sentencing for Feb. 7, and allowed Mr.
Keating to remain free on bail in the meantime.
The judge gave no indication of what sentence he might impose.


Bucks' Harris Resigns
DEL HARRIS, in his fifth season as coach of the Milwaukee Bucks, resigned yesterday and was replaced by his top assistant, FRANK HAMBLEN.
Harris said he wanted to devote more time to his duties as vice president of basketball operations.


Campuses, Artful and Otherwise
IN the finicky eye of Thomas A. Gaines, the author of "The Campus as a Work of Art" (Praeger, $45), Amherst College's hillside buildings represent "the last word in missed opportunities." The modernist skyline of the State University of New York campus in Purchase offers "one whammy too many for the harried eye," he writes.
Only a few campus features please him, like the Old Well at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, right, which he describes as satisfying "the human need for visual symbols."


Credibility of Chief Witness Is Debated in Closing Arguments of Miller Fraud Case
Assembly Speaker Mel Miller, one of New York State's most influential legislators, was an active participant in fraudulent schemes to buy and sell cooperative apartments, a prosecutor charged yesterday in his summation.
The prosecutor said that Mr.
Miller and his co-defendant, Jay Adolf, were "partners in crime" with Avi Cohen, the owner of a real-estate firm, who testified as the prosecution's main witness in the fraud trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


ANDERSON, LAST U.S. HOSTAGE, IS FREED BY CAPTORS IN BEIRUT
Terry A. Anderson, the last American and longest-held hostage in Lebanon, was set free tonight by his kidnappers after nearly seven years in captivity.
"I've thought about this moment for a long time and now it's here," he told reporters at the Syrian Foreign Ministry here.
"I'm scared to death. I don't know what to say."


Pop and Jazz in Review
Errol Parker  Drummer S.O.B.'s
The drummer Errol Parker's show at S.O.B.'s on Tuesday night steadfastly refused any allegiances.
The music, performed by a large band that included four saxophonists, a trombonist and a trumpeter, may have been jazz, for those broad-minded enough to accept pop influences, non-American influences and general eccentricity under the title.
It had elements of easy listening music -- the saccharine soprano saxophone appeared more than once -- and at times the music reached a pop intensity.


Wirtz Lacking 'the Vision Thing'
A month ago, when the National Hockey League Board of Governors met in New York, the members briefly considered a letter of resignation from William Wirtz, the chairman, who is also the owner of the Chicago Blackhawks.
Wirtz wasn't feeling well at the time and he was feuding with at least two teams.
John Ziegler, Wirtz's friend and the league president, seemed to think that Wirtz's attempt to resign was nothing more than a fit of pique.
A smiling Ziegler said that afternoon that the governors had refused to consider it.


Interstate Bakeries Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 16


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.60
4.68
7.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.32
4.36
7.00
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.31
4.35
6.86
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.72
6.81
8.07
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.84
7.89
8.31
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.85
8.90
9.66
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.88
6.87
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Barosaurus is Unveiled to the Public


ISRAEL A NO-SHOW, SO ARABS DEPART
Syrian, Lebanese, Jordanian and Palestinian negotiators gathered at the State Department today for the second round of Middle East peace talks, but they quickly departed after Israeli delegates failed to turn up.
Instead of taking part in the negotiations organized by the United States, Benjamin Netanyahu, an aide to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, held a news conference at which he was repeatedly challenged -- often by Israeli reporters -- to explain why Israel for 40 years said it would negotiate with its Arab enemies anytime, anywhere and was now balking at the opportunity to do just that.


CHRONICLE
There's always something to worry about on the frenzied New York social circuit, and for two days concern has been focused on ELIZABETH TAYLOR and her health.
Miss Taylor has had to cancel her appearance tonight at the annual masquerade dinner-dance of the American Foundation for AIDS Research because she has the flu and a fever hovering around 103, and has been told to stay home in Los Angeles.
In a statement issued by her publicity agent, Chen Sam, her physician DR.
MICHAEL ROTH was quoted as saying, "While this flu is not a life-threatening condition, Miss Taylor had a serious bout of pneumonia last year, and flying to New York under these circumstances would most certainly exacerbate this condition."


Care Faulted In the Death Of Warhol
Andy Warhol -- anemic, undernourished and fearful of hospitals -- slipped into a coma after surgery and died virtually unattended because his doctors overloaded him with fluids, a lawyer for his estate said yesterday in opening arguments in a wrongful death suit.
The lawyer, Bruce Clark, said that New York Hospital negligently pumped more than twice the required volume of fluids into Mr.
Warhol when he underwent gallbladder surgery five years ago and that the resulting internal pressure caused his death from heart failure.


Handley Makes Team Pride The Priority Over the Playoffs
For the Giants, it has come to this: Coach Ray Handley said today that the defending Super Bowl champions were playing this week mainly to restore pride.
Despite their 7-6 record, the Giants still have a remote chance to make the National Football League playoffs.
That chance might be less remote if they beat the Philadelphia Eagles (8-5) here on Sunday, the Washington Redskins (12-1) away and the Houston Oilers (9-4) in their three remaining games, an unlikely parlay.
But Handley said first things first.


Burnup &amp; Sims reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


And Now, a Word From the Tar Heels: Blowout
The made-for-television plan was that this game, Seton Hall against North Carolina, would be one of the highlights of the third and final challenge series between the Atlantic Coast Conference and the Big East.
The result was an unthinkably wide gap between the fifth- and sixth-ranked teams in The Associated Press poll.
North Carolina created the worst shooting nightmare of Terry Dehere's Seton Hall career, and ran past the Pirates, 83-54, at Meadowlands Arena.


Old Veterans Return to Mark a Day of Infamy
They are coming back to remember Pearl Harbor again.
Half a century after the surprise Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, which drew the United States into World War II, the old soldiers and sailors who survived that day of infamy are returning to ponder its meaning, honor the dead and socialize with old buddies.


EUROPE'S 'POOR 4' DEMAND MORE AID
Fearful of being condemned to "poor relative" status, Spain, Greece, Portugal and Ireland are demanding that their richer partners promise them greater aid when European Community leaders meet next week to chart the region's economic and political future.
Spain, which estimates that by next year it will become a net contributor to community funds, has even threatened to veto planned treaties on economic and political union if its proposal is rejected at the summit meeting on Dec. 9 and 10 in the southern Dutch city of Maastricht.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Hard Times Call for the Hard Sell
RETAILERS are changing the face they present to shoppers during the holiday season, shifting from the warm and fuzzy image-building long popular at this time of year to hard-selling product promotions.
The changes are particularly noticeable in network television and magazines.
They are beginning to seem more like radio and newspapers, filled with ads emphasizing prices, sales, limited-time offers and contests.
"Every bit of economic news is negative," said Pete Vetowich, executive vice president and director of retail at Ross Roy Group, which creates campaigns for K Mart and the K Mart Corporation's chains of office supply, sporting goods and home-improvement stores.
"You put that on top of the short selling season," Mr.
Vetowich added in a telephone interview from his office in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., "and there's reason to be very promotional.
The changes are apparent in campaigns for K Mart, by Ross Roy; Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, by Ogilvy &amp; Mather Chicago, and Toys "R" Us Inc., by J. Walter Thompson New York, and they echo what has been occurring in brand-name consumer products from cereal to soap.
There, too, long-term image advertising has become subordinate to short-term promotional programs.
"In this tough economy, to keep the stores open, you've got to sell product," said Susan Marber, vice president and group management supervisor at Grey Advertising Inc. in New York, which creates broadcast spots for Bloomingdale's.
Today and tomorrow, she added, the agency will shoot two holiday television spots for the retailer; one, called "Give Hope," will be altruistic, listing charities to which donations can be made, while the other, called "Best of Gifts," will be packed with products and prices.
When the spots start running on Dec. 13, "we'd love to do them 50-50," she continued, but in all likelihood the sales pitch will predominate.
For Toys "R" Us, Thompson New York has produced a television commercial touting the toy stores' selection of lower-priced video games, at $14.98 to $19.98, in addition to another spot, sans prices, devoted to the new Nintendo Entertainment System.
Toys "R" Us executives "wanted to make sure they were viewed as having reasonably priced video games as well as the higher-priced ones," said Marty Rose, a senior vice president and management director at Thompson New York, adding, "They know people are not as generous in spending money as in the past."
Among similar measures that Toys "R" Us is pursuing, Mr.
Rose listed radio commercials centering on a guaranteed-low-price program and booklets of coupons good for discounts on purchases of Mattel Inc. toys.
At K Mart, shoppers will find they can enter a sweepstakes, called "Celebrate a Magical Disneyland Christmas," that offers more than 100,000 prizes like a $500,000 annuity and 3,000 trips to Disneyland.
While in previous, more economically robust years, it would have been unusual for retailers to sponsor such consumer-enticing contests, "when economic conditions are not really strong, anything we can do to enhance sales is our job," said Jerry Habeck, K Mart's vice president of advertising in Troy, Mich.
For all the popularity of promotional advertising, retailers and their agencies say they recognize the problems it can generate, like weakening a brand name's value and conditioning consumers to buy only when prices are marked down.
"It is inevitable that if you take the price message to its logical conclusion, you go out of business," said Tom Hall, president and chief executive at Ogilvy Chicago.
That is why, he added, the agency, in creating Sears's holiday campaign, "gave consumers both kinds of messages, the price-product message and reasons why to feel smart or good about shopping at the store."


Chairman of Guinness Will Retire Next Year
Guinness P.L.C., Britain's sixth-largest company, announced yesterday that Anthony Tennant would retire as chairman and chief executive at the end of 1992 and be replaced by Tony Greener, the group's managing director.
It also said Lord Iveagh, the president, and Lord Macfarlane, deputy chairman, would retire at the annual general meeting next May and would not seek re-election to the Guinness board.


Sununu Expects Skinner Will Be New Staff Chief
John H. Sununu, the ousted White House chief of staff, said tonight that he expected his successor to be Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner.
Speaking in an interview on the Cable News Network, Mr.
Sununu, who submitted his forced resignation on Tuesday, also said he expected President Bush to name the new chief of staff either Thursday or Friday and to make the long-expected announcement of the President's top 1992 campaign staff at the same time.


A Design Archive Sings the Unsung
UNTOLD numbers of works by black American designers remain unidentified and unsung.
"Unless a picture or a description of the person survives, you would not know," said Ethel W. Williamson, who is organizing the Cooper-Hewitt Museum's African-American Design Archive, which will be a computerized collection of artisans' biographies.
So far she has gathered information on dozens of contemporary creators, including Sandy Baker, a jewelry maker; Douglas Phillips, a stained-glass restorer; Robert O'Neal, an industrial designer, and Edjohnetta Miller, a fabric painter some of whose work is shown here.


Gun Makers and Dealers Should Face Penalties
To the Editor:
Strict liability for firearms, which you discuss in "Voters' Courage on Guns" (editorial, Nov. 12), must be explored to slow the onslaught of guns that are killing and maiming innocent victims.
New York State has one of the toughest gun-control laws in the country, yet the statute can be easily circumvented.
Thus, in 1990 there were more than 1,400 handgun homicides in New York City with 39 children younger than 16 killed.


Home Video
In a CBS News documentary released on videotape today, a former radar operator looks back.
Early on the morning of Dec. 7, 1941, he reported a "large indication" of aircraft streaking in from the sea toward Pearl Harbor.
No one, he says, was very interested.
The CBS tape, "Remember Pearl Harbor," is one of several new videos that commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack.
CNN, too, has released a documentary and there is a third entry of an entirely different nature: "Dec. 7: The Movie," a free-wheeling feature film directed by John Ford and now available in its entirety for the first time since it was made in 1942.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Freddie Hubbard Quintet  Fat Tuesday's 190 Third Avenue, at 17th Street Manhattan Through Sunday
As young jazz musicians embrace the hard-bop of the 1960's, the musicians who invented the style have their pick of high-powered sidemen.
The trumpeter Freddie Hubbard has assembled an aggressive group of young musicians that shares some of his most daring music since the 1960's.


Duke Aims Higher


Homedco Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bayou Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


When Housing Gives Drugs a Roof
Sunlight barely penetrates the gloom of 1055 University Avenue in the Bronx.
Darkness fills its corridors and stairwells, obscuring the kinetic grafitti, the clumps of discarded clothing, the bulging bags of garbage and the grimy tile.
Many of the apartments, with cracked ceilings, creaky floors and gaping rat holes, are hardly any better and sometimes just as dim.
But it not just the ruin inside that the dark conceals.
It also cloaks the drug dealers who rule the courtyard, the lobby and several apartments in this 96-unit building overlooking the Major Deegan Expressway in the High Bridge section.


Review/Music; Of Grace and Grandiosity
Both Haydn and Liszt had strong physical ties to Hungary and an even stronger cosmopolitan bent, but there the similarities mostly end.
Musically, they make an odd couple, Haydn with his self-effacing grace and wry wit, Liszt with his preening grandiosity and ponderous proclamatory tone.
But the pianist Alfred Brendel is fond of both composers, and on Friday evening at the Metropolitan Museum of Art he split his recital between them.
Mr.
Brendel speaks Haydn like a native tongue, with exquisite timing and sense of scale.
Here he gave the E-flat Sonata (H. XVI:49) a robust reading, toying deliciously with the delayed recapitulation in the first movement.
After a refined account of the Andante With Variations in F minor (H. XVII:6), the pianist eased into the C-major Sonata (H. XVI:50) enticingly.
He fairly reveled in the "wrong" harmonies in that work's finale, and ended with clever understatement.


Survey Finds Vacant Slots In Drug Treatment Centers
Despite a chronic shortage of drug treatment programs in New York City, hundreds of treatment slots go unfilled because of a failure to match clients with available services, a new survey has found.
The survey, a spot check by a business group, found about a 7 percent vacancy rate, 351 openings in 23 programs with 4,779 treatment slots.
The survey, described as preliminary, covered about 10 percent of the programs in the city.


Study Set on Abortion Pill's Use in Breast Cancer
The French producer of the abortion pill RU486 will begin a large-scale study of the pill's potency in treating breast cancer next year in Canada, officials of the company said today.
Word of the study has frustrated researchers in the United States, who have sought to study the drug's effects on breast cancer as well other diseases, but have been turned down by the company because of the political conflict over abortion in the United States.


In the Nation; A Predictable Demise
John Sununu gave up the struggle to stay on as White House chief of staff more quickly than Sherman Adams did during the Eisenhower Administration.
Both formerly were New Hampshire Governors, both regarded themselves as indispensable to Presidents who almost agreed, and both were disliked if not despised by the rest of Washington.
Mr.
Sununu's offense was the more serious; he became a policy problem for President Bush and the Republican Party, widely regarded in and out of the White House as responsible for the Administration's lack of coherent policy on the domestic economy, its foot-dragging on environmental issues, and other political deficiencies.


Olympian's Dream: On the Road Again
By now, it was just another game for Shawn McEachern, another night of checking and skating and packing up the equipment.
"At the beginning, I remember it was really exciting playing the National Hockey League teams," the 22-year-old center said before the United States Olympic hockey team lost, 7-3, to the Rangers last night in an exhibition at Madison Square Garden.
"But it's been a long haul."


Flow International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


When Casey Could Have Met Iranians in '80; Suspicious Timing
To the Editor:
"The October Surprise: Hear the Case" (editorial, Nov. 19) misstates the issues in going ahead with a Congressional investigation of allegations that the 1980 Reagan Presidential campaign dealt with the Iranians to delay the release of the United States embassy hostages, and mischaracterizes the position of Congressional Republicans.


Justices Weigh Ban on Voicing Hate
The Supreme Court wrestled today with what steps the Constitution permits governments to take in efforts to curb speech and acts that express hostility based on race, religion or sex.
"Each generation must reaffirm the guarantees of the First Amendment with the hard cases," the Justices were told by a lawyer representing a St.
Paul teen-ager who is charged with burning a cross on a black family's lawn in violation of the city's "hate crime" ordinance.


Corrections
An article on Monday about "A Day Without Art," an observance for people who have died of AIDS, misidentified the organizer of a special exhibition, "A Space Without Art," at the Museum of Modern Art.
It was the museum's projects committee.


Ukraine Faces a Familiar Post-Communist Quandary of Money and Politics
Nascent self-government was working at cross-purposes today on two important levels of an independent Ukraine, laying bare the post-Communist quandary of how to attract new money and eclipse old politics.
In one part of the nation, apostate Communist Cabinet ministers angled to keep their jobs, while in another, Westward-looking bankers insisted the old Cabinet had to be quickly dumped if the new nation is to have any chance at international credibility.


President of Phibro Is Promoted to Chief
Salomon Inc.'s Phibro Energy unit announced yesterday that Andrew J. Hall, its president, would succeed Ernst Weil as chairman and chief executive when Mr.
Weil, who is 62 years old, retires on Dec. 31.
Phibro, a diversified energy company, has been seeking in recent years, largely at the initiative of Mr.
Hall, to expand its interests in oil production.
The centerpiece of that effort has been a joint venture in the Soviet Union informally known as the White Nights project because of the Siberian summers.


Petrolite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Corrections
An article on Friday about the cleanup of a lot in the South Bronx referred incorrectly to the owner's lawyer.
He is Aaron Gelbwaks.


George F. Harkins, 78, Leader in Lutheranism
The Rev.
George F. Harkins, a leader in American Lutheranism, died on Tuesday at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J.
He was 78 years old and lived in Wyckoff, N.J.
He died of complications of emphysema, his family said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Charles H. Keating Jr. was convicted of securities fraud in connection with the collapse of Lincoln Savings.
A jury in Los Angeles found Mr.
Keating guilty on 17 of 18 fraud counts after deliberating for more than two weeks.
Mr.
Keating faces a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison.  [ Page A1. ]
Pan Am finally died, broke and too weak to attempt yet another comeback.
The shutdown means the jobs of 7,500 Pan Am employees, thousands of whom had worked in the New York area and were in the process of moving to Miami.  [ D1. ]
Delta, USAir and Continental offered to honor most tickets issued by Pan Am, with some restrictions.  [ D6. ]
Carolco said it had laid off 50 people from its staff of 200 and was considering whether to end or scale back deals with a number of film makers.  [ D1. ]
I.B.M. plans to disclose today the first steps it will take on the road to fundamental change in its operations.  [ D1. ]
Du Pont is planning a new round of belt tightening and productivity improvements, company officials said.  [ D5. ] The Economy
The economy grew at a 1.7 percent annual rate during the quarter that ended in September, an advance considerably less than initially estimated and a disappointment to both private analysts and the Bush Administration.  [ D1. ]
A Fed survey showed that the nation's economy continued to weaken on the eve of the holiday shopping season.  [ D5. ]
Congressional hearings on the economy will spotlight the fundamental difference between Republicans and Democrats over tax policy and what makes the economy tick.  [ B18. ]
Sales of domestically made cars and light trucks rose 20.9 percent in late November, auto makers reported, and sales for the full month were down 6.7 percent from last year's level.
Analysts said the low annual rate of six million for the full month gave a more accurate reflection of the depressed industry.  [ D2. ]
The grueling push to overhaul the nation's banking laws will start all over next year, a top Presidential adviser and a senior member of Congress said.  [ D2. ] International
The Maxwell family is preparing to put its collection of private companies into the British equivalent of bankruptcy, a top adviser to the family's publishing empire said.  [ D1. ]
Japan has poured billions of dollars and enormous energy into East Asia over the last decade, building car factories and electronics plants, while America's attention was elsewhere.  [ D1. ] Markets
Stocks closed mixed for the second day, as blue-chip issues again failed to keep pace with the overall market.
The Dow fell 17.89, to 2,911.67.  [ D10. ]
Prices of Treasury securities continued to rise and interest rates moved lower again.  [ D18. ]
Coffee futures prices fell sharply after the Brazilian Government said it would be up to the factionalized private sector to develop a price-support plan.  [ D19. ]  The dollar ended weaker.  [ D19. ] Today's Columns
The market for initial stock offerings by debt-laden private companies took a downward turn.
Talking Deals.  [ D2. ]
Retailers are changing the face they present to shoppers during the holiday season, shifting from the warm and fuzzy image-building long popular at this time of year to hard-selling product promotions.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D8. ]
Analysts increased their estimates of Allergan's earnings after it signaled its intent to stop investing in its contact lens operation.
Market Place.  [ D10. ]


4 Held and Linked to 40 Queens Store Robberies
After a manhunt that included several stakeouts and air surveillance of a broad swath of Queens, the police have arrested four men and linked them to more than 40 convenience store robberies there since August.
In one robbery, in October, the store owner was killed.
A month later, the police said, the suspects returned to rob the store again and critically wounded the murder victim's cousin.


Error Exaggerates Wages
As it unveiled its major revision of data on the growth of the economy yesterday, the Commerce Department tripped up, making errors in some of the figures it released.
Not long after the tables of revisions were released, economists were calling the Department's Bureau of Economic Analysis because the figures for wages and salaries, especially for the first quarter of this year, looked way out of line.


Newport Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Throughout, A.P. Worked For Anderson
Over the nearly seven years since Terry A. Anderson was dragged into a car by terrorists in Beirut, obtaining his release was a paramount concern at The Associated Press, where his salary continued to be paid week after week in the determined hope that he would be able to claim it.
The A.P.'s partner in this effort was Peggy Say, Mr.
Anderson's sister.
With the news agency paying her expenses, Mrs.
Say sought public forums to call attention to her brother's plight even as top A.P. executives negotiated behind the scenes, including repeated meetings with Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North when he was serving President Ronald Reagan on the National Security Council staff.


PHP Healthcare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Police Seeking Motive in Baby's Death
The parents whose infant died in a fire that investigators said was started by a Swiss child-care worker told the police that they had noticed nothing unusual about the young woman's behavior in the five weeks since she arrived from Switzerland.
"We've touched base with the parents, and there were no obvious problems between them and the au pair, no incident or circumstances that made the parents think this could happen," said Chief Paul J. Oliva of the Mount Pleasant Police.
"In fact they were very content with her." Agency Defends Process
The agency that provided the family with the au pair continued to stand by what it had described as an elaborate screening process.
But other parents said today that they had had problems with the organization, based in Cambridge, Mass.
They said the young European women often arrive in the United States under the impression that their job is to study first and care for children second.
The parents, as well as an au pair, said the screening process was less than thorough.
Au pairs are usually hired to care for children in exchange for room, board and a stipend, as well as the adventure of living for a year in the United States.


Seven Oaks International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Its Cash Depleted, Pan Am Shuts
Pan American World Airways finally died yesterday -- broke and too weak to attempt yet another comeback -- two days after Delta Air Lines ended its financing arrangement.
The shutdown means the loss of the jobs of 7,500 Pan Am employees, thousands of whom had worked in the New York area and were in the process of moving to Miami to join the carrier at its new headquarters at Miami International Airport.


Thomas Nelson Porter, A Stage Manager, 59
Thomas Nelson Porter, a Broadway stage manager, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 59 years old.
He died of cancer, said his brother David, of Clearwater, Fla.


10-Day Sales Of Vehicles Up by 20.9%
Sales of domestically made cars and light trucks rose 20.9 percent in late November, auto makers reported today, but sales for the full month were down 6.7 percent from last year's level.
Analysts said the low annual selling rate of six million for the full month provided a more accurate reflection of the depressed auto industry in recent months.


Thoughts From The Glass Booth
Dr.
Manuel A. Gilman has watched nearly 19,000 horse races as one of the three stewards who monitor New York racing from a glassed-in booth high over the finish line.
But as he closes out as career that included 37 years as a veterinarian and 7 as a steward, the view that troubles him most is the Offtrack Betting parlor across the street from the race track.
"I am worried about racing," he said the other day at Aqueduct.
"I have a picture in my office showing 50,000 people at Belmont Park. You don't get crowds like that anymore. OTB has certainly changed racing as we used to know it.


Despite a Coup, Togo's Reform Prime Minister Clings to Post
Togo's reformist Prime Minister was still in his post today despite a coup by rebellious troops, but diplomats said he would have to make big concessions to hard-liners from the former ruling party.
The Prime Minister, Joseph Koffigoh, was under loose military guard after being seized on Tuesday in a bloody attack on his official residence by soldiers pledging allegiance to President Gnassingbe Eyadema.
Looking drained, Mr.
Koffigoh told reporters today in a news conference at his private home that he was free to go where he pleased.
But the Prime Minister declined to say whether he had started talks on naming a new cabinet.
General Eyadema had issued a statement Tuesday night saying that the two men would form a provisional government to replace Mr.
Koffigoh's three-month-old Cabinet.
General Eyadema, who led a military Government in Togo for 24 years, was stripped of all but his ceremonial functions in August when pro-democracy forces brought a civilian leadership to power. .
He a has distanced himself from the army's actions this week, but many citizens of this West African country accuse him of stage-managing the coup.
Public feeling against France, the former colonial ruler of Togo, is also running high.
Many Togolese assailed the French Government for not sending military support to bolster Prime Minister Koffigoh.
Shouting "Down with France!" crowds stoned the French Embassy and jostled Europeans in the streets.
The number of people killed in the battle for the mansion that serves as the Prime Minister's official residence was still unclear today.
Troops used tanks, shells and heavy machine-gun fire to blast their way into the building on Tuesday.
Red Cross workers seeking to evacuate casualties after the fighting stopped were denied entry, and witnesses said that many dead and wounded were taken to an army camp in Lome.
One soldier at the camp said he had seen about 200 bodies and that corpses were being returned to families in northern Togo, the region of Mr.
Eyadema's Kabye tribe.
The Kabye make up around 70 percent of the army.
Mr. Koffigoh urged all Togolese to return to the rule of law.
"The country must be governed, and I am setting about getting things back on track," he said at the news conference.


Howard Activated For Giants Practice
The Giants added Erik Howard to the practice roster today, and the Pro Bowl nose tackle took part in his first practice since back surgery 10 weeks ago.
Howard said he hoped to play Sunday against the Eagles.
Coach Ray Handley said he had to show in practice this week that he could make a tackle, take on a block and defend himself against double-team blocking.


Bucharest Journal; Critics View Ceausescu Works and, Well, Despair
The pompous apartments and sweeping boulevards were meant to mark the dawn of an era, eternal monuments defining the soul of Romania under Nicolae Ceausescu.
But now the future of the monstrous buildings is being debated as Romania struggles toward democracy.
Part of an urban renewal program after Bucharest's core was rent by an earthquake in 1977, the quarter was begun by the Romanian dictator in a spirit of gigantism that some have compared to the work of Albert Speer, Hitler's architect.
After Mr.
Ceausescu's engineers began leveling entire city neighborhoods, including the stirring 18th-century Church of the Holy Spirit, and damaged venerable monasteries of that epoch, the project was assailed by architects and art historians the world over.


INSIDE
False Start for Mideast Talks
Syrian, Lebanese, Jordanian and Palestinian negotiators gathered in Washington for peace talks but quickly departed after the Israelis failed to turn up.
Page A11.
A Grim Economic Report
The economy grew at an annual rate of 1.7 percent in the third quarter, considerably less than first estimated and a disappointment to analysts and the White House.
Page D1.
Scholarship Limits Proposed
Education Secretary Lamar Alexander announced a proposal to ban scholarships based exclusively on the recipient's race except in some circumstances.
Page A26.
Earliest American Books
Scholars say that illustrations on a ceramic vessel suggest that the ancient Maya civilization was using books 500 years earlier than previously believed.
Page A12.
Pan Am Is Shut Down
Short of cash and unable to attract more, the airline closed its doors, lay ing off thousands.
Page D1.
Maxwell Troubles Mount
The Maxwell publishing family was said to be preparing to put its private companies into bankruptcy.
Page D1.


Rough Justice for Dr. Baltimore
The renowned biologist David Baltimore has paid a harsh but necessary penalty for his efforts to whitewash a case of scientific fraud.
A 1986 research paper prepared under his supervision was supported in part by data almost certainly fabricated by a colleague.
The controversy over his handling of the affair has forced Dr.
Baltimore, a Nobel laureate, to resign as president of Rockefeller University.
At first impression, the penalty may not seem to fit the crime.
The research in question was carried out under Dr.
Baltimore's general direction in Massachusetts five years ago, well before he ascended to the presidency of Rockefeller, a distinguished research institution in Manhattan.


Canada's Reckons With AIDS
Across Canada today, players, coaches and fans of professional hockey anxiously struggled to come to terms with the disclosure by two Montreal doctors that a young woman who died of AIDS two years ago contended she had had sex with 30 to 70 National Hockey League players.
One doctor who treated the 24-year-old Montreal woman suggested that she was referring to sexual contacts dating to the mid-1980's and earlier, indicating that many of the players involved may no longer be on National Hockey League team rosters.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Advest Bank, Hartford, a unit of the Advest Group, named Charles P. Bassos president and chief executive. *
Coventry Corp., Nashville, which operates health maintenance organizations, said Philip Hertik, president and chief operating officer, would assume the additional position of chief executive next May.
He will succeed Joseph P. Williams, who will remain chairman. *
First Interstate Bank of Texas N.A., Houston, a unit of First Interstate Bancorp, said Linnet F. Deily, president and chief executive, would assume the additional post of chairman. *
Fuchs, Cuthrell &amp; Co., New York, an executive placement firm, named Walter R. Trosin vice chairman. *
Lincoln National Corp., Fort Wayne, Ind., an insurance holding company, named Robert A. Anker president and chief operating officer of the company and its Lincoln National Life Insurance Co. unit. *
Prudential Securities Inc., New York, a subsidiary of Prudential Insurance Co. of America, named A. Laurence Norton Jr. executive vice president.


Willis, Thomas Fined
KEVIN WILLIS of the Atlanta Hawks was fined $3,500 and ISIAH THOMAS of the Detroit Pistons was fined $3,000 by the N.B.A. for an incident during a game last Wednesday night.
Thomas was fouled by Willis while driving the lane with 1 minute 59 seconds left and the score tied, 90-90, in the game eventually won by Detroit, 100-91.
Willis was called for a flagrant foul and Thomas for a technical foul for retaliating.


An Artist's Joyous Gifts To Herself
AT the age of 85, Eva Zeisel could easily rest on her laurels.
One of the most prolific ceramists of the 1940's and 50's, she designed countless sets of sleek, joyous, mass-produced china for dozens of major manufacturers.
Occupied with writing and teaching since the mid-60's, she has now returned to product design, this time in wood.
Her new line of 19 accessories in poplar, cherry, walnut and mahogany includes candlesticks and lamps.
"I did them out of intense playfulness, or maybe as gifts to myself," she said.


Rebuilding the Building of Castles in the Sand in Casino Land
"It's the second oldest profession in Atlantic City," says Ralph Halpslader, who just a few months ago joined a new wave of sand sculptors in this storied resort city.
Mr.
Halpslader, who is in his 30's and describes himself as "basically homeless," works as he talks, restoring tautness to the haunches of a 10-foot alligator tousled a bit by the wind.
The alligator, which has seashells for teeth, seems to be stifling a grin that could make you look around to see if the dachshund you were walking is still safely on its leash -- a crocodile smile.


Next for Jets' Once-Stingy Defense Is Lions' Hard-Running Sanders
Until last Sunday, when they gave up 124 yards on the ground to Buffalo's Thurman Thomas, the leading rusher in the National Football League, the Jets had not allowed any runner to post a 100-yard game against them.
This Sunday, they will be going up against Detroit's Barry Sanders, the National Football Conference's leading rusher and second in the N.F.L. to Thomas, his former teammate at Oklahoma State.


Power of the Yen Winning Asia New 'Co-Prosperity' Is Displacing U.S.
The day that most Americans remember as a day of infamy resonates very differently in Asia.
Here, Pearl Harbor is regarded as a sideshow to Japan's real ambitions in World War II -- the creation of a "Greater East Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere," an economic and military empire that stretched from the coal mines of Manchuria to the oilfields of Indonesia.
Fifty years later, in radically different form and with very different purposes, the co-prosperity sphere lives on.
Over the last decade, while America's attention was elsewhere, Japan has poured billions of dollars and enormous energy into the region, building car factories and electronics plants here on the edge of the Malaysian jungle, employing thousands in the Thai countryside and erecting giant shopping centers and office towers in Hong Kong and Singapore.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-22 LAST U.S. HOSTAGE IS FREE
Terry Anderson, the longest-held American hostage in Lebanon, was freed by his kidnappers after nearly seven years in captivity.
Smiling and laughing as he met with reporters in Syria, he said he was in good health.
A1


For Disabled Women, A Time For Sharing
Each Saturday and Sunday in an auditorium at the Y.W.C.A. on Lexington Avenue in Manhattan, the Networking Project for Disabled Women and Girls brings together the two groups so that they can learn from each other.
"I knew no other disabled person when I was growing up," said Carr Massi, who is the secretary for the occupational therapy department at the New York University Medical Center and serves on the board of the Brooklyn Center for Independence.
"If I can give the younger girls some of what I had to learn alone, it's worth it."


The Hostage Lesson, Even Now
President Reagan had just started his second term.
The buzz in Congress on March 16, 1985, was about Star Wars, MX missiles and the forced resignation of Secretary of Labor Raymond Donovan.
That same day Terry Anderson was kidnapped in Beirut.
Now Mr.
Anderson, the last American hostage, is rubbing his eyes in a strange new world in which blocs and walls have collapsed and even the Middle East is talking peace.
Seeing Terry Anderson yesterday one could have imagined a man filled with anger at having been robbed of a tenth of his life.
He wasn't.
He was composed, even chipper as he joked about playing solitaire while listening to a radio account of his progress toward freedom.
His comportment showed that civility and humanity can prevail over dark cruelty.


Vikings Confirm Report That Burns Will Retire
The Minnesota Vikings confirmed yesterday that JERRY BURNS would retire as coach after the season.
Burns had indicated in recent weeks that he would not return.
"After a period of time, I just decided that I'd had enough of coaching," Burns said in a statement released by the team, which has a 6-7 record.


Keating Convicted Of Securities Fraud In S.&amp; L.'s Collapse
Charles H. Keating Jr., the Phoenix financier who has come to embody the troubles that decimated the savings and loan industry, was convicted today of securities fraud in connection with the collapse of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association.
A jury in a state court in Los Angeles found Mr.
Keating guilty on 17 of 18 fraud counts after deliberating for more than two weeks.
Mr.
Keating faces a maximum sentence of 10 years in prison and a $250,000 fine.
Judge Lance A. Ito of the California Superior Court set sentencing for Feb. 7, and allowed Mr.
Keating to remain free on bail in the meantime.
The judge gave no indication of what sentence he might impose.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising -- Addenda; Employees Return To Foote, Cone
The twenty employees who left Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Direct last week to start their own direct-marketing shop returned yesterday after legal action was taken against them.
"When it became clear that it was going to be more awkward and complex than they had thought," said Mitchell T. Engell, executive vice president and managing director at Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago, everyone involved decided to "get back in business together." All the parties involved declined to provide any details of their discussions.


Excavation Stirs Debate On Cemetery
Two months ago in lower Manhattan, just a few steps ahead of the bulldozers, archeologists working where a new Federal office tower is to rise began unearthing an 18th-century cemetery that had endured as one of the oldest vestiges of a black community in New York City.
Since then, the dig has grown to remarkable proportions: 93 skeletons have been found and there is the possibility that another 70 remains may await discovery.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  STRIKING A DEAL ON HOSTAGES
As the U.N.
Secretary General recalls it, the first sign that all the Western hostages would be freed came when the Iranian President gave him his word that Teheran would use its influence.
A1  Terry Anderson was reunited with his sister in Germany.
A12


For Children
Environmental and Museum Tours
North Wind Undersea Institute  610 City Island Avenue  City Island  The Bronx  (212) 885-0701  Recommended ages: 3 and up
The North Wind Undersea Institute, a maritime museum founded in 1978 by Michael Sandlofer, a deep-sea diver, in a cluster of old buildings on the main street of City Island, was originally meant to draw attention to the plight of whales and the marine environment.
These days, the institute also offers trail rides through nearby Pelham Bay Park on wagons pulled by hefty draft horses.
The tours, which focus on the environmental surroundings, are led by Mr.
Sandlofer or Pam Wood, a North Wind volunteer, through the leafy, crunchy trails of the park.
The tour starts with a slide lecture and the hitching up of two draft horses to the wagon.
Participants are asked to wear helmets provided by the institute.
The two-hour tour wends its way along city roads and into the park, where some of the Bronx's wetlands are pointed out and the horses slow down and rest at a cove overlooking Eastchester Bay.
At that point, the horses sometimes demonstrate their prowess by pulling logs.


Review/Film; A Tale of 5 Schoolboys As War Began 50 Years Ago
December could not be a worse time for releasing "December," a small, talky film that's sure to get lost in the holiday shuffle.
But the release date was inevitable, since this film, which opens today at the Sutton, revolves around the bombing of Pearl Harbor 50 years ago and the effect of that event on five students at a boys' boarding school.
From the night they learn of the attack to the next morning, when those students who have decided to enlist board a bus taking them away from school and childhood, the film's principal characters stage a marathon debate on the meaning of war.
Everything they have to say is expressed with passion, but all of it has been said before.


Man Said to Recant Barnard Rape Claim
A 25-year-old man who had reported that he was raped while visiting Barnard College on Nov. 22 has recanted his account and is being charged with falsely reporting a crime, officials in the Manhattan District Attorney's office said yesterday.
The man, Billy Poolaw of 206 West 24th Street, was arrested after signing a statement in which "he admitted to us that no crime had occurred," said Gerald McKelvey, a spokesman for the District Attorney's office.


Art in Review
'Brooklyn' Jack Tilton Gallery 24 West 57th Street Manhattan Through Dec. 21
This group exhibition of artists from Brooklyn proves that art east of the East River is just as pluralistic as it is in the rest of the country.
Every work on view has merit and very little stylistic common ground with its neighbors, although there's a certain amount of realism present, in one form or another.


Full-Price Brands Fighting Off Assault by Cheaper Rivals
AS the souring economy spurs shoppers to buy lower-priced products, some marketers of full-price packaged goods are fighting back.
Consumers "still want to buy a name brand, but they don't want to pay a big price," said Deepak Raj, an analyst who follows household and personal-care products for Merrill Lynch Research in New York.
"That puts pressure on the manufacturers."


Art in Review
Patrick Nagatani and Holly Roberts Jayne H. Baum Gallery 588 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through Dec. 28
In his photographic constructions, Patrick Nagatani relies on a theatrical, jokey style to consider the influence of nuclear weapons on American culture.
Mr.
Nagatani, a Japanese-American artist who lives in Albuquerque, N.M., deploys an impressive array of techniques, including collage, multiple printing and hand-coloring, to address this weighty topic.
In a number of images here, he stages elaborate and humorous tableaux to point out contradictory attitudes toward the history and effects of nuclear weaponry.
In one, a gaggle of Japanese tourists excitedly photograph a monument at the site of the first atomic bomb explosion; the sky behind them is a lurid mix of red and black.
Elsewhere he prints images together to create strange but suggestive juxtapositions.
In one instance here, he pairs an image of Hopi dancers with a picture of a group of missiles pointed skyward, setting up a comparison between modern ideology and tribal myth that is both ironic and effective.


Lotus Plans To Lay Off 10% of Staff
The Lotus Development Corporation announced today that it planned to lay off 300 to 400 employees, or 10 percent of its work force, and take a $14 million to $18 million charge against earnings in the fiscal fourth quarter of 1991.
The company also said it would consider moving from its Cambridge, Mass., headquarters and was studying lower-cost alternatives.
Richard Eckel, a Lotus spokesman, stressed that the layoffs and charges were cost-saving measures and that despite the situation the company's revenues were showing healthy growth.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M.
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Review/Film; Saving the Savages, but Losing Themselves
"At Play in the Fields of the Lord," Hector Babenco's adaptation of the Peter Matthiessen novel, is a big, melancholy screen adventure, vividly realized in the jungles of Brazil, about people out of touch with one another and at dangerous odds with a primeval world they understand not at all.
With fidelity to the book, and to the look, sound, heat and wet of the exotic locale, Mr.
Babenco evokes the arrogant confusion of a small group of mismatched North Americans, caught in a brutal landscape that overwhelms them even as it's disappearing.
Though the movie sometimes has trouble expressing what's on its mind, it is a rare movie in that it has something on its mind to express.


Review/Film; A Meeting Of Youth And Age
Horton Foote, who wrote Robert Duvall's Oscar-winning role in "Tender Mercies" (and won an Oscar for himself), provides Mr.
Duvall with another big, actorly opportunity in "Convicts," opening today at the Angelika Film Center.
Soll Gautier is made to Mr.
Duvall's measure.
Soll is very old; the skin on his face is as tough as the hide of a hippo.
He's also as mean as he is stingy, which is how he has survived.
Although Soll is land-rich, he ekes out a bleak existence, using cheap convict labor to work the cane fields of his cheerless plantation on the Texas Gulf Coast.


Oldsmobile Cutting Rate On Leases
Oldsmobile offered unusually inexpensive-lease terms today for its new Achieva compact, which arrives in showrooms this month.
The struggling General Motors
division is hoping that the new model will win back market share from Japanese competitors like the Honda Accord.


Review/Film; How an Orphan Finds Love And Turns Grim With Age
"I don't care! I can only live once!" declares the tempestuous heroine of "Rouge of the North" as she embraces the man for whom she has secretly lusted.
This is soap opera, all right, but since it's set in China it has a distinctly regional flavor.
This surreptitious clinch occurs in the family shrine before a large golden Buddha.
The principals, related by marriage and named according to birth order in a wealthy family, are known as "Mrs. 2" and "Mr. 3." And even when they fall into each other's arms, they do so with a sense of ceremony and obligation.
"We have to pay our debts to each other!" one of them breathlessly exclaims.
"Rouge of the North," which opens today at the Cinema Village Third Avenue, is based on a novel by Eileen Chang and tells of Ying-ti (Hsia Wen-shi, who has the look and manner of an experienced screen star), first seen in 1910 as an orphan who abandons any hope of real love when she is forced into an arranged marriage.
Only when the groom emerges from his sedan chair does Ying-ti discover that he is crippled and blind.


In New York, the Doctor Is Out
New York State suffers from a surge of public health problems, yet the crucially important posts of State Health Commissioner, New York City Health Commissioner and president of the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation remain vacant.
Mayor David Dinkins may be forgiven for not having filled the Health and Hospitals post.
Dr.
J.
Emilio Carrillo resigned only recently.
But the jobs of City and State Health Commissioners have remained unfilled for months.
Dr.
Woodrow Myers resigned the city post in May; the state job has been vacant since February, when Dr.
David Axelrod suffered a stroke.


Hmmm. Who Could Serve as Yankee Boss?
The New York Yankees will undoubtedly round up the usual list of suspects in the team's search for its third managing general partner in less than two years.
Leonard Kleinman.
Hank Steinbrenner.
Hal Steinbrenner.
And -- dare his supporters say it aloud? -- George Steinbrenner.


Anderson Arrives at Germany Base And Appears Vigorous and Healthy
Terry A. Anderson, freed by his Iranian-backed captors in Beirut on Wednesday, looked vigorous and jubilant today as he took his first steps on Western soil since being kidnapped nearly seven years ago.
Grinning broadly and seemingly bursting with energy, Mr.
Anderson bounded out of an Army helicopter as dawn broke over Wiesbaden.
One of the first people he saw was his sister, Peggy Say, who had worked tirelessly for his release.


Accounts
*
Homeclub Inc., Fullerton, Calif., a home-improvement products retailer, to Larsen Colby, Los Angeles, for its $12 million broadcast advertising account.
The other finalists were Davis Ball Colombatto, Los Angeles, the incumbent; Della Femina, McNamee, Los Angeles; Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws Advertising, Los Angeles, and the Richards Group, Dallas.
Larsen Colby will handle creative and production; another shop will do media buying. *
Internet Inc., Reston, Va., to DDB Needham Worldwide, Washington, for its Most electronic banking network.
The agency estimated billings at about $2 million.
Earle Palmer Brown, Richmond, previously handled the account. *
Farallon Computing Inc., Emeryville, Calif., to Dahlin Smith White, Salt Lake City, to advertise computer networking products.
Billings were estimated at $1 million.
Clement Mok Designs, San Francisco, had previously handled the account.


2 WPP Units Are Combined
Einson Freeman Inc., Paramus, N.J., a unit of WPP Group P.L.C. that specializes in promotional work, has acquired the North American operations of another WPP unit, Promotional Campaigns Worldwide, London.
The move should increase Einson's billings by 10 percent to 12 percent, said Jeffrey K. McElnea, its president.
Last year, Einson was one of the 10 largest promotional firms in the United States, with billings of about $65 million.


Comptroller Urges Control Board To Press Dinkins on Fiscal Goals
The State Comptroller called yesterday on the State Financial Control Board to step up the pressure on Mayor David N. Dinkins to shrink New York City's government in more drastic ways than were outlined in the Mayor's long-term financial plan in November.
The Comptroller, Edward V. Regan, asserted that a resolution by the board was needed because "there is a vacuum" of leadership at City Hall.
Such a resolution would be largely symbolic but could be a prelude to a takeover of the city's finances by state, he said.


Mets May Pursue Mercker
Before departing for baseball's winter meetings in Miami, General Manager Al Harazin told reporters yesterday the Mets needed "another pitcher to be the kind of club we want to be, and the kind of pitcher we need is one that could be a No. 1, No. 2 or No. 3 starter."
Don't be surprised, then, if the Mets go after Kent Mercker, a left-hander for the Atlanta Braves.
The 23-year-old Mercker, used primarily as a reliever in the majors, could be converted back into a starter.
He throws very hard and had a 5-3 record with a 2.58 earned run average this season, but his future with the Braves is up in the air.


Moscow Seen as Controlling A-Arms
The shriveling central Soviet Government holds firm control over its 27,000 nuclear weapons, Pentagon officials said this week, but the former republics are pressing for a greater say in the fate of the weapons on their soil.
The Soviet authorities are said to be in early discussions with Ukraine to give the newly independent republic greater control over the 4,000 nuclear weapons on its territory.
Ukraine, which has pledged to create a nuclear-free state, has called for the republics with strategic nuclear weapons to form a collective military command to control and eventually destroy them.


On Stage, and Off
Of Bookings and Possible Bumpings
If you haven't noticed the vultures circling Broadway lately, look again.
There is a booking crunch for the second half of the season, when activity traditionally picks up.
That means there are too many shows for the theaters available.
And finding the right home for a show can mean its life or death, both artistically and at the box office.


Arabs Challenging U.S. on Talks
The three Arab delegations challenged the Bush Administration today to set a new official opening date for the resumption of peace talks, or risk a breakdown of negotiations.
The proposal appeared to be an effort to avert the impression that the Arabs were acquiescing to Israeli demands that the talks be postponed until early next week.
Arab delegates appeared for the scheduled opening of the talks at the State Department Wednesday, but refusing to face empty chairs a second day, they decided not to return today.


Deft Design on Minority Scholarships
Education Secretary Lamar Alexander has found a formula that may rescue the Bush Administration from an unnecessary, embarrassing flap over the legality of college scholarships based on race.
He says race-based scholarships are legally questionable, thereby winning plaudits from conservatives who oppose affirmative action programs.
But he also says that some race-exclusive scholarships are legal and that administrators may seek diversity on campus by using race as one factor in awarding aid.
That's a mixed signal, but a more positive one than the Education Department sent out a year ago when this controversy first surfaced.


Review/Dance; A Heritage Is Affirmed In 'Griot New York'
"Griot New York" is one of the happiest and most poetic dance premieres of the season.
This first-time collaboration by the choreographer Garth Fagan, the composer and trumpeter Wynton Marsalis and the sculptor Martin Puryear is constantly blessed with a quality of surprise.
Free of polemics but rooted subtly in distilled allusions to the black experience, the choreography moves with urban bustle and pastoral lyricism toward a celebration of life.
There is no griot, or African storyteller and keeper of his people's history, onstage; but the collaborators play that role implicitly, offering a panorama of existence, a mini-epic of sorts.


Houston Mayoral Candidates Avoid Race as Issue
For several weeks the two candidates in the Houston mayoral race have debated each other, criticized each other and dissected each other's positions on a variety of issues without even hinting at one major difference between them.
Bob Lanier, a real estate developer, is white.
State Representative Sylvester Turner is black, and he is the first black politician to make a serious bid to become the mayor of the nation's fourth largest city.


Review/Theater; A Woman's Power To Banish Defeat With Goodness
THE title character of "Marvin's Room," who is seen only as a blurred shape behind the glass-brick wall of his sickroom, has been dying for 20 years.
Eaten up by cancer and crippled by strokes, he turns for entertainment to the simple pleasure of watching his lamp's light bounce around the walls and ceiling when it is reflected at bedside from a compact mirror.
The heroine of "Marvin's Room" is the woman who takes care of Marvin, his 40-year-old daughter Bessie (Laura Esterman).
She is dying of leukemia.
The play's other characters include Marvin's aged sister and Florida housemate, Aunt Ruth (Alice Drummond), who has electrodes in her brain to stop the pain of three collapsed vertebrae, and Bessie's sister, Lee (Lisa Emery), a cosmetician who is in good health but has two severely troubled teen-age sons, the older of whom has been confined to a mental institution since burning down his own house and much of his neighborhood.


TV Weekend; John Larroquette Becomes Noble. Honestly.
Like it or not, this is the time of year when heartwarming stories proliferate on television schedules.
Choosing carefully becomes the chief line of defense against sugar poisoning.
Pitifully few of television's new Christmas-theme movies are likely to lift holiday spirits, but there are exceptions.
One can be found at 9 P.M. on Sunday on NBC: "One Special Victory," starring John Larroquette.
Mr.
Larroquette has collected several Emmy Awards for his work in the NBC series "Night Court." Now, as both star and co-executive producer of "One Special Victory," he gets to play a similar character, a kind of rogue only millimeters away from being a slimeball.
Kinky wit and perverse charm are Bo Arner's only saving graces.
He's an incorrigible wheeler-dealer, overspending and hustling outrageously even as the bank machine refuses to return his card because of insufficient funds.


Quotation of the Day
"I got a promise that the Iranians would help me as much as they could, and I was able to personally confirm all the arrangements with Rafsanjani. It was in those discussions that we prepared the final operation." -- SECRETARY GENERAL JAVIER PEREZ de CUELLAR, on the release of the hostages in Lebanon.  [ A1:3. ]


Survivors Tell Tales About Pearl Harbor
Japanese bombers appeared suddenly on Dec. 7, 1941, in the skies over Pearl Harbor, Jimmy Bryan recalls.
"Machine gun bullets started rattling all around me," said Mr.
Bryan, then a 20-year-old coxswain who watched as a bomb hit a turret on the battleship Arizona where his brother was a gunner.
The Arizona disappeared with 1,117 sailors, including his brother.


Redmen Not Quite Up to Challenge
The Atlantic Coast Conference completed its domination of the third and final Big East-A.C.C. challenge with a pair of powerful performances this evening against two of the Big East's flagship teams.
In the opener, Virginia defeated Georgetown, 76-66, in overtime.
And in what was to have been the marquee game, Duke (3-0) built leads of 27 and 31 points and then coasted to a 91-81 victory over St.
John's (3-1) at the Greensboro Coliseum.


Repeal of U.N. Zionism Resolution Seen
The United States and Israel are now confident they have the necessary votes to repeal a General Assembly resolution equating Zionism with racism before the current General Assembly session ends Dec. 17, the Israeli delegate to the United Nations said today.
"We always said that when we had a majority we would move," Yoram Aridor, the Israeli delegate, said.
"And we are now sure we have that majority."


Give My Regards to Yankees, Says Nederlander
Saying that the juggling of two high profile and full-time jobs in baseball and theater had become too much to handle, Robert Nederlander announced yesterday that he would resign as managing general partner of the Yankees at the end of the year.
The decision did not come as a shock because there were reports in early October that the 58-year-old theater impresario had grown disenchanted with the lengthy hours and persistent criticism that accompanied his role with the Yankees during the last 16 months.


Daily News Files for Bankruptcy But Seeks to Continue Publishing
The Daily News filed for Federal bankruptcy court protection yesterday, and while the paper will probably continue to operate for now, the possibility that it will soon be sold or closed has greatly increased.
The paper's bankruptcy filing came on the same day that the Maxwell family's privately held companies, which control The Daily News and hundreds of other family companies, filed for bankruptcy in Britain.
The British court appointed four partners at Arthur Andersen &amp; Company, the accounting firm, to act as administrators of the private companies.  [ Page D7. ]


Tax Ruling Worries Officials Of Bowls
Officials of several college bowls expressed concern yesterday that a new Internal Revenue Service ruling imposing taxation of the bowls' corporate sponsorship money could substantially reduce payouts to colleges and impair the quality of the post-season games.
"The real losers are the universities, which will have fewer funds for their educational programs," said John Stuart, the president of the Cotton Bowl Athletic Association.
"Since 1972, over 100 colleges and universities have gotten funds from bowl games. You drop that, you hurt them."


In Hawaii, Survivors Tell Tales Of Dec. 7
Fifty years have done little to dull Jimmy Bryan's searing memory of the morning of Dec. 7, 1941, the Sunday morning he watched as his brother was killed on a nearby battleship and 350 of his own shipmates were cut down and burned to death.
He was a 20-year-old coxswain on the battleship Nevada when Japanese bombers appeared suddenly out of the skies over Pearl Harbor.
"I was standing on the main deck when machine gun bullets started rattling all around me," he recalled.


Coke Is Undecided On the Super Bowl
Coca-Cola U.S.A. has still not decided whether it will advertise during CBS's telecast of Super Bowl XXVI, said Steve Koonin, director of national promotions and entertainment marketing of Coca-Cola.
The nation's largest soft-drink marketer and its archrival, Pepsi-Cola, have used the Super Bowl as a showcase for special commercials.
Pepsi has indicated that it plans to run commercials, each of which will cost $850,000 per 30-second spot, during the game on Jan. 26.


Old Battlefields Draw G.I.'s as Tourists
As thousands of World War II veterans and their families gather in Honolulu this week for the 50th anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor, they are also beginning what promises to be one of the nation's biggest exercises in nostalgia: the return of tens of thousands of G.I.'s to the battlefields of Europe and the Pacific over the next four years.
Many of the old soldiers and sailors of World War II are already signing up for commemorative tours of Normandy, France, in June 1994, the 50th anniversary of D-day, and are making plans to sail into Tokyo Bay in 1995, to commemorate the Japanese surrender aboard the battleship Missouri.


Society's Ambivalence Clouds Date Rape Issue; State of Consent
To the Editor:
Katie Roiphe objects to the image of men wanting sex and women resisting it, recreated in what she calls the "movement against date rape." She asks, "When did the possibility of sex become an 'unnecessary risk'?" and argues that books instructing women on how to avoid date rape hark back to Victorian conduct guides.
Finally, she celebrates her alternative vision of women as "strong and sensual, as autonomous, pleasure-seeking, sexual beings."


Terry Slater, 54, Dies; Colgate Hockey Coach
Terry Slater, Colgate University's hockey coach, died today at Crouse Irving Memorial Hospital, four days after suffering a stroke at his home in Hamilton, N.Y.
He died on his 54th birthday.
Mr.
Slater began coaching at Colgate in 1977, and in his 15 seasons became the most successful hockey coach the university has ever had.
His Colgate teams compiled a record of 251-180-23 and played at the highest level of intercollegiate competition for the first time.
In 1990, the Red Raiders won the Eastern Collegiate Athletic Association title and skated in the national championship game, losing to Wisconsin.


Society's Ambivalence Clouds Date Rape Issue; Don't Blame Feminism
To the Editor:
What is Katie Roiphe talking about in "Date Rape Hysteria" (Op-Ed, Nov. 20)?
She purports to discuss date rape, but dismisses it as "a neo-puritan preoccupation" and a "paranoid metaphor." The problem, she states, is that "certain feminists are busy turning rape into fiction."


Border War on Lake Champlain Waste
Hostilities have erupted between New Yorkers and Vermonters over the operation of a giant paper mill here that discharges waste into Lake Champlain.
In a charge led by Vermont's Governor, Howard Dean, Vermont environmentalists are demanding that New York State officials force the International Paper Company mill to use oxygen instead of chlorine to bleach its paper products.
They contend that the byproducts of the chlorine process are carcinogenic.


CHRONICLE
Is ALEXANDER LIBERMAN, the editorial director who has shaped Conde Nast magazines for years and who has recently been hospitalized for heart problems, about to be replaced by (a) TINA BROWN, editor of Vanity Fair, (b) ROCHELLE UDELL, associate editorial director of Conde Nast, or (c) ANNA WINTOUR, editor in chief of Vogue?
None of the above, BERNARD LESER, president of Conde Nast, said adamantly this week, responding both to office rumors and to a report in the Dec. 4 issue of Inside Media, a trade publication.


Fire in Times Square Destroys Businesses and Snarls Traffic


When Mythology and Real Life Clash
"What's wrong with the Giants?" echoes Charles Garfield, the management consultant, in the middle of our power breakfast.
The bagel is en route to his mouth, but Garfield, a former rocket scientist, knows about trajectory.
"The coach violated the basic rule: You do not lose your position because you get injured. Think of the message he sent to his team after he started Jeff Hostetler. Every player, even Lawrence Taylor has to say, 'If it can happen to Phil Simms, it can happen to me. One injury and I'm history.' Some of them start to play differently."
"Wait a minute," I say, giving him a chance to bite and chew.
"Ray Handley may not be a rocket scientist, but he could have figured this out."


Mandela Seeks U.S. Backing for Goal
In a meeting with President Bush and other Administration officials, Nelson Mandela sought today to convince the United States that establishment of an interim government in South Africa that included representatives of the country's disenfranchised blacks would speed the transition to multiracial democracy.
Mr.
Mandela, president of the African National Congress, South Africa's largest black political organization, told reporters after the White House meeting that the lifting of trade sanctions against South Africa should be tied to the installation of a government more representative of the population.
Under such a government, he said, a constitutional convention could be called and a new constitution written.


Hard-Earned Change
Decisions, decisions.
Paul Stubbs never found shopping easy.
Not long ago he would not have had the gumption to even try venturing into a grocery store alone.
That was then.
Now he dropped some toothpaste into his green basket, then scooped up an orange drink and a few bottles of fruit punch.
He reached for a bag of chips, then vetoed the idea.
He craned his neck to inspect a wild berry drink.
"Any good?" he asked Luke Walsh, a store attendant.


William Alexander, Producer Featuring Blacks, Dies at 75
William D. Alexander, a pioneer in black film making, died on Nov. 19 at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 75 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of cancer, said Harriet Barton, a friend.


LAWMAKERS QUERY PANELIST'S ETHICS
The director of the White House Council on Competitiveness, Allan B. Hubbard, helped decide a pollution rule that favored a company in which he owns stock, Representative Henry A. Waxman said today.
At the same time, two advocacy groups, O.M.B.
Watch and Congress Watch, called for Mr.
Hubbard's resignation for what they said were conflicts involving the Clean Air Act amendments of 1990.
Mr.
Waxman, a California Democrat, said Mr.
Hubbard's behavior was so flagrant it could be a violation of ethics law.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.62
4.60
7.43
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.34
4.32
7.01
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.36
4.31
6.89
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.77
6.72
8.08
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.84
7.84
8.32
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.87
8.85
9.67
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.88
6.88
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Diner's Journal
Laura Belle
Nightclub food used to conjure up images of gray steaks, reheated potatoes, pale green beans and fountains of Champagne.
That is changing fast.
Several clubs in New York City offer more than competent fare: Tatou, the Grolier Club, Maxim's and Rex, to name a few.
Perhaps the most ambitious dance fuel is served at Laura Belle, the stylish club in a former movie palace at 120 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
It is owned by Michael O'Keeffe of the River Cafe in Brooklyn and the Water Club in Manhattan.


Fresh Theories on Maxwell's Death
Did Robert Maxwell jump off his yacht or did he fall into the sea by accident?
These questions are being raised afresh in the British press as the scope of the financial disaster left behind by the British entrepreneur becomes clear.


Joseph D. Pikus, Professor, 75
Joseph D. Pikus, a longtime professor of health science at Jersey City State College, died on Sunday.
He was 75 years old and lived in Cedar Grove, N.J.
He died of stomach cancer, his family said.


French Chamber Music
The Ensemble Instrumental d'Avignon is to play an all-French program of works by Debussy, Francaix/Scarlatti, Honegger, Louvier and Roussel, Sunday at 3 P.M. at Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan.
Fabrice Pierre, a harpist, is the soloist.
Tickets are $10 and $12.
Information: (212) 355-6100, extension 228.


Great Barrington Journal; Folk Singer Hopes Fans Can Save 'Alice's Church'
Twenty-five years after Arlo Guthrie first sang the antiwar ballad "Alice's Restaurant," the folk singer is hoping his fans will help him purchase the restaurateur's former home so that he can preserve it.
Mr.
Guthrie wants to raise $300,000 to buy the small church where Alice Brock and her husband, Ray, lived in the bell tower in the 1960's.


Syracuse Loses Appeal To Reinstate McRae
The National Collegiate Athletic Association's eligibility committee has rejected Syracuse University's appeal to reinstate Conrad McRae, a 6-foot-10-inch junior center, who was suspended because of recruiting violations committed by the Syracuse staff.
The committee made its unanimous decision Wednesday night after a four-hour conference call with university officials, McRae, and his lawyer, Eric Alderman.
The ruling effectively ended McRae's career at Syracuse, although the university said that it will appeal the decision to the N.C.A.A.
Subcommittee on Eligibility Appeals.


Fannie Mae Narrows Its Corporate Review
The Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, has narrowed the review on its corporate advertising account to five agencies.
Advertising executives, who spoke yesterday on condition of anonymity, identified the finalists as GSD&amp;M Advertising, Austin, Tex.; Geer, DuBois, New York; Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston; Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, New York, and Hal Riney &amp; Partners, New York.
Billings are estimated at $5 million to $7 million.


Teachers Will Be Getting Two Unintended Days Off
New York City's teachers will get two extra days off this year because of an apparent misunderstanding by Board of Education officials and some deft bargaining by the teachers' union during the budget crisis earlier this year.
It all began when the board was facing a $40 million deficit last winter and asked the teachers to defer a few days' pay until 1994 or 1995.
As an incentive, the board offered to rearrange its calendar so that the teachers could have a weeklong break in February.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Rowan Cos., Houston, sold $200 million of 11 7/8 senior notes, due 2001, through Wasserstein, Perella Securities.
Ratings are Ba2 by Moody's Investors Service and BB by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
The company provides offshore drilling services.
PREFERRED *
Santander Overseas Bank Inc.'s preferred stock has an A+ rating from S.&amp; P., and the rating service said it had confirmed the rating in response to inquiries.
COMMON *
Spectranetics Corp., Colorado Springs, has filed for two million common shares to be offered through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The company makes laser and fiber-optic catheters to treat coronary arteries for atherosclerosis, the primary cause of heart attacks.
RATINGS *
El Paso Natural Gas has been removed from S.&amp; P.'s credit-watch list, and the rating agency affirmed its A-minus rating on its senior debt.


3 Books by Magic Johnson
Magic Johnson has agreed to write three books for Random House, Harold Evans, president and publisher of the Random House Trade Group, announced yesterday.
The books are to be an autobiography covering his career and his decision to stop playing basketball after learning that he was infected with H.I.V.; a guide to responsible sexual behavior, and another book to be determined later.
Random House executives said it had not been decided who would write the autobiography with Mr.
Johnson, who is widely regarded as one of the greatest basketball players.
C.
Everett Koop, the former Surgeon General, is to work with Mr.
Johnson on the safe-sex guide.
Mr.
Evans said the profits from that book would go to the Magic Johnson Foundation, a new organization to support education, care and research of H.I.V., which causes AIDS.
The paperback is to be published by Times Books, a division of Random House.


Chief of Lukens Quits Before Planned Date
Lukens Inc., a big steelmaker embroiled in a two-month-old strike, said yesterday that its chairman and chief executive, William R. Wilson, resigned six months before his previously announced retirement date.
His duties will be assumed by R. William Van Sant, who has been president and chief operating officer since October.


The First Draft of I.B.M.'s Future
Just how far I.B.M. is prepared to go to free itself from the large-system computer business that has been its bread and butter became obvious yesterday when it separated a $2 billion printer company and its $11 billion disk drive business from its mainframe division.
"By freeing these individual companies we are establishing competition, and that's healthy," John F. Akers, chairman of the International Business Machines Corporation, said in a telephone interview.


Bush Names New Staff Chief and Campaign Team
President Bush tried to halt his political slide today by appointing Samuel K. Skinner and Robert M. Teeter, a pair of pragmatic moderates, to run his staff and his re-election campaign.
As he appointed Mr.
Skinner, who is now Transportation Secretary, as his chief of staff, and Mr.
Teeter, who is his poll-taker, as his day-to-day campaign manager and chief political strategist, Mr.
Bush also made a new attempt to demonstrate his concern for what he called the "extraordinarily sluggish" economy.


Books of The Times; Sinister Problems Hide Under Silly Arguments
Naked to the Waist By Alice Elliott Dark 261 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.
On the surface, the arguments that estrange the couples in Alice Elliott Dark's new stories seem trivial, even silly.
One woman takes issue with her boyfriend's determination to discipline her naughty new puppy.
Another woman seizes upon her husband's new interest in astral projection as a sign of betrayal.
A third woman grows disillusioned with her fiance when he's unable to participate in a drunken conversation with a friend.
As orchestrated by Ms.
Dark, however, such arguments open out to disclose sinister secrets and the sad misunderstandings that can accrue between women and men.
In fact, the real problems of her characters turn out to be serious ones -- physical abuse, adultery, heavy drinking -- or the more subtle but intractable ones of emotional duplicity and resentment.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  EXTRA TIME OFF FOR TEACHERS
Teachers will get two extra days off this year because of an apparent misunderstanding by Board of Education officials and some deft bargaining by the teachers' union during the budget crisis earlier this year.
B3.


Art in Review
Imi Knoebel Barbara Gladstone Gallery 99 Greene Street SoHo Through Jan. 11
Although the abstract paintings of Imi Knoebel, a German artist, can be monotonously Minimal and repetitive, the works in this exhibition are alive with pictorial incident, of a certain kind.
Working with an array of power tools, Mr.
Knoebel has gouged, gashed and occasionally perforated the surfaces of large sheets of Masonite mounted on wood supports, and then painted them a warm, gleaming shade of black.
At once decorative and violent, the chaotic surfaces that result are oddly charged with emotion while remaining perfectly matter-of-fact.
Both their generous proportions and their titles -- "Battle No. 1," "Battle No. 2," etc. -- encourage an association with history painting.
There is also the suggestion that the artist is making an ironic statement about this century's several forms of Expressionism: German Expressionism (which favored the woodblock print), Abstract Expressionism (the gestural abandon) and Neo-Expressionism (the hulking physicality) -- a possibility that only increases the ideas these paintings set in motion.


Trenton Panel Supports Plan For Welfare
The New Jersey Legislature took a significant step today to advance a controversial plan for revising the welfare system by, among other things, trying to discourage welfare mothers from bearing more children.
A pivotal committee of the Legislature today approved a package of bills that would drastically revise New Jersey's welfare system, among other things barring additional benefits to any welfare mother who gives birth to another child while receiving benefits.


How Japan Announced the Start of War
To the Editor:
Leslie H. Gelb's "Infamy Is Still Infamy" (column, Nov. 17) indicates there is still considerable controversy about whether or not Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor was a sneak attack.
However, the memoirs of Japan's Foreign Minister at the time, Shigenori Togo ("The Cause of Japan," New York, 1956), shed a good deal of light.


Critic's Notebook; Pleasure for the Ears, and Now for the Eyes
THE Spanish guitar has exerted seductive powers over many people during the four or five centuries of its evolution, but perhaps no one fell under its spell more fatally than Andres Segovia.
In his autobiography, the master guitarist recalled the epiphanic moment when he first held in his arms the beautiful concert guitar that Manuel Ramirez, the Madrid instrument-maker, presented to him as a gift in 1916:


Coach Accepts Policy
RENE PORTLAND , the women's basketball coach at Penn State who has drawn criticism for her opposition to having lesbians on her team, said she would abide by university policy prohibiting discrimination against gays and bisexuals.


Officer Held in Robberies Discusses Plea Bargain
Lawyers for the Government and for a Howell Township police sergeant who has been charged with committing two bank robberies said today that they are engaged in plea bargaining that could eliminate the need for a trial.
The discussions were disclosed during a bail hearing for Detective Sgt.
Allen R. Schott, a 17-year veteran of the township police force, who is charged with robbing the Provident Savings Bank in East Windsor of $117,312 on Sept. 23 and robbing the Midlantic National Bank in Lower Township of $92,689 on Oct. 23, while he was on his way home from a three-day law-enforcement seminar.


Smith Lawyers Assail Accuser's Memory
For more than five hours today, William K. Smith's chief defense lawyer tried to chip away at the credibility of the 30-year-old woman who has said his client raped her last March on the Kennedy family's estate.
Three times the woman broke down on the stand, and the judge called recesses for the witness to regain her composure.
In his cross-examination, the defense lawyer, Roy E. Black of Miami, jumped from one stage of the couple's evening together to another, fast-forwarding and reversing course.


Society's Ambivalence Clouds Date Rape Issue; Still Weaker
To the Editor:
Has it occurred to Katie Roiphe (Op-Ed, Nov. 20) that perhaps not all women enter college as "strong and sensual" and "autonomous, pleasure-seeking, sexual beings"?
A great majority of young women have never lived away from home; they are unprepared for the freedom and the pressures, both academic and social, of college life.
Not wanting to be considered provincial or unsophisticated, they are too often enticed into situations that result in embarrassment, guilt and shame.


Society's Ambivalence Clouds Date Rape Issue
To the Editor:
While I often think of myself as "only 42," nothing makes me know I am kidding myself as regularly as your "Voices of the New Generation" Op-Ed articles.
Katie Roiphe's "Date Rape Hysteria" (Nov. 20) derides date rape pamphlets urging women to be careful as a return to Victorian notions of passionless women beset by wicked men.


In Smith Case, a Firm Judge Known for Fairness
Lawyers here who have argued cases in her court refer with dread to what they call "the Lupo look." Long before the rape trial of William K. Smith brought her into national prominence, Judge Mary E. Lupo of Palm Beach County Circuit Court had a way of demanding attention and respect from lawyers, litigants and witnesses with the stern, piercing and sometimes impatient gaze she aims at those who fail to meet her standards of courtroom behavior and competence.
Now this veteran of more than a dozen years on the Florida bench faces the demanding task of maintaining order and fairness at the most celebrated criminal trial of the year, before an audience that includes millions of television viewers around the world.
As much as the six jurors who are hearing testimony about what happened at the Kennedy family estate in Palm Beach on Easter Weekend, Judge Lupo has been making the decisions that will determine Mr.
Smith's fate.


Society's Ambivalence Clouds Date Rape Issue; Traumatic Experiences
To the Editor:
I was horrified by Katie Roiphe's "Date Rape Hysteria" (Op-Ed, Nov. 20) because it brought to mind the deeply destructive experiences of sexual assault that women students shared with me when I served as a campus minister.
These young women were emotionally traumatized by feelings of physical violation, humiliation, shame, anger and betrayal.
Their sense of trust, self-confidence and ability to perform academically were all damaged, sometimes causing complete disruption of their lives.


In Smith Case, a Firm Judge Known for Fairness
Lawyers here who have argued cases in her court refer with dread to what they call "the Lupo look." Long before the rape trial of William K. Smith brought her into national prominence, Judge Mary E. Lupo of Palm Beach County Circuit Court had a way of demanding attention and respect from lawyers, litigants and witnesses with the stern, piercing and sometimes impatient gaze she aims at those who fail to meet her standards of courtroom behavior and competence.
Now this veteran of more than a dozen years on the Florida bench faces the demanding task of maintaining order and fairness at the most celebrated criminal trial of the year, before an audience that includes millions of television viewers around the world.
As much as the six jurors who are hearing testimony about what happened at the Kennedy family estate in Palm Beach on Easter Weekend, Judge Lupo has been making the decisions that will determine Mr.
Smith's fate.


At the Movies
If Rutger Hauer were an army, he'd be proceeding on many fronts.
The Dutch-born star of such films as "Soldier of Orange," "Blade Runner" and "Ladyhawke," is anticipating the release of two new movies, the re-release of one old one, the remodeling of his image and the expansion of his career into writing and directing.


Croat Resigns as Head Of Belgrade Presidency
Stipe Mesic, a Croat, resigned today as the head of Yugoslavia's collective presidency amid renewed fighting in his breakaway republic of Croatia.
Mr.
Mesic's formal resignation from a post he ceased to act in months ago was accepted unanimously by his republic's Parliament.


Dee Spears Is a Bride
Dee Ella Spears and Peter Franklin Kardon were married yesterday in New York.
Rabbi Susan Einbinder officiated at the University Club.
Mrs.
Kardon, 38 years old, is the assistant director of the Center for War, Peace and the News Media at New York University.
She graduated from Southwestern University in Georgetown, Tex.
She is a daughter of Lola Larkin of Lake Jackson, Tex., and Floyd Spears of Gladewater, Tex.
Her father is a retired professor of industrial engineering at Grayson County College in Denison, Tex.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.


ZAIRE'S CHIEF VOWS TO STAY IN OFFICE
President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire, whose seven-year term in office just ended, vowed today that he would continue as head of state until new elections are held.
The decision is likely to heighten political tensions in this Central African nation, a longtime United States ally, where a coalition of nearly 150 opposition groups has insisted in recent weeks that Mr.
Mobutu turn over power to a transitional government once his term expires.


Underdog With Bite Unleashed by Knicks
As a youngster growing up in Queens, Anthony Mason used to root for the Knicks.
Did he ever root for the Boston Celtics?
"Not really," said Mason, the Knicks' bruising forward.
"It's not so much that I disliked them. It's just that they always won. I like to root for the underdog. I'm an underdog."


Cable TV Bill Would Have Hurt Those It Should Protect
To the Editor:
"Cable TV Customers, Gouged Again" (editorial, Nov. 15) laments the burial of a cable television bill in the Senate in the crush of end-of-session business.
The bill is better off buried because, if it were passed, it would hurt most the people it was proposed to protect.


Pop/Jazz; Vernon Reid Takes a Busman's Holiday
Vernon Reid, the guitarist for Living Colour, plans to spend tomorrow night on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
For the first part of the evening, he will be the organizer, host and occasional performer in a showcase of musicians at the Public Theater.
Once his duties are over, he'll stroll a few blocks downtown to CBGB, where the organization he helped to found, the Black Rock Coalition, will be presenting four bands.
He says he is not sure whether he'll bring his guitar.
This is the beginning of a two-week stretch of activity outside the band by Mr.
Reid, to continue next weekend.
On Dec. 13 and 14 at the Knitting Factory in SoHo, he is to lead an instrumental trio with Will Calhoun (of Living Colour) on drums and Melvin Gibbs on bass, with plenty of room for his speed-fingered solos and crashing riffs.
And next Sunday he is to join a reunion of the band Defunkt as part of "A Black Rock Christmas," a quintuple bill and guitar summit (with Mr. Reid, Sonny Sharrock, Eric Gales, Jean-Paul Bourelly, Kelvyn Bell and others) at the Manhattan Center in midtown.


One More Blow to the Heart For Survivor of Nazi Terror
IT happened in the war's waning months nearly 50 years ago.
Hundreds of Ukrainian boys like Jerry Kupchynsky had been snatched from families and shipped to Germany as laborers.
Chaos reigned.
The youth walked down a rubble-strewn Munich street past a bombed house.
Strangely, one window was not shattered.
The boy peered in.
Then, he walked on.
A scream.
The window flew open.
There stood his mother, now a refugee herself.
That was the first holiday miracle in Jerry Kupchynsky's life.


INSIDE
Zionism and the U.N.
The United States and Israel are confident they have the votes to repeal a United Nations resolution equating Zionism with racism.
Page A3.
Mandela and Bush Meet
The black nationalist leader sought to convince the U.S. that an interim Government in Pretoria would speed the transition to democracy.
Page A3.
Smith's Accuser Questioned
The woman who says William K. Smith raped her underwent several hours of persistent questioning by Mr.
Smith's lawyer.
Page A16.
Seeking to Start Old Reactor
The Energy Department hopes to resume producing fuel for atomic bombs at an old reactor, but critics have questions.
Page A14.
An Option for Patriots Owner
Victor Kiam, financially pressed owner of the New England Patriots, is exploring selling his Remington Products razor company.
Page D1.
Bowl Games Thrown for Loss
An I.R.S. ruling has colleges and corporate sponsors fretting over the loss of tax-deductible payouts for bowl games in football.
Page B9.
Yankees Lose to Broadway
Giving baseball his regards, Robert Nederlander plans to resign as head of the Yankees and concentrate on his family's theater business.
Page B9.


Gorbachev Seeks Aid for Moscow Food Crisis
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that the food situation in Moscow was "critical" and that the city was in need of urgent help from the rest of the country.
Mr.
Gorbachev said he had been told by Mayor Gavriil K. Popov and the head of the city administration, Yuri Luzhkov, that the city was not receiving supplies of meat, milk, butter and other goods for which it had contracts.


Stop The Bomb, and Not Just in Iraq
If the world's experience in Iraq proves anything, it's that bombing can't stop The Bomb.
Even the victorious allies must rely on sustained political pressure to block would-be proliferators like North Korea.
Israel's attack on Iraq's nuclear reactor in 1981 only drove the bomb-makers underground, beyond reach of Desert Storm's air armada.
The painstaking nuclear archeologists of the U.N.
Special Commission will keep on digging until they find what they're looking for, including evidence that Iraq has more enriched uranium stashed away.


Overtime Mistake Ruins Islanders
Rich Pilon of the Islanders practically ran off the ice at the end of the game tonight, but he was in no hurry to change out of his uniform.
After accidentally setting up Montreal's game-winning goal in overtime, Pilon charged down the corridor at Nassau Coliseum and smashed his stick into pieces on the way to the dressing room.
His anger came after his clearing pass landed on the stick of Montreal's Sylvain Turgeon, who beat Glenn Healy from the slot to give the Canadiens a 5-4 victory.
This defeat was particularly maddening because the Islanders had fallen behind by 4-1 after two periods but had tied the game with three goals in a 1-minute-32-second span early in the third period.


Agra Journal; Under Dirty Skies, Even the Taj Mahal Darkens
Black smoke belched from a stack as thinly clad men labored up steep stairs balancing baskets of coal on their heads, the fuel to stoke the fire inside the furnace.
Beneath the furnace, from a cement spout, a stream of intensely orange molten iron spewed into a corroded steel bucket.
Two men, barefoot, their heads swathed in filthy rags, lugged the tub of glowing liquid metal toward a bed of sand molds for sewer pipes.
Ringing this city, 220 iron foundries spew coal and coke smoke, sulfuric fumes and ash into the air.
Grime settles densely on everything here, coating cars, the white kurta pajamas of shopkeepers, the table tops in outdoor restaurants.
Inevitably, it also settles on one of the most remarkable monuments of Mogul architecture, the milky white Taj Mahal, the tomb of Shah Jahan's beloved Mumtaz Mahal.


Devils From Calgary Beat the Other Calgary
The game was televised back to Alberta, Canada, which was incentive aplenty for every bona-fide and honorary Calgarian on the New Jersey Devils.
"My mom, my dad, my sister, my brother, they were all watching," said Pat Conacher, after scoring two goals in the Devils' 6-3 victory tonight over the Flames at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
"And it was 2 points, besides."


Rates Rise Ahead of New Jobs Data
Interest rates rose slightly yesterday in quiet trading as investors and securities dealers digested new issues and waited for today's report on November employment to provide new clues to future rate changes.
Many analyts expect a weak employment report to be the catalyst for another move by the Federal Reserve to push short-term rates lower.


Smith Lawyers Assail Accuser's Memory
For more than five hours today, William K. Smith's chief defense lawyer tried to chip away at the credibility of the 30-year-old woman who has said his client raped her last March on the Kennedy family's estate.
Three times the woman broke down on the stand, and the judge called recesses for the witness to regain her composure.
In his cross-examination, the defense lawyer, Roy E. Black of Miami, jumped from one stage of the couple's evening together to another, fast-forwarding and reversing course.


Sherrill Stays Put, Too
Count JACKIE SHERRILL out of the running to take over as coach at the University of Texas.
Two days after DAVID McWILLIAMS announced his resignation as the Longhorns' coach and Sherrill's name popped up as an interested successor, Mississippi State moved a step closer to extending Sherrill's contract, and Sherrill denied he was seeking the Texas job.


A Defense Lawyer Changes Tactics in a Murder Trial
In a closing statement that stunned the prosecution and other defense lawyers, the lawyer for a defendant in the Brian Watkins murder trial conceded yesterday that his client took part in the assault and robbery of the Watkins family on a Manhattan subway platform last year.
But the lawyer, Alan Farber, insisted that his client, Pascal Carpenter, had no idea that Mr.
Watkins, who was visiting New York from Utah with his family, would be stabbed to death during the robbery or that any of the eight defendants in the attack was armed.


Lightning Finally Pays
Saying that the "the check is no longer in the mail," JOHN ZIEGLER , president of the National Hockey League, announced yesterday the receipt of the Tampa Bay Lightning's long-awaited $22.5 million partial expansion payment.
It came on the first day of the N.H.L.
Board of Governors' winter meetings in West Palm Beach, Fla.
While the Ottawa Senators, the other expansion team to begin play next season, made its first payment, the Tampa Bay group was having problems.
The Lightning, headed by PHIL ESPOSITO , its general manager and president, missed the first deadline on June 15.
But with the help of a new limited partner, GEORGE STEINBRENNER's $2.5 million investment, Tampa is back in business.


Warning to Drivers


Shoppers Jittery Over Gunfire Threats
Christmas and commerce at the Roxbury Mall are mixed this year with threats of sniper fire, extra police patrols, bitter merchants, jittery shoppers and the angry residue of financial trouble.
Someone shot out at least 14 windows at the mall late one November night and -- a few days later -- left on car windshields, in neighborhood mailboxes and at the Shop Rite supermarket about 100 hand-lettered fliers warning shoppers of sniper fire during business hours.
"Your life will be in danger," the leaflets said.
"This is your only warning!"


In Smith Case, a Firm Judge Known for Fairness
Lawyers here who have argued cases in her court refer with dread to what they call "the Lupo look." Long before the rape trial of William K. Smith brought her into national prominence, Judge Mary E. Lupo of Palm Beach County Circuit Court had a way of demanding attention and respect from lawyers, litigants and witnesses with the stern, piercing and sometimes impatient gaze she aims at those who fail to meet her standards of courtroom behavior and competence.
Now this veteran of more than a dozen years on the Florida bench faces the demanding task of maintaining order and fairness at the most celebrated criminal trial of the year, before an audience that includes millions of television viewers around the world.
As much as the six jurors who are hearing testimony about what happened at the Kennedy family estate in Palm Beach on Easter Weekend, Judge Lupo has been making the decisions that will determine Mr.
Smith's fate.


At the Bar; When a Firm Tries to Cut Corner, It Is Caught in Copyright Embarrassment
The photocopying machine is as much a staple of the modern law office as cumbersome old carbon paper used to be.
But put to the wrong use, photocopying can be hazardous to a firm's financial health.
If you doubt it, consider the sad tale of Collier, Shannon &amp; Scott of Washington.
Every week for the past 18 years, Collier, Shannon, which has a substantial products-liability practice, has received a copy of the Product Safety Letter, a 10-page weekly journal on the latest in recalls, lawsuits and technology.
The information is dear -- subscriptions cost $657 a year -- but, apparently, extremely useful.
So useful that the firm wanted its lawyers to read it without having to endure the delays of the routing list.


Seth Kimmelman, 40, Pianist and Teacher
Seth Kimmelman, a pianist and teacher at the New England Conservatory of Music in Boston, died yesterday at his home in Boston.
He was 40 years old.
He died of pneumonia resulting from AIDS, his family said.


Smith Lawyers Assail Accuser's Memory
For more than five hours today, William K. Smith's chief defense lawyer tried to chip away at the credibility of the 30-year-old woman who has said his client raped her last March on the Kennedy family's estate.
Three times the woman broke down on the stand, and the judge called recesses for the witness to regain her composure.
In his cross-examination, the defense lawyer, Roy E. Black of Miami, jumped from one stage of the couple's evening together to another, fast-forwarding and reversing course.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Bush and his economic advisers sent mixed signals on cutting taxes and on whether to violate last year's budget agreement, seeming to underscore what public opinion polls show to be the President's most serious political vulnerability: his Administration's seeming lack of a coherent economic policy.  [ Page A1. ]
Despite price cutting that encouraged buying over the Thanksgiving weekend, many of the nation's largest retailers said sales remained sluggish in November.  [ D1. ]


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Capitals Defeat Flyers  Randy Burridge had two goals and two assists to spoil the coaching debut of Bill Dineen as the Washington Capitals defeated the Philadelphia Flyers, 6-3, last night in Philadelphia.
Dineen was named the Flyers' coach on Wednesday, replacing Paul Holmgren, who was dismissed.  (AP) Bruins 2, Nordiques 2: Joe Sakic scored two goals as visiting Quebec played to a tie with Boston.
McNulty had a one-stroke lead over Steve Elkington, an Australian. (AP) Two Teams Tied: The teams of Ted Schulz-Jane Crafter and Mike Hulbert-Laura Davies matched scores of seven-under-par 64 to share the first-round lead in the $1.1 million J. C. Penney Golf Classic in Tarpon Springs, Fla.
Fifty-two teams are entered in the mixed-team event, which pairs professionals from the PGA, Senior PGA and L.P.G.A. tours. (AP)


Bush Orders Quicker Expenditure Of $9.7 Billion to Aid Economy
President Bush issued orders today to speed up the spending of $9.7 billion of Federal money in an effort to kick life into the nation's listless economy.
The announcement followed months of assertions by Democrats and some Republicans that Mr.
Bush was neglecting the nation's economic problems.


Abroad at Home; Realism and Evil
Sixteen years ago this week Indonesian troops invaded East Timor, a Portuguese colony on an island north of Australia.
They crushed the local independence movement, which was about to take over as Portugal left, and annexed the territory.
The United States turned a blind eye to that bloody act, and to years of murderous repression that followed.
So did the other major powers.
Indonesia had a free hand, and used it cruelly.
Of the 750,000 people in East Timor, between 100,000 and 200,000 were killed or died of hunger and disease.


Whittle to Expand Educational TV
Buoyed by the rapid growth of its Channel One educational television program, Whittle Communications L.P.said yesterday that it planned to invest another $50 million in the next 18 months to bring its 12-minute daily show to more schools.
That would bring to $250 million the sum that the privately held Knoxville, Tenn., media concern has spent in broadcasting its show to schools, which are given television sets and are not charged for the program.
In return, the schools are required to guarantee that at least 9 of 10 of Channel One shows will be broadcast.


Review/Theater; Borscht Belt Humor Goes to Town
The title of the show "Catskills on Broadway" deserves a truth-in-advertising award.
With these four stand-up comics at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, you pay your money and you get the jokes, unless you happen to miss the punch lines because of the laughter.
Appropriately, the show begins with a quick, clever montage of photographs of celebrities and guests enjoying themselves at diverse hotels.
The song "Comedy Tonight" is heard in the background.
For receptive theatergoers, "Catskills on Broadway" offers something familiar, and something entertaining.
Is Broadway ready for the Catskills?
Do Catskill hotels serve too much food?


Review/Film; Aging Trekkers to the Rescue One Last Time. Really.
"IS it possible that we two, you and I, have grown so old and inflexible that we have outlived our usefulness?" Mr.
Spock asks Captain Kirk in "Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country," the sixth and supposedly last installment in the "Star Trek" saga.
It's possible, but not likely.
Never mind that the crew of the starship Enterprise is supposedly only months away from mothballs as this story begins; never mind that most of the principals have reached Hairpiece Heaven.
Never mind that this film, supposedly the "Star Trek" valedictory, gives fans the stars' autographs with its closing credits.
The title, from "Hamlet," may refer to the afterlife, but in the words of a different poet, it ain't over till it's over.
And "Star Trek VI," directed by Nicholas Meyer, is as lively a tale as any Trekkie might want, even if it's not free-standing enough to bring in new recruits. (Anyone who thinks Klingon sounds like a new synthetic fabric need not apply.) There are no signs of waning energy here, not even in an Enterprise crew that looks ever more ready for intergalactic rocking chairs.
The principals' enthusiasm for their material has never seemed to fade.
If anything, that enthusiasm grows more appealingly nutty with time.


On My Mind; Thank Them Not
Now that the last American hostage is free, so is the Government of the United States.
It is free at last to use a political weapon that might prevent other Americans from being taken prisoner and held captive year after foul year.
The weapon is the truth -- the truth about the terrorist organizations that took the Americans prisoner, about how the terrorist states organized them, paid them, how they kept them in guns, Mercedeses, safe houses and money, and how they could have stopped the kidnappings almost as soon as they began, quite possibly before.


Society's Ambivalence Clouds Date Rape Issue; 'Beat It, Buster'
To the Editor:
Cheers to Katie Roiphe ("Date Rape Hysteria," Op-Ed, Nov. 20) for daring to question the feminist party line without relinquishing her feminist credentials.


Art in Review
'Celebrating Calder' Whitney Museum of American Art 945 Madison Avenue (at 75th Street) Through Feb. 2
This exhibition of 50 works by Alexander Calder, almost all of them from the museum's extensive Calder holdings, doesn't add much to one's appreciation of one of the century's most inventive and amusing sculptors; the pieces on view are, for the most part, very familiar.
But it is great fun.
Its heart is the Calder "Circus," with its scrappy retinue of miniature wire-and-cloth clowns, acrobats, lions, seals and so on, and the even more wonderful film, from 1961, that shows the artist putting his creations through their paces.
The denizens of "Circus" look even better in motion than they do standing still, and it's a relief to view them away from the hubbub of their usual home, the Whitney's lobby.


Richard B. Strouse, Writer, 79
Richard B. Strouse, a retired writer and public relations executive, died on Sunday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of prostate cancer, his family said.


Pan Am's Routes Are Sought
Large United States airlines jockeyed yesterday for Government permission to take over the lucrative Caribbean and Latin American routes abandoned by Pan American World Airways after its collapse this week.
Among the carriers proposing to expand into the old Pan Am routes was American Airlines, the nation's largest airline, which already has an extensive network of routes in those areas.
That presented a dilemma for the Transportation Department, which is under pressure to restore service as quickly as possible.


Treatment Of Warhol Is Defended
Andy Warhol was recovering beautifully from gallbladder surgery at New York Hospital -- walking around, watching television and chatting on the telephone and with visitors -- before he died in his sleep of a sudden, unpredictable heart attack, lawyers for his doctors and the hospital said yesterday.
In opening statements in a wrongful death suit, they rebutted claims by lawyers for Warhol's estate that Mr.
Warhol died after doctors failed to monitor his condition and overloaded him with fluids after he underwent surgery on an infected gallbladder on Feb. 21 1987.


COMMUNISTS MEET IN SOUTH AFRICA
Under the defiant slogan "The Future Is Socialism!" the South African Communist Party convened its first congress here in more than 40 years today, working to justify its relevance against the tide of Communism's decline elsewhere.
In a spirited two-hour speech on the state of the ideology and the party, its general secretary, Joe Slovo, defended Marxism, assailed capitalism and offered harsh judgments of the United States and the Soviet Union.


William Alexander, Producer Featuring Blacks, Dies at 75
William D. Alexander, a pioneer in black film making, died on Nov. 19 at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 75 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of cancer, said Harriet Barton, a friend.


Haitian Refugee Center at Guantanamo Base Is Growing


U.S. Hopes to Start Old Atom Plant to Make Bomb Fuel
Three and a half years after the Government closed all the reactors used to produce fuel for atomic bombs because of poor equipment and ill-trained operators, the Energy Department hopes to resume production in the next few days, running a 37-year-old reactor at 30 percent capacity.
The plan is to resume production of tritium, a crucial ingredient of nuclear weapons that loses its potency with time.
But the Savannah River complex near here, even after a billion-dollar improvement program that is not yet completed, will never have the safety features of newer civilian models.
And opponents, some of them the Department's former supporters like the Senate Armed Services Committe, are questioning whether the expense and risk of running the plant are worth it in an era of rapid nuclear disarmament.


Review/Art; Being Young and Abstract Along With Pollock et al.
The history of American art of the 1940's is often seen as a streamlined missile rising toward the horizon of Abstract Expressionism, with Jackson Pollock as the nose cone.
The truth is, of course, a much clumsier contraption with lots of uncoordinated moving parts, something akin to a Rube Goldberg machine.
One need only walk through the Stuart Davis retrospective at the Metropolitan Museum of Art to know that Pollock and his Abstract Expressionist colleagues weren't alone in trying to translate European modernism into an authentically American art.
Similarly, one can think back to the 40's paintings of Burgoyne Diller, highlighted in his retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art last year, and realize that the decade was full of artists hoping that history would anoint them for creating the "next thing" in modern art.
At the moment two related yet wildly dissimilar exhibitions shed more light on the diversity of 40's art.
They also help elucidate some of the artistic issues that dominated the period.
One show, "The Indian Space Painters" at Baruch College near Gramercy Park, is a well-researched excavation of a little-known group of artists whose pursuit of abstraction was as determined as the Abstract Expressionists', and a bit ahead of them, too.
The group included Will Barnet, now a figurative artist, as well as much less familiar names: Steve Wheeler, Robert Barrell, Peter Busa, Helen DeMott, Gertrude Barrer and Howard Daum, a Polish-born painter who gave the group its name in 1946.
Their bright, often intricately patterned abstractions, which borrow equally from Cubism and Surrealism and from the animated, animal-based motifs of Northwest Coast Indian art, add a new chapter to the story of the art of the 1940's.
The other show, at the Michael Rosenfeld Gallery on West 57th Street, is a sketchy 25-year survey of the Neo-Romantic Surrealist Pavel Tchelitchew (1898-1957).
This display of 29 works, mostly drawings from the late 1930's and 40's, constitutes the first New York exhibition of this artist since 1964.
Master of a creepy-crawly fusion of figures and landscape forms, Tchelitchew relocated to New York in the mid-1930's after establishing himself in Paris.
He was a gifted, if often reactionary, draftsman who took inspiration from the Renaissance, supported himself painting portraits and frequently designed ballet sets and costumes, sometimes for George Balanchine.
Stylistically, these two shows go together not at all, and yet viewed in tandem, they provide a fresh sense of the artistic ideas or "issues" that were in the air in the 40's and of the ways different artists dealt with them.
The main issue, visible in both shows, is the breakdown between figure and ground -- initially inspired by the automatic drawings of the Surrealists -- that melded positive form and negative space into a single, continuous "all over" image.
The Abstract Expressionists have traditionally been seen as the prime inventors of all-overness, with Pollock's 1947 drip abstractions marking the breakthrough.
But at Baruch it's clear that the Indian Space Painters formulated their own integration of figure and ground in the early 40's.
The most striking evidence is Wheeler's "Dancing Figure" of 1941, a colorful patchwork of interlocking shapes, and Barrell's "Hunters" of 1942, whose debt to Northwest Coast Indian art is so great that this delicate little painting reads as an act of devoted homage. (Barrell is also represented in the show by a painted wood bowl and carved totem in addtion to several paintings.)
"Red Painting" by Helen Demott, whose sincere, tenderly done paintings may qualify as the show's most significant rediscovery, is a sequence of compartmentalized ideograms and hieroglyphs that has strong affinities with Gottlieb's paintings from the same period.
Strangely enough, Tchelitchew intermittently pursued his own idiosyncratic version of the figure-ground blend, without ever betraying his realist impulses.
He had many stylistic irons in the fire, starting with a Constructivist-inspired abstraction titled "Three Eggs" from 1925.
But his New York work shows an increasing instinct to blend natural and human forms into emotionally suggestive hybrids.
This would culminate in "Hide and Seek," several sketches for which are included in this exhibition, as well as more conventional works like "Interior Landscape," in which a faintly Mannerist translucent head becomes the site of a vast interior space populated by a forest of branchlike veins.
It is doubtful that Tchelitchew will be rehabitiliated as a great or even a very good artist, although his polymorphous sense of style has many echoes among contemporary artists -- Sigmar Polke, for example.
Nor is it likely that the re-emergence of the Indian Space Painters will much diminish the Abstract Expressionist achievement.
Nonetheless, both exhibitions make Pollock and company seem less toweringly singular; they were far from alone in their endeavors and the more that is known about their contemporaries the better.
"The Indian Space Painters: Native American Sources for American Abstract Art" remains at the Sidney Mishkin Gallery, Baruch College, 135 East 22d Street, through Dec. 17.
"Pa
vel Tchelitchew: Nature Within and Without," remains at the Michael Ro
senfeld Gallery, 50 West 57th Street, through Jan. 25.


Seven Who Will Manage Bush's 1992 Presidential Campaign
Following are the seven people who were named today by President Bush to run his 1992 Presidential campaign:  Robert A. Mosbacher Campaign Chairman
Secretary of Commerce . . .
Charged with coordinating political, fund-raising and operations arms of the campaign as general chairman, but lacks skills to mastermind the race in the fashion of the 1988 campaign chairman, James A. Baker 3d . . .
Recently conceded that Republicans face an image problem with the economy, and has pressed the President to move quickly to stimulate growth . . .
Among Mr.
Bush's most loyal and trusted political advisers . . .
Veteran fund-raiser, can tap wealthy establishment where his roots lie . . . was finance chairman for Mr.
Bush's 1988 Presidential campaign . . .
As Commerce Secretary, Mr.
Mosbacher has been active in White House deliberations on domestic economy and in promoting exports . . . 64 years old . . .
His ties to Mr.
Bush and Mr.
Baker go back to Houston oil business in the 1950's . . .
Headed family-owned Mosbacher Energy Corporation before coming to Washington.
Frederic V. Malek  Campaign Manager
In his new post Mr.
Malek will be chief operating officer, overseeing nuts and bolts of the race . . .
Has less political experience than others, but is an experienced manager and enjoys Mr.
Bush's trust . . .
Masterminded the 1988 Republican National Convention and the economic summit meeting in Houston last year . . .
Was deputy director of the Office of Management and Budget under Presidents Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R. Ford . . .
Mr.
Bush brought him to the Republican National Committee as deputy chairman in 1988 . . .
Mr.
Malek resigned that September after Federal archives showed that in 1971, at Mr.
Nixon's behest, he compiled a rough count of Jewish workers in a Labor Department agency; Mr.
Nixon suspected Jews in the Bureau of Labor Statistics were slanting unemployment data to make him look bad . . .
Mr.
Malek denied being anti-Semitic and has worked assidously to restore his standing with Jewish leaders . . .
Vice chairman of NWA Inc. and its major subsidiary, Northwest Airlines . . .
Also co-chairman of CB Commercial Real Estate Group and advisor to the Carlyle Group, an investment firm . . . 54 years old.
Robert M. Teeter  Chief Political Strategist
President of an Ann Arbor-based corporate and political consulting firm, Mr.
Teeter will operate as the President's thematic orchestrator, responsible for overall tone and direction of the re-election effort . . .
He is considered adept at sizing up political moods to design winning campaigns . . .
For 20 years he built his reputation as a pollster at Market Opinion Research, the Detroit-based firm . . .
Worked for President Nixon in 1972 and President Ford in 1976 . . .
In 1980, he worked for Mr.
Bush and, after the Republican convention, for Ronald Reagan . . .
Senior adviser and chief poll-taker for Mr.
Bush in 1988 campaign . . .
Opted not to join the Bush Administration, citing family concerns . . .
But other accounts suggested that the incoming chief of staff, John H. Sununu, had refused to share responsibilities . . . 52 years old.
Charles Black  Senior Campaign Adviser
A pivotal 1992 strategist, Mr.
Black is likely to be the architect of Mr.
Bush's campaign in the South . . .
Among Mr.
Bush's aides, Mr.
Black is closest in spirit and political instincts to the late Lee Atwater, who engineered Mr.
Bush's slashing 1988 victory . . .
Will be the President's liaison to the right wing . . .
Knows how to use "wedge issues," issues intended to split Democrats from their party . . .
Founding chairman of the National Conservative Political Action Committee . . .
Native of North Carolina . . .
Political director of Jesse Helms's first Senate campaign in 1972 and advised his 1990 re-election effort . . .
Partner in the lobbying firm of Black, Manafort, Stone &amp; Kelly, which became enmeshed in influence-peddling scandal involving Federal public housing grants two years ago.
Mary Matalin  Political Director
Ms.
Matalin will run day-to-day state and local campaign operations . . .
Knows Republican Party operations and personnel from the state committees to the headquarters . . .
An Atwater lieutenant and close friend in the 1988 campaign, she will be counted on to supply a semblance of his political savvy . . .
Unlike Mr.
Atwater and Mr.
Black, not an ideologue . . .
Now chief of staff of the Republican National Committee . . . 38 years old . . .
A descendant of Croatian grandparents in a campaign dominated by white males . . .
Got a taste for politics in a 1980 Illinois Senate race (her candidate lost) . . .
Worked in a number of Republican National Committee positions, and was Rich Bond's aide when he was deputy chairman in 1982 . . .
In 1988 primaries, was Midwest field director for the Bush campaign . . .
In the general election she ran Victory '88, the Republican National Committee's get-out-the-vote operation . . .
After the election Mr.
Atwater gave her the No. 2 job at party headquarters.
Richard N. Bond  Field Organization Chief
Mr.
Bond will be in charge of designing and overseeing state and local operations . . .
Called a Long Island version of Lee Atwater, his longtime mentor . . .
One of the early Bush advisers, dating to the mid-1970's . . .
Made his mark as architect of Mr.
Bush's upset in the 1980 Iowa primary . . .
Later became his deputy chief of staff when Mr.
Bush was Vice President . . .
Was political director and deputy manager of the 1988 campaign . . .
Very intensepolitical style, but is a tactician, not an ideologue . . .
Chairman of Bond Donatelli Inc., a Washington-based corporate consulting firm . . .
Got his start as press aide to the Nassau County, L.I., county executive . . .
Later was press secretary for Representative Bill Green of New York . . .
Crewed during a 1977-78 around-the-world yacht race.
George W. Bush  Campaign Adviser
The President's oldest son and self-appointed loyalty watchdog for past Bush campaigns and for his Administration . . .
Has been advising the President on 1992 race for a couple of months . . .
From 1986 to 1988 he worked on the Bush Presidential campaign as adviser and speechmaker . . .
After 1988 victory he screened job-seekers to insure that jobs went to his father's original believers . . .
Ran for Congrss in the 19th Congressional District of Texas in 1978; won the primary but lost the election in a close race . . .
Aspires to become governor of Texas, but his mother, Barbara, is said to oppose the notion . . .
Nicknamed "Junior" , but takes pains to note his name is not the same as his dad's . . .
While his father is a Connecticut Yankee in Texas, George takes prides in being the rough-edged Real Thing . . .
Intense, extremely competitive and sometimes hot-tempered . . .
Managing general partner of the Texas Rangers baseball team . . .
Like his father, went into the Texas oil business as a young man . . .
Business foundered in oil glut of 1980's and was sold to Texas-based Harken Energy Corporation . . . 45 years old.


NBC 'Today' Program To Be Shown Every Day
NBC announced yesterday that it would extend the "Today" show to seven days a week in August, creating a Saturday edition of the morning news program for the first time.
In its announcement, which was expected, NBC also said it would drop most or all of its animated children's shows and become the first network not using the Saturday morning hours exclusively for children's shows.
NBC lags behind CBS and ABC in the ratings on Saturday mornings.


Economic Scene; Why Fiscal Policy Has to Have Soul
IS the United States economy in worse shape than the official statistics disclose?
Or is the national mood simply a lot worse than the economic data warrant?
The Commerce Department's shift this week to a new set of figures for tracking the United States economy is intended to put the economy into sharper focus, even though it may muddy the waters for people accustomed to thinking in the old terms.
The new approach focuses on gross domestic product -- or what is produced within United States borders -- rather than gross national product, which included income earned by Americans companies and individuals abroad as well as at home.
In addition, the department moved to 1987 prices from 1982 prices.


Swiss Stunned by Charges Against Nanny
People in Switzerland who knew the child-care worker charged with setting a fire that killed a 3-month-old baby here have expressed shock and incredulity at the accusations, a Swiss newspaper said today.
The paper, Blick, interviewed an administrator of Juventus-Schulen, a school in Zurich where the 20-year-old nanny, Olivia Riner, had studied to be a medical assistant.
"I don't believe it at all," the administrator, Margrit Thoma, was quoted as saying.
"Olivia was one of our best students."


Howard Pressing Giants to Let Him Play. Why? Because It's His Job.
Ten weeks ago, Erik Howard underwent surgery to remove part of a herniated disk that was causing back pain and leaving a leg numb.
After returning to the practice field Wednesday and today, he said he felt fine.
So on Sunday, Howard hopes to play for the Giants here against the Philadelphia Eagles.
For an ordinary human being, this quick recovery would be impressive.
For a Pro Bowl nose tackle whose team faces a desperate fight to make the playoffs, this is business.


Dow Off 22.58, to 2,889.09, As Trading Volume Falls
Stocks closed lower yesterday, with a growing number of investors taking to the sidelines ahead of today's November employment numbers.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 22.58 points, to finish at 2,889.09.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was a moderate 166.4 million, compared with 187.9 million on Wednesday.
Losing issues outpaced gainers by 1,037 to 619.


Deliberations Set to Begin Today in Miller Trial
A defense lawyer declared in his summation yesterday that the prosecution of Mel Miller on fraud charges was an effort to snare an important politician, a case of "coming after the big fish."
"These are strange times, ladies and gentlemen, for public officials in this country," the lawyer, Gerald B. Lefcourt, told the jury as he suggested that Mr.
Miller was being prosecuted because of his position as the State Assembly Speaker.


BUSH AND ADVISERS GIVE MIXED SIGNALS ON ECONOMIC PLAN
President Bush and his top economic advisers, undecided about what to propose to revive the flagging economy, sent mixed signals today on cutting taxes and on whether to violate last year's budget agreement.
The confusion was clearest on Capitol Hill.
On the first day of a series of Congressional hearings on tax policy and the state of the economy, the economic advisers at first suggested that giving the economy a quick jolt was more important than holding to the budget agreement.
But they came back from a short lunch saying that breaking the agreement was unacceptable.


Restaurants
Seryna
Seryna is not on the much ballyhooed midtown Manhattan sushi circuit.
One reason is its setting, well concealed in the ground floor of an office building on East 53d Street.
Formal and hushed, it even lacks a sushi bar.
More important are the prices, which can make the tab feel like a karate chop to the neck.
Seryna is the New York branch of the Tokyo original, but that does not guarantee provocative fare.
The limited menu, while exemplary on many levels, is Western friendly with few surprises.
The most exotic item we sampled in three visits was octopus.


Review/Film; An Affectionate Look At the Punk-Rock Era
There are those who remember the summer of 1977, when punk-rock rudely exploded onto the London pop scene, as a shining moment when rock-and-roll briefly became a potent political wedge in British society.
Those days when Johnny Rotten and the Sex Pistols proclaimed "Anarchy in the U.K." are fondly remembered in "Young Soul Rebels," a film by the British black independent film maker Isaac Julien.
The movie's injections of racial and sexual politics suggest a crude, low-budget hybrid of "My Beautiful Laundrette" and "Pump Up the Volume."
Two years ago, Mr.
Julien's cinematic meditation on the poet Langston Hughes, "Looking for Langston," was shown at the New York Film Festival and caused a minor furor because of its insistence on Hughes's homosexuality.
Mr.
Julien's examination of the punk-rock era brings a similar racial and sexual perspective to its portrait of two friends who operate a pirate radio station out of an East End garage.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 579 money market mutual funds increased by $328.9 million, to $481.27 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 214 institutional funds increased by $720 million, to $160.85 billion.
The assets of the 274 general-purpose funds were down by $84.8 million, to $175.01 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds decreased by $306.3 million, to $145.41 billion, the institute said.


Brooklyn Gun-Purchase Plan Nets 400 Firearms
When the police in Brooklyn asked residents to turn in guns, officers received 80 in 10 months.
When they offered to buy them, they collected nearly 400 handguns, rifles and shotguns in two weeks, District Attorney Charles J. Hynes and Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown said yesterday.
Calling the no-questions-asked gun-purchase program "a significant success," Mr.
Hynes said it would be extended until Dec. 23, instead of ending this week.
It began in mid-November; the other gun program began the first of this year.


Art in Review
Frantisek Drtikol Howard Greenberg Gallery 120 Wooster Street SoHo Through tomorrow
This valuable exhibition brings together a wide selection of work by Frantisek Drtikol (1883-1961), a leader of the photography avant-garde that blossomed in Czechoslovakia between the world wars.
Drtikol studied painting in Munich and was influenced by Symbolism early in his career.
In 1910, though, he returned to Prague and opened a photography studio.
His early photographs feature the soft-focus, sentimental subjects and textured prints that characterized the art photography of the day.
In the 20's, he turned to a more openly theatrical style in which he posed nudes in elaborately lighted stage sets that he built, based on geometric forms.
In "Nude and Waves" (circa 1927), a dramatically lighted nude appears to be caught between two scalloped forms that run along the top and bottom of the frame.
In his later work, Drtikol used paper and wood figurines as well as photograms and other techniques to express increasingly mystical themes.
In "Earth Mother" (1931), he photographed a nude woman with a tiny cut-out picture of two nude women placed between her splayed legs, creating an image that is both portentous and laughable.


Say Hello to 3 Teams Who Received a Bye
The soccer committee of the National Collegiate Athletic Association must be doing something right because three of the four teams it seeded in the 28-team tournament have reached the semifinals.
With Jim Dyer of the University of Maine as its chairman, the soccer commitee gave first-round byes to Indiana, Virginia and St.
Louis.
Those three have been joined in the semifinals by Santa Clara, which eliminated U.C.L.A., the defending champion and the other seeded team, in the quarterfinals last Sunday.


Tea in Teheran: How Hostage Deal Was Born
As Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar recalls it, the moment he believed that all the Western hostages would be freed came when the Iranian President gave him his word of honor that Iran would use its influence to see that an intricate secret plan for ending the hostage ordeal would be carried out.
It was Sept. 11 and the United Nations Secretary General was having tea with President Hashemi Rafsanjani in his office in Teheran.


Reading Bush's Lineup
The new leadership for the White House staff and for the re-election campaign that President Bush announced today emphasizes experience, technical skills and a nonideological approach, but it includes no one who has ever run a large-scale political enterprise.
The lineup shows how deep the Republican Party's talent pool has become after five successful Presidential races of the last six attempts.
What it does not show is what kind of campaign Mr.
Bush will run in 1992.


Which Foot Forward?
Until yesterday the list of Presidential aspirants included a handful of scarcely known Democrats and a Republican, David Duke, who was once a member of the Ku Klux Klan.
The conservative columnist and Republican Pat Buchanan is prowling in the wings.
Into this mixed bag now jumps a candidate with authentic credentials and undeniable name recognition.
By announcing a new chief of staff and a campaign team, George Bush has effectively kicked off his bid for re-election.
Welcome to the race, Mr.
President.
But now, what kind of race do you intend to run?


Market Place; Japan's Cash Fountain Has All but Dried Up
The Tokyo stock market, which had been a fountain of cash that financed an investment boom in corporate Japan over the last five years, has all but dried up.
The closely watched Nikkei index of 225 issues continued its decline today, ending the session off 14.11 points, to 22,445.06, after falling 210.27 points Thursday.
That leaves the index down about 17.4 percent from its 1991 peak in March, making this the second consecutive disappointing year.
A slowing economy, tumbling corporate profits and a gloomy outlook on the part of corporate managers have dampened the market, even after Government steps to stimulate it this fall with two interest-rate cuts.


Review/Dance; Donald Byrd's 'Gym' Opens the Ailey Season
It was very much business as usual -- triumphant, dazzling and full of heart -- when the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater opened its four-week winter season on Wednesday night at City Center.
This was not the kind of high-powered gala opening, filled with high-energy performances and low-energy socialites, that has become de rigueur in the dance establishment.
The Ailey troupe will celebrate itself in a premiere-laden benefit on Tuesday.
At this season opener, the company simply did what has made it a major American cultural institution: it danced as if there was no tomorrow.
One highlight of the program was the premiere of Donald Byrd's "Dance at the Gym," a glittering, hard-edged conundrum of a dance set to richly textured music by Mio Morales.
There is a punning allusion to the title in the fact that the dancers are dressed in stylish versions of gymnasts' outfits, designed by Davis Church.
But most of all, this is a piece about romantic pairings.


BRIEFS
*
Allied Clinical Laboratories Inc., Nashville, said it had acquired substantially all the assets of Doctor's Clinical Laboratories Inc., a clinical laboratory.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Alltel Corp., Little Rock, Ark., a telephone service company, said it had signed a definitive agreement to acquire Computer Power Inc., Jacksonville, Fla., a data processing company.
Alltel said it would exchange 7.64 million shares Alltel shares for all the outstanding shares of CPI.


Mel Dinelli, 79, Dies; Wrote Films and Plays
Mel Dinelli, a screenwriter and playwright who specialized in stories of suspense, died in Los Angeles on Nov. 28.
He was 79 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of heart failure, said Bridget Aschenberg, his agent at International Creative Management in New York City.


Man In the News: Samuel Knox Skinner; A Model of a Competent and Wily Team Player
In picking Samuel K. Skinner as his chief of staff today, President Bush went for the member of his Cabinet with the clearest record of domestic successes and a degree of political savvy that won tributes even from Democrats in the hard-bitten world of Chicago politics.
But the very characteristics that make him popular among moderate Republicans, his reputed pragmatism and disdain for ideological inflexibility, have sometimes cost him support among White House aides.
Some of his proposals as Transportation Secretary were mercilessly picked apart by the man he is replacing, John H. Sununu, as well as Richard G. Darman, director of the Office of Management and Budget.


The Art Market
Mystery Cabinets
Almost as quickly as Sotheby's issued the catalogue of its Dec. 13 London sale of French and Continental furniture and tapestries, tongues began wagging.
One of the sale's star offerings -- a pair of Louis XIV ebony cabinets decorated with Boulle ormolu marquetry -- looked awfully familiar.
Experts in the rarefied world of fine French furniture believed the cabinets had been among the most prized pieces in the celebrated Patino Collection.
Sotheby's sold this collection of furniture and decorative objects, which had belonged to Antenor Patino, the Bolivian tin magnate, to an unnamed buyer on Nov. 1, 1986, for $797,500.


WALESA APPOINTS CRITIC AS PREMIER
President Lech Walesa reluctantly nominated a critic of Poland's free market economic reforms today to be Poland's new Prime Minister.
The nomination of Jan Olszewski, a former Solidarity lawyer and a candidate of the center-right coalition, came after the lower house of Poland's Parliament, or Sejm, accepted the resignation of Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki.
Mr.
Bielecki had been committed to establishing a full free market economy in Poland as rapidly as possible even if this increased unemployment and inflation.


Society's Ambivalence Clouds Date Rape Issue
To the Editor:
While I often think of myself as "only 42," nothing makes me know I am kidding myself as regularly as your "Voices of the New Generation" Op-Ed articles.
Katie Roiphe's "Date Rape Hysteria" (Nov. 20) derides date rape pamphlets urging women to be careful as a return to Victorian notions of passionless women beset by wicked men.


Squalls Bury Syracuse Area Under 18 Inches of Snow


Landing Is Aborted Just Above Runway
A British Airways Concorde jet aborted a landing less than 150 feet from the runway at Kennedy International Airport Tuesday night after the pilot saw a smaller plane ahead of him, Federal Aviation Administration officials said yesteday.
No one was injured. The Concorde circled and landed safely.


Braves Seek Arbitration
The Atlanta Braves yesterday offered salary arbitration to the free-agent outfielder OTIS NIXON and the free-agent reliever ALEJANDRO PENA , which means they may continue to negotiate with them through Jan. 8.


Killing in Brooklyn Social Club Is Linked to Mob Power Struggle
A 79-year-old man was killed in a social club in Brooklyn early yesterday, in what law enforcement officials say is a bloody struggle for control within the Colombo organized crime family that has left three dead in six shootings since June.
Earlier this week, the police said, a 78-year-old man who was a member of of the Genovese crime family was killed by a bullet meant for a Colombo family member who was wounded in the attack.


Posts Are Consolidated At American National
The American National Can Company announced yesterday that Jean-Pierre Ergas, chief executive since 1989, had been named to the additional post of chairman.
As producer of cans for Coca-Cola, toothpaste tubes for Colgate-Palmolve, bottles for Oil of Olay and other products, the $4.7-billion-a-year company says it is the world's largest maker of beverage cans and plastic-based tubes.


Bonilla Finally Arrives At His Field of Dreams
Bobby Bonilla stared out over the microphone, over the dozens of reporters and out to the full expanse of Shea Stadium, its seats empty in the frozen sunlight.
For a moment in his mind, it was 1978 and he was a kid at a Mets tryout.
Bonilla, then a 15-year-old prospect from the Bronx, couldn't remember which official had overseen the workouts.
He couldn't remember what he did at the plate in the makeshift game that morning more than a decade ago.
What he could remember was that his girlfriend, who today is his wife, had asked him to steal her some of the infield dirt.


Valentine Also Remains
Count Texas Manager BOBBY VALENTINE in for an additional season, or at least an extra year's income.
After leading the Rangers to an 85-77 record and a third-place finish in the American League West, Valentine has been given a one-year contract extension that will keep him on the Rangers payroll through the 1993 season.
Similar contract extensions were given to General Manager TOM GRIEVE and Assistant General Manager SANDY JOHNSON. (AP)


Comptroller Faults Policy On Jail Pact
The New York City Comptroller's office said yesterday that jail officials had refused to provide internal documents and correspondence used in awarding a $1.9 million contract for a house arrest program and to describe the role that a lobbyist, Sid Davidoff, played in winning the contract for a client.
At a hearing on the contract yesterday, the city's Executive Deputy Comptroller, Rhea Kimble Dignam, called for a "full investigation" of the contract award, and City Councilwoman Carolyn B. Maloney urged that the contract be bid again under a different formula.


Sports of The Times; Right Place, Right Time, Right Guy
YOU couldn't help think how lucky Bobby Bonilla is, and was.
He said, "I'm in the right place at the right time." But he could almost as easily have been in the wrong place at the wrong time.
He stood at a news conference yesterday at Shea Stadium given by the Mets to welcome him and his new $29 million contract, and you couldn't help think how lucky he was, at least for having made the right decision about what he didn't want to do in life.


CHRONICLE
There will probably be thousands of words uttered next week about a document of 45 spare words: the First Amendment.
Many of those words will be delivered at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, which is marking the 200th anniversary of the Bill of Rights with a variety of events, including a dinner tribute on Wednesday in honor of WILLIAM J. BRENNAN JR., the retired Supreme Court Justice.
The dinner is expected to draw hundreds of prominent journalists, lawyers, scholars and communications executives to the university's Low Library.
CAROLINE KENNEDY SCHLOSSBERG, co-author of a recent book on the Bill of Rights, WILLIAM SAFIRE, author and columnist for The New York Times, and VINCENT BLASI, a professor of law at the Columbia Law School, will read from landmark decisions on the First Amendment by the Supreme Court.


Budget Talks Stall and Cuomo Fumes
Negotiations over how to close the widening deficit in New York State's budget fell into greater disarray yesterday, with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders unable to agree on even the first steps toward the spending cuts that the gap has compelled them to make.
After a brief morning meeting in Manhattan, delayed by the late arrival of the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, and cut short by Assembly Speaker Mel Miller's need to get to his fraud trial in Brooklyn, it was clear that the Governor and the leaders had not agreed on whether to work out a long-range budget that would deal with the deficits in both the current budget and next year's over the next 18 months, or to pass a more immediate package of spending cuts.


Japanese Apology Over War Unlikely After Bush's Stand
A proposed resolution in Parliament expressing regret over Japan's wartime aggression has run into trouble and may not be approved because of a furor among some in Japan over President Bush's recent refusal to apologize for the atomic-bomb attack on Hiroshima.
Officials said it was now unlikely that any sort of resolution on World War II would be adopted by Parliament in time for the American commemoration of the 50th anniversary of Pearl Harbor on Saturday.


Suspicious Fire Destroys Stores and Snarls Times Square
A suspicious four-alarm fire on West 42d Street yesterday morning destroyed an X-rated video store, a strip club and three other businesses, engulfed the Times Square area in a malodorous haze and tied up traffic in midtown for several hours.
City records show that the burned building, at 251-257 West 42d Street, is owned by Alexander DiLorenzo 3d, whose extensive holdings of property around New York include the building that housed the Happy Land Social Club in the Bronx, where 87 people died in an arson fire in March 1990.


In Linguistic Eden, the Sexes Were Equal
To the Editor:
In "Gender Perfect" (Op-Ed, Nov. 16), Prof.
S.
Scott Whitlow chides a student applicant on "inappropriate" and "thoughtless use of language" in employing the word "chairman" because it is not "gender inclusive or gender free."


Critic's Choice/Dance; Performers Step Out to Raise Money for Free Shows
The stars of downtown performing arts will be out tomorrow night at the Building when Movement Research holds a benefit to raise money for its acclaimed series of free dance at the Judson Memorial Church.
John Kelly will be on hand, that potent wisp of a performer who has charmed audiences with his moonlit arias and perfumed ballet dancing.
The irrepressible Dancenoise duo -- Lucy Sexton and Anne Iobst -- will kick up their glittering heels and skewer all icons, as will Yoshiko Chuma and her School of Hard Knocks company, with additional high-energy hurtling from Clarinda MacLow and Rebecca Moore.
Food will be provided by Florent, the Odeon and other stylish eateries.
The club at which this takes place is also quite a trip.
But for all its chic, the benefit is likely to be a family affair, with everyone a family member.
Movement Research began life 12 years ago as both a fairly esoteric floating school, which taught performers how to think and work in unaccustomed ways, and a producer of challenging dance events.


Alone, Broke and Pregnant, She Is Aided by the Neediest
Two and a half years ago, Ying W. thought her troubles were over when she and her husband fled China before the authorities could question him about the visas he had secretly issued to Tiananmen Square protesters.
Three weeks ago she found herself alone and ill, penniless and eight months pregnant and on the verge of homelessness.


For Jets, Loss of Burkett Hurts and Hurts and Hurts
Jets Coach Bruce Coslet was glum.
Al Roberts, the special-teams coordinator, was sick about it.
And Chris Burkett was so upset about his sprained right knee that he couldn't bear to talk about it for too long.
"Nobody hit me or anything like that," said Burkett, who suffered the injury in Wednesday's practice.
"I jumped up to catch the ball and came down. I guess I came down wrong. I had banged it up a little in the second Colts game, but not as bad. I really banged it yesterday. I'm just icing it up now. I just feel terrible about it now. Lemme go."


Chrysler to Pay Bonuses To 19,000 of Its Workers
The Chrysler Corporation, financially the weakest of the Big Three, said today that it would pay holiday bonuses to 19,000 white-collar workers.
The bonus amounts to $600 for most workers, meaning an outlay for Chrysler of almost $12 million.
The decision comes less than a week after the General Motors Corporation, the nation's largest auto maker, elected to forgo bonuses for its 107,000 salaried employees.
The Ford Motor Company said today that it had decided to forgo a bonus, which would have been paid in the spring.
Ford did not pay its bonus last spring either.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Savings Bank, White Plains, named Charles J. Buchta senior executive vice president for consumer banking. *
Converse Inc., North Reading, Mass., a unit of Interco Inc., named Joanna Jacobson senior vice president for marketing.


Klan Seeks to Put Float in Georgia Parade
The Ku Klux Klan wants to enter a float in the annual Christmas parade in Gainesville, Ga., prompting several groups, including four high schools, a church and a Cub Scout den, to pull out of the event.
Officials in the small town on Lake Lanier, about 40 miles northeast of Atlanta, are scheduled to meet on Friday to determine whether the Dec. 14 event should be canceled rather than allow the Ku Klux Klan to enter the float.
The title of the float is "I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas."


Review/Film; Executing a Man in Anger at Another, the Real Killer
"Let him have it": those were the words that sealed the fate of Derek Bentley, the slow-witted 19-year-old who became the first man in British judicial history to be executed despite a jury's recommendation for mercy.
Derek, an epileptic who had an I.Q. of 66 and a mental age of 11, was an accessory to a murder committed by Christopher Craig, his vicious and more street-wise 16-year-old friend.


Football Debts May Force Kiam to Sell Remington
Victor Kiam, the man who liked his Remington electric razor so much that he bought the company, has decided it may be time to sell.
Mr.
Kiam is exploring the possible sale of Remington Products Inc., the Bridgeport, Conn., razor and appliance maker that he bought in 1979 for $25 million in a leveraged buyout, a bank official said yesterday.


Gen. John J. Tolson, 76, Dies; Pioneered Army's Helicopter Use
Lieut.
Gen.
John J. Tolson 3d, retired, who as commander of an Army division in Vietnam helped pioneer the use of helicopters as a leading instrument of modern warfare, died Monday at Rex Hospital in Raleigh, N.C.
He was 76 years old and lived in Raleigh.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


Christmas Conjuring In 'Nutcracker'


Karl Springer, 60, a Designer Of Classic and Exotic Furniture
Karl Springer, a designer and manufacturer of luxury furniture and a wide array of accessories, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old.
He died of lymphoma, reported Mateo Lettunich, a former business partner and longtime friend.


Retailers' Sales Still Sluggish
Despite price cutting that encouraged buying over the Thanksgiving weekend, many of the nation's largest retailers said yesterday that sales remained sluggish in November.
Once again, Wal-Mart Stores Inc. and the Gap Inc. were the exceptions; both chains posted strong increases in the month.
Wal-Mart's sales rose 39 percent over the same month last year, to $4.47 billion.
The sales at its stores open for more than a year, called same or comparable stores, rose by 13 percent.


Review/Dance; City Ballet's 'Nutcracker': Toys, Mice and That Tree
During the course of "The Nutcracker," a Christmas tree magically grows to an enormous height, toys come alive to battle mice, a bed sails off into a snowy night and a little girl journeys to a land ruled by a Sugarplum Fairy.
Nevertheless, it can be argued that much of "The Nutcracker" is a ballet about real life.
The New York City Ballet made the reality as well as the fantasy convincing when it danced the holiday classic for the first time this season on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater.


Holtz Will Remain Notre Dame's Coach
Count LOU HOLTZ out of the running to take over as coach of the Minnesota Vikings.
A day after the Vikings announced that JERRY BURNS was indeed stepping down at the end of the season and that Holtz would be considered as a possible replacement, Notre Dame had a counter-announcement.
It said that Holtz had agreed to a five-year contract extension that would keep him at Notre Dame through the 1996 season.
"I have no intention of coaching anywhere else," Holtz said.


Stanley Platos, 44, A Fashion Designer
Stanley Platos, a fashion designer and manufacturer, died on Wednesday at Christiana Hospital in Wilmington, Del.
He was 44 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of liver failure resulting from complications from AIDS, said Robert Weinstein, chief executive officer of Stanley Platos/Martin Ross.


Sons File for Bankruptcy for Private Maxwell Companies
The global publishing empire that the late Robert Maxwell built on a foundation of debt -- and possibly illegal financial dealings -- came tumbling down today as his sons sought bankruptcy court protection in Britain for two of the Maxwell family's private companies.
The Daily News of New York, which is owned by one of the companies, later filed in New York for protection from its creditors under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code.
For the moment, the newspaper, once America's most widely circulated daily, will continue to be published.
But it is likely that new attempts will be made to sell The Daily News.


Public &amp; Private; Cradle to Grave
He still had a trace of those delectable cheeks that dominate the face in babyhood, those round apples just below his eyes.
In the photograph he is smiling.
Despite it all.
Adam Mann was on television this week.
For 52 minutes his story unraveled in a devastating "Frontline" documentary made by a producer named Carole Langer.
She had followed him from cradle to grave; in Adam's case, the journey took only five years.
He was beaten to death in March 1990 for eating a piece of cake.
The last frame of the film was of the little boy, the cheeks round, in his casket.
The caskets for kids are smaller.
They cost less.


CHRONICLE
If there is one American whose name is inextricably associated with the cause of human rights, it is former President JIMMY CARTER.
This week he will fly to two cities, Houston and Boston, to honor others who have devoted their lives, or given them, for human rights.
Tomorrow Mr.
Carter is to give his annual State of Human Rights address at a ceremony in Houston for the winners of three different awards, the Carter-Menil Human Rights Prize, the Rothko Chapel Awards for Commitment to Truth and Freedom, and the Rothko Chapel Oscar Romero Award.
NELSON MANDELA will deliver the keynote speech at the event.


Sports of The Times; Bring Back George
This clearly is not working.
The whole idea of banning George Steinbrenner from baseball was to punish him and cleanse the Yankees.
It hasn't happened that way.
The Yankees are in worse chaos than ever before.
A limited partner named Robert Nederlander was persuaded to act as the general managing partner for the last year, but he resigned on Thursday, saying he wanted to get back to something stable and wholesome, like producing Broadway plays and jollying up investors.


Santa Takes a "Train to Nowhere" for Handicapped Children


CHANCES FOR END TO YUGOSLAV WAR SEEM TO BE FADING
Although Western nations have dramatically stepped up the economic and political pressure against Serbia in recent days, the prospects for a quick end to the war in Yugoslavia remain tenuous at best.
Cyrus R. Vance, the United Nations envoy trying to broker a durable cease-fire and deployment of peacekeeping forces, acknowledged as much today as the 14th truce in the Yugoslav conflict fell apart after several days of increasingly violent clashes.


Mobil Reduces Spending Budget
The Mobil Corporation, the nation's second-largest oil company, behind the Exxon Corporation, said it had cut back this year's spending budget by $500 million, or 10 percent, from what it had originally planned because of the recession.
The company, based in Fairfax, Va., also said it had deferred some investments until business conditions improved.
"These are difficult times for the oil industry as the pace of economic recovery is slower than expected," said the company's chairman, Allen Murray.
He said that the recession in the United States and in key markets abroad was having a significant impact on demand for Mobil's petroleum and chemical products.
A Mobil official declined to disclose the actual level of the 1991 capital budget, saying the data are strictly for internal use.


Stocks Close Mixed; Dow Is Off 2.69
Stocks closed mixed for the day, after a volatile trading session that saw the Dow Jones industrial average swing 50 points before finishing down 2.69, at 2,886.40.
For the week, the index fell 8.28 points.
Despite the Dow's loss yesterday, gainers led losers by 874 to 775.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy at 199.2 million shares traded, up from 166.4 million on Thursday.


2 Kennedys Take the Stand in Florida To Tell of Family Ties and That Night
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, whose wish for a nightcap last Easter weekend helped set the William K. Smith rape case into motion, came here today to testify in his nephew's trial.
But what he said in his long-awaited appearance in Judge Mary E. Lupo's courtroom was longer on wistfulness over the family's dead than on information relevant to the case.
Moreover, what information he produced was less helpful to the prosecution, which had called him as its own witness, than to the defense.


Former Museum Head Named to Culture Post
Luis R. Cancel, a former executive director of the Bronx Museum of the Arts, was named New York City's Commissioner of the Department of Cultural Affairs yesterday by Mayor David N. Dinkins.
The post had been vacant since Sept. 6, when Mary Schmidt Campbell left to become dean of the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University.


German Ensemble
The German Chamber Philharmonic Orchestra will give a concert at 8 tonight at Carnegie Hall as part of its first United States tour.
With the violinist Gidon Kremer as conductor and soloist, the ensemble will play Mozart's First and Fifth Violin Concertos and two works by Arthur Lourie.
Tickets are $12 to $45.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Americans Aren't Being Protected Against Tuberculosis, Panel Says
Americans are not being adequately protected against tuberculosis, and infected patients are not being given optimal treatment, a national panel of experts concluded today after a two-day meeting here.
The number of tuberculosis cases in the United States is rising instead of declining as Federal health officials had predicted, and the resurgence has jeopardized the goal of eliminating tuberculosis from the country by 2010, the panel said.


Bridge
Five years ago, Eric Rodwell set a record by winning 364 master points at a single national championship.
That record was seriously threatened last week in Indianapolis at the American Contract Bridge League's Fall Nationals.
David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., collected 359.65 master points, and his partner, Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., won 355.
This remarkable total was achieved by winning two major events, the Open Board-a-Match Teams and the Reisinger Teams, and finishing second in another, the Life Master Open Pairs.


Patents; New Process Cuts Cost of Real Vanilla
Vanilla, with its smooth facility for blending with other tastes and fragrances, eclipses even chocolate as the most heavily consumed flavor.
Despite that, most people rarely taste the real thing.
The reason is its expense.
Natural vanilla, extracted from the bean, costs about $1,200 a pound.
The beans themselves are $35 a pound, but only 3 percent is usable for the extract.
By contrast, flavoring made from synthetic vanillan costs only $7 a pound.


In Congress, Miles Apart On Tax Issue
The stark differences in the way Democrats and Republicans in Congress view tax policy, the economy and politics was highlighted today on the second day of hearings about what to do next year to speed recovery from the recession.
The solutions put forward by Democrats in testimony before the House Ways and Means Committee focused almost entirely on tax plans that would let middle-income taxpayers keep a few hundred dollars more a year from what they earn.


Kurds Unearthing New Evidence of Iraqi Killings
Across northern Iraq, Kurds, freed for now from the harshness of President Saddam Hussein's grip, have been uncovering mass graves, torture chambers, elaborate prison systems and documents from secret police files that attest to the inner workings of one of the region's harshest dictatorships.
In the city of Sulaimaniya alone, local officials say they have unearthed more than 200 bodies in the last two months, and new sites to be excavated are being discovered every week.


Mexican Army Officers Held in Drug Agents' Deaths
The Mexican authorities detained two Army generals and three other officers today after an investigation found them responsible in the killings last month of seven Mexican narcotics agents by soldiers, officials said.
A report released in Mexico City by the National Commission on Human Rights avoided the question of whether the soldiers might have been protecting cocaine smugglers whose plane the agents had followed to a remote landing strip in the southern state of Veracruz.


Citing Peace, Navy Will Shut Reactor Prototype
A landlocked prototype of a nuclear submarine reactor, which the Navy has operated in Windsor, Conn., since 1959, will be closed in the spring of 1993 because of "reduced world tensions," the Navy has announced.
The reactor is run by General Electric, which employs 170 people at the site.
Many of them will be eligible for retirement, according to the Navy, and others will get help finding new jobs.
Another 250 naval staff and 270 sailors undergoing training will be reassigned, the Navy said in an announcement made on Thursday.


Knicks Make Wilkins Wait
Dave Checketts, president of the New York Knicks, said last night that the team did not expect to offer Gerald Wilkins a new contract before the season ends.
Wilkins, who is earning $725,000 in the last year of his contract, is seeking a multiyear package averaging $2.5 million.
If he does not sign a new deal, he will become an unrestricted free agent when the season ends.
If the Knicks sign Wilkins this season, it would undoubtedly put them well over the salary cap next season.


Classical Music in Review
Academy of St. Martin-in-the-Fields Carnegie Hall


We'll Need More Than a Water-Saving Drive
To the Editor:
"What to Do About Water" (editorial, Nov. 19), on the drought warning for New York City's water supply system, shows little understanding of the complexity and seriousness of the water management and planning problems facing New York City and the communities upstate served by the city's system.
The relatively minor conservation measures you advocate are helpful but inadequate.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about this year's New York City school calendar referred incorrectly in some editions to the view of Sandra Feldman, president of the United Federation of Teachers, about the two extra days off that have been provided.
Ms.
Feldman said students were getting two fewer days of instruction than they would have in an alternate proposed calendar.
She did not say students were getting two fewer days because of the way the board arranged the current calendar.


Review/Dance; Fresh and Largely Funny
Dance Theater Workshop's "Fresh Tracks" project, presented twice a year at the Bessie Schonberg Theater, lived up to its name this season with a program of dance and performance art by new and emerging artists that was for the most part decidedly fresh.
The program, presented on Monday night, opened with Sally Greenhouse's mordantly funny "Do No Harm," which starts as a monologue about a woman's obsessive examination of her breasts and ends with a litany of mostly foolish-sounding phobias.
Ms.
Greenhouse, standing behind a television monitor, tells one horrific anecdote after another as a woman's hands travel across a life-sized torso on a television screen, checking the breasts for lumps.
"Do No Harm" is an indictment of society's simultaneous overreaction and insensitivity to the issues involved in breast cancer.
But it makes its points with Swiftian humor.
And the neatly obsessive-looking Ms.
Greenhouse frames the piece with some refreshingly frank memories of childhood sexual exploration.


Essex County Fights the State Over Paying the Costs of Courts
Cass Gilbert, the architect, had good timing.
He designed the monumental stone temple that became the Essex County Courthouse and then left town before the justice business got complicated and money grew scarce.
Now, 84 years later, his building is a national historic landmark, but it is also dilapidated, overcrowded and outmoded as a courthouse.
Looking every bit its age, it has become the focus of a prolonged and nasty quarrel over how justice should be administered, by whom and at what cost.


Family of Dead Sailor Is Suing NBC Over Report
The family of a sailor killed in the explosion aboard the battleship Iowa sued NBC today for reporting that he might have been a homosexual who deliberately caused the blast out of despondency over a failed relationship with a shipmate.
The suit, filed in Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court here on behalf of the family of Gunner's Mate 2d Class Clayton M. Hartwig, accuses NBC News of intentional infliction of emotional distress.
It seeks $10 million in punitive damages and an unspecified amount in compensatory damages.


Pay-per-Minute Phone Advice Gets Personal and Professional
The pay-per-call services -- 900 telephone numbers -- that dispense advice of all kinds are reaching out again, expanding to include insurance assistance and legal information.
Now you can dial a 900 number from anywhere in the country and talk to an insurance consultant or a lawyer.
What's next?
Financial services: there are plans to put financial planners, bond specialists and other experts at the end of new 900 lines.


Grand Jury To Hear Case On Au Pair
The Swiss child-care worker charged with murder and arson in the death of a 3-month-old baby walked slowly down the aisle of the small courtroom here today, flanked by police officers, before greeting her mother and father in an emotional embrace, kissing each of them on both cheeks.
The 20-year-old au pair, Olivia Riner, then turned toward the front of the room, where her lawyer told the judge that the case could go straight to a grand jury.


Atom Agency Seeks Stronger Safeguard System
The director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency today formally proposed strengthening the agency's system of safeguarding nuclear material, in response to the discovery last summer that Iraq was running a secret nuclear arms program in violation of safeguard agreements.
"Warning voices are heard -- primarily in the public debate -- that there might be similar cases and that better guarantees must be offered against surprises," said Hans Blix, the agency's director general, describing the proposal at a meeting of the agency's 35-nation governing board.


Gooden Feels No Discomfort As He Throws for First Time
Dwight Gooden's first pitch since September made him laugh outright.
The second one left him smiling at the unfamiliarity of his mechanics and the wildness of the baseball's trajectory.
The third one produced an explosion in the catcher's glove but no pop in Gooden's right shoulder.
It left him, he related later, quietly ecstatic.
None of the 25 or 30 pitches the Mets right hander unleashed in his first workout since rotator cuff surgery last fall made Gooden wince.


Corrections
A chart on Thursday listing the Americans taken hostage in Lebanon omitted one.
David S. Dodge, acting president of the American University of Beirut, was seized on July 19, 1982, and released on July 20, 1983.


American Airlines Refusing To Take Routes Temporarily
American Airlines refused yesterday to add flights on routes to Brazil and Argentina in an effort to win permanent rights to do so.
American has said the Department of Transportation should award the additional flights permanently because of the high cost of adding service for what might be only a short time.


Shooting Rampage in India Claims 51 Lives


Steinbrenner Receives A Hint From Vincent
George Steinbrenner can ask Commissioner Fay Vincent to reinstate him as boss of the Yankees whenever he wishes, but Vincent warned yesterday that it would be difficult even to consider such an action while there are two outstanding lawsuits from team associates against the commissioner and major league baseball.
"It would be difficult to talk to George about circumstances while we are in litigation," said Vincent, who would not otherwise comment on the chances of Steinbrenner's reinstatement.
"That is clearly the case and I think George knows that."


Cost of AIDS Blindness Drug Overstated
To the Editor:
Contrary to Daniel T. Bross in "AIDS Blindness Drug Priced Much Too High" (letter, Nov. 16), the cost of our new drug, Foscavir (foscarnet) is not anything like $21,000 a year.
Unlike AZT, which comes as a pill patients take themselves to combat the human immunodeficiency virus, Foscavir is administered through periodic injections by a trained health care worker.
At $58 a day, daily Foscavir therapy costs about the same as other forms of intravenous antimicrobial therapy.
Our research suggests the average patient is on this therapy only 6 months, not 12.


Latin American Works
Tania Leon is to conduct the Cosmopolitan Symphony Orchestra in works by Latin American composers at 2 P.M. today at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street in Manhattan.
On the program are the world premiere of Gerardo Dirie's "Puerto de Cantaros, Roberto Sierra's piano concerto "Glosas" and works by Villa-Lobos, Silvestre Revueltas, Ricardo Lorenz-Abreu and Miguel Del Aguila. Jose Ramos-Santana is the pianist. Tickets are $5. Information: (212) 840-2824.


Jeannette Kriendler, A Philanthropist, 77
Jeannette E. Kriendler, a philanthropist and the wife of H. Peter Kreindler, the longtime chairman of "21" Club, died yesterday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Kriendler, who had been suffering from osteoporosis, diabetes and pulmonary disease, collapsed at her Fifth Avenue apartment yesterday morning and died at Mount Sinai a short time later, her husband said.


Soviet Union Shuts Down Its Sports Ministry, Ending Financial Support for Olympic Effort
The Soviet Union's state sports agency announced today that it was being closed down because of the Government's crushing financial problems, raising doubt about the nation's ability to field a competitive Soviet Olympic team in 1992.
The organization, Gossport, was shut down as part of the Soviet Government's efforts to shrink a bloated bureaucracy.


South Koreans Plan to Halt Drift-Net Fishing, U.S. Told
A Republican Senator said today that a South Korean official had told him that nation would join other countries in promising to halt drift-net fishing, which critics say is environmentally destructive.
"Korea's decision means the curtain of death on the high seas is now closing for good," Senator Frank Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, said in a statement released by his office.


Yeltsin Now Confronts Backlash From the Soviet Military Complex
Faced with the threat of spreading bankruptcy, the Soviet military industrial complex -- once the backbone of a nuclear superpower -- has become the breeding ground for a conservative backlash against the reforms of President Boris N. Yelstin of the Russian republic.
One of the first to openly distance himself from Mr.
Yeltsin's policies was his Vice President, Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, a retired Soviet Air Force general.
On a tour of military industries in Siberia this week, Mr.
Rutskoi attacked the Russian government's plan to free prices and argued that the defense industry should be rescued from the pressures of a market economy.


BLEAK JOB REPORT SHOWS EMPLOYERS SLASHED PAYROLLS
In an unexpectedly grim report, the Labor Department today found that employers slashed payrolls by 241,000 in November, the biggest drop in jobs since late last winter, when the economy was mired in recession.
The nation's unemployment rate remained at 6.8 percent last month -- and did not rise slightly as had been widely predicted -- but economists took little comfort from any part of the report, which now shows 8,499,000 unemployed.
The report is the first comprehensive gauge of the economy's performance last month.


Lincoln Savings Charges
Federal prosecutors today charged Bruce F. Dickson, a former top executive of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, with one count of bank fraud as they moved closer to an indictment of Charles H. Keating Jr., the failed savings institution's former owner.
Mr.
Dickson, who served as president of Lincoln and as a senior vice president of its parent company, the American Continental Corporation, is scheduled to be arraigned on Monday and prosecutors said he is expected to plead guilty.
Four other people have previously pleaded guilty to Federal charges in the case and are cooperating with the United States Justice Department's investigation into Mr.
Keating's management of Lincoln.


Hellinger Theater Sold To Church
The Nederlander Organization has sold the Mark Hellinger Theater to the Times Square Church, the Rev.
Donald W. Wilkerson, a pastor of the church, said yesterday.
The Hellinger has long been considered one of the best and most beautiful theaters for presenting Broadway musicals.
Mr.
Wilkerson said the 1,600-seat theater at 217 West 51st Street had been sold "during the last few weeks." He would not disclose the purchase price, but others knowledgeable about theater property values estimated it at $15 million to $18 million.


Classical Music in Review
New York Grand Opera Carnegie Hall


For U.N.'s Hostage Envoy, There Is Still Much to Do
He stayed in secret locations in Lebanon and traveled without bodyguards to meetings with kidnappers that always occurred in the dead of night.
He flouted United Nations regulations by commandeering its planes and helicopters and went jogging almost every morning to kept his energy level up and his blood pressure down during months of grueling negotiations.
But today, Giandomenico Picco was back behind the desk in his tiny office in the United Nations Secretariat, relishing the release of the last American hostage on Wednesday, but plunging ahead with the unfinished business of the eight-year hostage ordeal.


Carroll Blocks Out Questions About Coaching
Last week it was Buffalo's Thurman Thomas, the National Football League's top rusher.
This week it's Barry Sanders, the league's second-leading rusher.
For two straight weeks Pete Carroll, the Jets' defensive coordinator, has been besieged with questions about how to stop the two former teammates at Oklahoma State.
But with the announcement earlier in the week that Minnesota Coach Jerry Burns would retire at the end of the season, Carroll, a former Vikings assistant, has been besieged with questions about his dreams of being a head coach.
They were the same questions he sidestepped when Ron Wolf, the Jets' player personnel director, left New York to become Green Bay's general manager a couple of weeks ago.


Pan Am Creditors Group Sues Delta on Promises
A committee of Pan American World Airways creditors sued Delta Air Lines yesterday for its actions in backing away from a reorganization plan that might have saved the bankrupt airline from having to shut down earlier this week.
The breach-of-contract suit, which seeks $2.5 billion in damages, was filed in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan, where Pan Am sought Chapter 11 protection in January.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.  Bulls' Streak Hits 14


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press on Nov. 26 about a Connecticut program for the terminally ill referred incompletely to origins of a program that offers special bracelets for people who want their doctors to withhold life-sustaining measures.
It was begun by the Connecticut College of Emergency Physicians.
It is based on policies of the American College of Emergency Physicians.


SIHANOUK APPEALS FOR CONCILIATION
Prince Norodom Sihanouk stepped up his efforts to placate the Khmer Rouge and its international sponsors and pleaded with Cambodians today to allow senior Khmer Rouge leaders to return to Cambodia without violence.
His plea on state radio came a day after the Prince announced that his followers and the current Vietnamese-installed Government in Cambodia had dropped plans for now to form a coalition government.
The coalition would not have included the Khmer Rouge.


Rangers Squander A Three-Goal Lead
The Rangers, who have squandered an assortment of two-goal leads this season, managed worse tonight at Joe Louis Arena.
They lost a three-goal bulge, in a breathtaking game filled with deflections, breakaways and open-ice surprises.
The result was a 6-5 overtime defeat by the Red Wings that was nearly worth the drama, though certainly Coach Roger Neilson disagreed.
This was hardly his sort of bump-and-grind affair, and the lightning pace produced the wrong ending when Detroit wing Brent Fedyk knocked in an acrobatic pass from Steve Yzerman with just 36.9 seconds left in the overtime.


An Ode to Napoleon
The Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center is to play Mozart's String Quintet in D, Brahms's Quartet for Piano and Strings in C minor, and Schoenberg's "Ode to Napoleon Buonaparte" for piano, strings and reciter at 5 P.M. tomorrow at Alice Tully Hall.
The soloists are to be Joseph Swensen, violinist; Roberto Diaz, violist; the pianist Garrick Ohlsson, and Toby Appel as reciter.
Tickets are $24.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


News Summary
International 2-7  KURDS FIND SIGNS OF IRAQI TERROR
Across northern Iraq, Kurds, freed for now from the grip of President Saddam Hussein's Government, have been uncovering mass graves, torture chambers, elaborate prison systems and documents from secret police files.  1


Mobil Reduces Spending Budget
The Mobil Corporation, the nation's second-largest oil company, behind the Exxon Corporation, said it had cut back this year's spending budget by $500 million, or 10 percent, from what it had originally planned because of the recession.
The company, based in Fairfax, Va., also said it had deferred some investments until business conditions improved.
"These are difficult times for the oil industry as the pace of economic recovery is slower than expected," said the company's chairman, Allen Murray.
He said that the recession in the United States and in key markets abroad was having a significant impact on demand for Mobil's petroleum and chemical products.
A Mobil official declined to disclose the actual level of the 1991 capital budget, saying the data are strictly for internal use.


European Monetary Union: Now Much More Than Talk
After years of talk, European Community governments seem set to relinquish control over their monetary policies and form a landmark monetary union that will include a common central bank and a single currency.
Despite Britain's objections, the plan calls for setting up a common currency in several European countries, perhaps as soon as 1997 and no later than 1999.


N.F.L. Fines 2
Philadelphia defensive back Wes Hopkins was fined $7,500 by the National Football League yesterday and Detroit defensive back Melvin Jenkins was fined $5,000, both for rules violations.
Hopkins was fined for hitting Houston receiver Ernest Givens in the head with his right forearm during Monday night's game.
Jenkins was fined for hitting Minnesota receiver Anthony Carter in the head area with the crown of his helmet during a game on Nov. 24.


New Move On Rates By the Fed
The Federal Reserve eased monetary policy another notch yesterday, pushing down short-term rates in response to a much larger-than-expected decline of 241,000 jobs on corporate payrolls in November.
The most recent move by the Fed is the latest in a series of adjustments to reduce interest rates that began in early 1989 and accelerated in the last few months.
The Fed's chairman, Alan Greenspan, noted in a speech yesterday that the economic rebound of the summer "has shown signs of faltering" and that there was enough uncertainty about the future to make lenders, consumers and businesses more cautious.


Classical Music in Review
Aleck Karis Pianist Merkin Concert Hall


Observer; You'd Hate It There
At the time of Pearl Harbor the United States contained about 132 million people.
At 249 million, we are now nearly twice as many.
The country we now are would be unrecognizable, even terrifying perhaps, like some monstrous futuristic nightmare, to that smaller, relatively threadbare yet sassy old America which came to an end that Sunday afternoon.
I had ridden the streetcar downtown around noon to see a movie.
How antique that was.
Nowadays there are practically no streetcars and almost no downtowns.
Even if there were, you wouldn't ride them there to see a movie, certainly not on Sunday afternoon.
You'd stay home and watch football on television.


In Malawi, Free Press And Enough Food
To the Editor:
In "Vast Africa Defies Easy Generalizations" (letter, Nov. 21), P. P. Lakshman alleges that Malawi has no free press or radio.
There is lively press coverage in Malawi, and contributors to papers circulating in the country are free to write whatever they want, provided they observe the legal limits and appreciate the sensitivities of the people of the country.
This is true too of radio under the Malawi Broadcasting Corporation.


The New Immigrants: Reshaping the Region/A special report; Wider Mosaic: Suburbs' Jobs Lure Immigrants
They still come for all the things that enticed their predecessors: economic opportunity, freedom, a better life for their families.
But unlike earlier immigrants, today's new arrivals often bypass New York City, settling in the towns and cities that dot the metropolitan region.
Quickly but quietly, areas that not long ago were fairly homogeneous have changed.
Indian saris swish down sidewalks in Edison, N.J.
Pastors deliver sermons in Portuguese and Spanish in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
Vietnamese restaurants and markets are springing up in the West End of Hartford.
Iranians are becoming homeowners in Great Neck, L.I.


Playing for Pride? That's Fine for Simms
Eyebrows were raised the other day when Coach Ray Handley said he wanted the Giants to play this week for pride rather than a playoff berth.
Some older Giants were baffled because year after year, their primary goal had been to make the playoffs.
But today, the oldest Giant, 36-year-old quarterback Phil Simms, and the oldest Giants defender, 32-year-old Lawrence Taylor, said they agreed with the coach.


Man, 30, Shot to Death
A 30-year-old man was shot to death yesterday in his driveway in Brooklyn, the police said.
The man, Vincent Fusaro, of 310 Bay 11th Street in Bensonhurst, was shot once in the back of his head, the police said.
His body was found near his black Lincoln Continental shortly before 4 P.M., Officer Andrew McInnis said.
The police had no suspects or motive, but were investigating whether the killing of Mr.
Fusaro, a part-time manager at the Venus Diner at 9316 Fourth Avenue in Bay Ridge, was linked to the Mafia, Officer McInnis said.
A power struggle in the Colombo crime family has left three dead in six shootings since June.


Don't Blame Columbus
To the Editor:
"What Doomed the Maya?" (Science Times, Nov. 19) should silence those who blame Columbus for bringing ecological disaster and slavery to the New World.
You state that the Maya civilization of Central America undermined ecology by overexploiting the forest.
Also that the Maya went to war to control conquered groups for labor and to take captives for sacrifice hundreds of years before Columbus.
That sounds like slavery to me.
VINCENT S. ROMANO Exec.
Director, N.Y.S.
Order Sons of Italy in America Bellmore, L.I., Nov. 22, 1991


Fred Feller, 64, Dies; Broadway Set Builder
Fred Feller, a set builder for more than 200 Broadway shows, died on Wednesday at his home in Tierra Verde, Fla.
He was 64 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said a friend and colleague, Willard Shaffar.


Conyers Journal; Veteran Touches Raw Economic Nerve in Georgia
When Bob Mensinger, a World War II veteran, decided that he wanted to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor by burning a replica of a Japanese battle flag on public property, he touched an economic nerve here.
And for good reason: Conyers, a city of 9,000 people 22 miles east of Atlanta, has shared in that city's growing international profile and become home in recent years to four Japanese companies whose payrolls provide more than $6 million annually to the city.


New Zealand's Skipper
ROD DAVIS, a native of Key West, Fla., who has held dual citizenship in New Zealand and the United States since moving to Auckland in 1987, has been named skipper of the New Zealand Challenge for the 1992 America's Cup.
The challenge syndicate also named DAVID BARNES tactician and RUSSELL COUTS navigator.
The New Zealand syndicate is headed by MICHAEL FAY, the banker, whose huge unorthodox monohull New Zealand lost the 1988 race to the even less orthodox catamran Stars &amp; Stripes skippered by DENNIS CONNER for the San Diego Yacht Club. (AP)


Jury Begins Deliberating On the Fate of Mel Miller
With the fate of one of New York State's most powerful politicians at stake, jury deliberations began yesterday in the fraud trial of Mel Miller, the State Assembly Speaker, and one of his top aides.
Judge Raymond J. Dearie addressed the jury for an hour and 40 minutes, explaining the complex legal principles governing the case in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
The jury then deliberated about four hours before adjourning at 5:10 P.M., to reconvene on Monday morning.


November Jobless Rate in New York City Jumps to 10.2%
With the recession biting ever deeper into New York City's most important businesses -- from retailing to publishing to Wall Street -- the city's unemployment rate jumped to 10.2 percent last month, the first time the November jobless rate hit double digits since 1977, the Federal Government reported yesterday.
Unemployment rose from 8.5 percent in October and now stands at the highest level since the summer of 1984.


Lincoln Center's Party
Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts is to hold its annual tree lighting ceremony and caroling party on Monday at 4:30 P.M. on the Fountain Plaza.
George Weissman, chairman of Lincoln Center, will throw the switch, lighting the 40-foot Colorado blue spruce and opening Lincoln Center's holiday season.
The Alpheus Chamber Brass Quintet and the soprano Ruth Golden will perform, and the Juilliard Chamber Singers, under Judith Clurman, will lead the singing of Christmas carols.
The event is free and open to the public.


Memorial Created Where Youths Were Killed


Hoping for Talks by Wednesday, U.S. Is Prodding Israel and Arabs
The United States held informal consultations with Israeli and Arab representatives today in a search for a mutually acceptable compromise on when to resume their peace talks, with most officials predicting that it would probably be next Tuesday or Wednesday.
American officials were telling the Israelis, Syrians, Lebanese, Jordanians and Palestinians that they should directly negotiate a time for the meeting.
But since such contacts have not gotten off the ground, the United States has been delicately trying to broker arrangements for a starting date.


Ball's Dropping for a New Year's Sitter
Finding a baby sitter for New Year's Eve is an inevitable struggle.
Now is not too soon to line one up.
Educators, parents and baby-sitting agencies in New York, Connecticut, New Jersey and on Long Island say they expect the demand to be high despite the recession.
"We're already getting calls," said Lucille Warrington, owner of the Service, a baby-sitting agency in Larchmont, N.Y.
Conspicuous spending is in disfavor, but people still plan to celebrate.


President Tours Successful Factory
President Bush toured a flashlight factory today and told the workers that he understands that "people are hurting."
Mr.
Bush's political strategists said that the Mag Instrument factory in Southern California was chosen for the trip because it was a success story and the President wanted to show, as one White House official put it, that "all the news isn't bad."


Anderson Says He Doesn't Hate Captors
A beaming Terry A. Anderson, free after nearly seven years as a hostage in Lebanon, said today that he bore no hatred toward his "very, very Islamic" captors, but added that he was never able to understand "what made them able to hold the beliefs they hold and to do the things they did at the same time."
"I don't hate anybody," Mr.
Anderson told reporters at a news conference here.
"I'm a Christian and a Catholic, and it's really required of me that I forgive, no matter how hard that may be, and I intend to do that."


What Is Really Frozen In Property Tax Freeze
To the Editor:
Mayor David N. Dinkins's call for a freeze on property taxes does not freeze property taxes, but the average tax rate.
This rate, 10.591, is computed by dividing the total tax levy by the total billable value.


Corrections
A brief article by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday about a sale involved in the breakup of the old Burlington Northern railroad system misidentified the company that had revenues of $1.82 billion last year.
It was Burlington Resources Inc., a holding company formed as part of the Burlington Northern breakup.


New Post for Zukerman
Pinchas Zukerman has been appointed principal guest conductor of the Dallas Symphony.
Under his new contract, which takes effect in June 1993, Mr.
Zukerman, a violinist and violist, is to conduct for two weeks in the 1993-94 season and three weeks in the two subsequent seasons.
He is to continue as principal conductor of the Symphony's Summer Music Festival, a post he has held since 1990, and appear as a soloist from time to time during the weeks he is conducting.


Quick Leap From Dominance to Disarray
The president of the International Olympic Committee said yesterday that the decision of the Soviet Government to withdraw support from its central sports agency would lead to a sharp decline in performance by Soviet athletes in future Olympics.
"In Albertville and Barcelona, the Soviet Union will be No. 1," Juan Antonio Samaranch, the I.O.C. president, said from Lausanne, Switzerland, referring to the sites of the 1992 Winter Games and Summer Games, in France and Spain, respectively.
"After Barcelona," he added, "the Soviet team will be weaker."


Quote of the Day
"We're not at the point where we're dealing with statistics. I know them by names. To us it's Ms. Smith and Mr. Davis and Mr. Jones. It's a lot more painful than 10.2." BRIAN MOREAU, president of Pan Am's flight attendants union, on the latest unemployment report.  [ 47:5. ]


Giant Trees to Match Our Skyscrapers
To the Editor:
Re "In the Bronx, a Forest Primeval" (editorial, Nov. 18): I have never visited the Forest, the 40-acre wilderness in the New York Botanical Garden of which you write, though I have heard of this majestic stand for some years since moving to New York.
The primary reason I have not made this journey is that there is a large stand of ancient trees in Manhattan.


J. C. West, 83, Partner in a Wall Street Firm
John C. West, a general partner in a Wall Street banking firm, died Wednesday at his home in Boca Grande, Fla.
He was 83 years old and died of heart failure, his family said.
Mr.
West, whose main residence was in Unionville, Pa., had been affiliated with the firm of Brown Brothers, Harriman &amp; Company since 1934, working at its Philadelphia and Manhattan offices.
Although he remained a partner until his death, he retired from daily work in 1973.


Murder Prosecutor Cites Words of Accused
The jury in the Brian Watkins murder trial was urged yesterday to convict the four defendants of homicide even though the prosecution has conceded that none of them wielded the knife used to kill the 22-year-old victim during a robbery in a Manhattan subway station a year ago.
"This was a vicious and brutal assault, robbery and murder," said Assistant District Attorney Thomas Schiels, "and they damned themselves with their own words."


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.62
4.62
7.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.24
4.34
6.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.23
4.36
6.77
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.73
6.77
7.93
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.80
7.84
8.17
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.87
8.87
9.54
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.87
6.88
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


New Polish Premier Predicts Hard Financial Times Ahead
Jan Olszewski, a former Solidarity lawyer and critic of Poland's economic reforms, was confirmed as Prime Minister today, but he acknowledged that his new job would be "a bed of thorns."
Mr.
Olszewski's election by the lower house of Parliament ended six weeks of political stalement after parliamentary elections on Oct. 27 left Poland with 29 parties in the lower chamber.
Mr.
Olszewski represents a coalition of five center-right parties.


There May Be 2 Jimmy Ellises, But There's Only 1 Foreman
George Foreman lost his last fight and this time around, the opponent, Jimmy Ellis, is so little known that many wonder if he is related to the former champion with the same name.
Or, in this day of geriatric sports wonders, if he is actually the same guy.
The answers are no and no.
But in the case of Foreman, he is the former heavyweight champion and he will be 43 years old next month.


Tenneco Names Head Of Its J. I. Case Unit
Tenneco Inc. said yesterday that Edward J. Campbell, president of its Newport News Shipbuilding unit, had been named president of its troubled J. I. Case unit, effective Jan. 1.
Based in Racine, Wis., Case is the world's largest maker of small and medium-size construction equipment, like bulldozers and backhoes, and the second-largest maker of farm equipment in North America, behind John Deere.
As president, Mr.
Campbell, who is 63 years old, succeeds Robert J. Carlson, who will continue as Case's chairman and chief executive.
A 30-year employee of John Deere, Mr.
Carlson joined Case in July from BMC Industries, a Minneapolis electronics and optical company, where he was chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
Carlson filled a position left vacant last March by the resignation of James Ashford.


Longhorn Can't Play
A federal judge refused Friday to extend a restraining order that had kept University of Texas basketball star DEXTER CAMBRIDGE in uniform despite a ruling by the National Collegiate Athletic Association that said he is ineligible.
Cambridge, a senior from the Bahamas who is the leading scorer and rebounder for the Longhorns, was declared ineligible by the N.C.A.A. for accepting cash from a fan at a junior college he attended. (AP)


Next Challenge for 2 Sides Is to Get Series Revived
The Big East-Atlantic Coast Conference challenge is history.
The third and final series between the two conferences ended Thursday night with the A.C.C.'s having captured six of the eight games in this year's series.
Fittingly, the A.C.C.'s dominance this year -- which included convincing triumphs by Duke and North Carolina over St.
John's and Seton Hall, respectively -- left the final tally for the three-year series in a tie at 12 victories apiece.


Lawyer to Investigate Source of Disclosures
Peter E. Fleming Jr., a 62-year-old partner in the New York law firm of Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt &amp; Mosle, was chosen by the Senate today to investigate unauthorized disclosures involving the Keating Five case and sexual-harassment accusations against Judge Clarence Thomas.
The appointment of Mr.
Fleming, a former Federal prosecutor, is effective Jan. 1, said a joint announcement by the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine, and the minority leader, Bob Dole of Kansas.


INSIDE
Testimony of 2 Kennedys First Senator Edward M. Kennedy and then his son Patrick testified in the William K. Smith trial.
In his 40 minutes on the stand, the Senator tried to emphasize the family's heritage of glory and sorrow.
Page 8.
Soviet Sports Pipeline Cut
Cutbacks in funds have forced the shutdown of the state sports system that develops athletes, drastically changing the Soviet picture for the Olympics next year.
Page 31.
Ex-Hostage Plans to Forgive
Terry A. Anderson, free after nearly seven years as a hostage in Lebanon, said he bore no hatred toward his captors, adding that he intended to forgive them.
Page 5.


Bottled Suffolk Water? County Thinks It'll Sell
Perrier, Poland Springs and Great Bear may soon be making room on supermarket shelves for Pine Barrens Pure, bottled and marketed by the Suffolk County Water Authority on eastern Long Island.
Michael LoGrande, chairman of the Suffolk County Water Authority, thinks there's a big market out there for the 10,000-year-old glacier water pumped daily from the pristine aquifer beneath the sands of Suffolk's pine barrens.
He envisions sales of more than $80 million a year in Suffolk County alone, but he has a ways to go to convince shoppers to put down money for something they can get out of their own tap.


Maryland Coach Is Out
A year after he took Maryland to its first winning season since 1985, scoring a stirring upset over highly ranked Virginia and getting a three-year contract as a reward, Coach JOE KRIVAK resigned under pressure yesterday, the victim of his inability to live up to his own expectations.
The Terrapins finished 2-9 this year, giving Krivak a 20-34-2 record in his five seasons at Maryland. (AP)


Review/Music; Mozart's Requiem, in Observance of the Day He Died
Two hundred years ago on Thursday, in a bed in Vienna, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart breathed his last.
There were no profoundly mysterious final words; just the composer mouthing the sound of the timpani from his incomplete Requiem.
There were no doubt many performances of that Requiem on Thursday night across the music-listening world, the culmination of a year of bicentennial tributes.
Erich Leinsdorf, for example, led the New York Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall, trying to create a new version of the fragmented work, culled from other attempts to complete it.
Usually we hear the efforts of Franz Xaver Sussmayr, who, at the request of Mozart's wife, Constanze, composed entire movements of the Requiem and completed substantial portions of others.
But Constanze asked Joseph Eybler for assistance first, some of whose efforts survive.
A modern performing edition composed by an English musicologist, Richard Maunder, was published in 1987.


Maxwell's Disintegrating Empire
The selloff of the Maxwell empire began in earnest today while special auditors, regulators and law-enforcement officials dug through documents to try to determine how much money had been siphoned off from the two big publicly held Maxwell companies to prop up the Maxwell family's private businesses.
At Mirror Group Newspapers P.L.C., which had been considered one of the Maxwell empire's most attractive properties, employees proposed to buy the 51 percent stake in the company held by two Maxwell family companies that filed for bankruptcy protection in Britain on Thursday.


Argentina's Nazi File Has Answers to Mystery
To the Editor:
Because of the mystery surrounding the fate of Nazism's No. 2 man, Martin Bormann, the recommendation by Gerald Posner (Op-Ed, Nov. 13) to the Argentine Government to open its file on Bormann is relevant.
This mystery has seemed almost a conspiracy since May 2, 1945, when Bormann supposedly disappeared from a Berlin street.
The file, containing also material on Dr.
Josef Mengele, Adolf Eichmann and others, is stored in the archives of the intelligence agency, the Seguridad Federal.


Japan Declines To State Regret At Pearl Harbor
Efforts collapsed in Parliament today to pass a resolution of regret for Japan's World War II aggression in time for the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
"We won't do it," said Takashi Hasegawa, a former Justice Minister and the senior legislator in the governing Liberal Democratic Party of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.
"There were just talks."


Carroll Blocks Out Questions About Coaching
Last week it was Buffalo's Thurman Thomas, the National Football League's top rusher.
This week it's Barry Sanders, the league's second-leading rusher.
For two straight weeks Pete Carroll, the Jets' defensive coordinator, has been besieged with questions about how to stop the two former teammates at Oklahoma State.
But with the announcement earlier in the week that Minnesota Coach Jerry Burns would retire at the end of the season, Carroll, a former Vikings assistant, has been besieged with questions about his dreams of being a head coach.
They were the same questions he sidestepped when Ron Wolf, the Jets' player personnel director, left New York to become Green Bay's general manager a couple of weeks ago.


Canadian Jobless Rate
Canada's unemployment rate held steady at 10.3 percent in November, the Government agency Statistics Canada said today.
But economists said a drop in the number of people with jobs and a rise in the number of discouraged job searchers showed that the economic recovery remained weak.
The number of people with jobs fell by 49,000 in November, and only a similar drop in the size of the work force kept the jobless rate from shooting higher, Statistics Canada said.
The number of unemployed people was virtually unchanged at 1.42 million, but about 45,000 people stopped looking for work last month.


Gephardt Raises Japan Challenge
Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the House majority leader, today challenged the Bush Administration to forge a "new and more realistic relationship" with Japan and said that those who had sought changes had been unfairly portrayed as racists.
Mr.
Gephardt suggested that the White House adopt a two-pronged approach of putting greater pressure on Japan to change its trading practices while at that same time investing domestically in education, training and health programs that would make American products more competitive.


Donald Bogart Kipp, Lawyer, 86
Donald Bogart Kipp, a retired New Jersey lawyer, died on Thursday at the Good Samaritan Medical Center in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 86 years old and lived aboard his yacht at Hobe Sound, Fla., and Northeast Harbor, Mount Desert, Me.
A 1928 graduate of Princeton University, Mr.
Kipp received his law degree from Harvard and was a partner in the firm of Pitney, Hardin, Kipp &amp; Szuchok in Newark and Morristown.
He also was a past trustee of Morristown Memorial Hospital, Mystic Seaport and Princeton University, as well as commodore of the New York Yacht Club.


Virginia and Santa Clara Try It Again
The soccer game for the nation's collegiate championship in Division I will be a rematch of two years ago, and this time there will be a winner.
Virginia and Santa Clara, who shared the title two years ago due to lack of an ultimate tie breaker in the championship game, will meet for the title again here Sunday.
This time, the game will go to penalty kicks in case the teams play to a tie after the regulation game and four overtime periods.


Theory and Practice Are at Odds in New Proposal on Minority Scholarships
Education Secretary Lamar Alexander's proposal for settling the legality of minority scholarships enables the Bush Administration to have it both ways on the issue of race.
The stand outlined by Mr.
Alexander last week played to conservative concerns by striking down, in theory, scholarships that are based solely on race.
But then, almost in the same breath, Mr.
Alexander reassured many minority students, and the college administrators who want to attract them, by doing almost nothing that would eliminate any of the 45,000 race-based scholarships now available.


Patents; From Biotechnology, A New Deodorant
Combining modern biotechnology and old-fashioned grooming, the Gillette Company patented a deodorant this week that uses customized antibodies derived from mouse cells to keep people smelling fresh.
The new deodorant employs monoclonal antibodies, which are man-made antibodies that can be designed to attach to specific proteins.
Monoclonal antibodies are now widely used in medical diagnostics, including home-pregnancy tests, where they attach to tell-tale enzymes and other proteins that signal particular conditions or illnesses.
Many companies are also trying to use monoclonals as a sort of magic bullet to deliver drugs to particular parts of a patient's body.


2 Kennedys Take the Stand in Florida To Tell of Family Ties and That Night
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, whose wish for a nightcap last Easter weekend helped set the William K. Smith rape case into motion, came here today to testify in his nephew's trial.
But what he said in his long-awaited appearance in Judge Mary E. Lupo's courtroom was longer on wistfulness over the family's dead than on information relevant to the case.
Moreover, what information he produced was less helpful to the prosecution, which had called him as its own witness, than to the defense.


U.S. Suspends Trade Benefits To All 6 Yugoslav Republics
The United States imposed economic sanctions on all six republics of Yugoslavia today, saying the measure was aimed at ending the undeclared war that started there in June.
In November, the 12-member European Community also imposed sanctions, including suspension of economic aid and trade benefits.
It lifted the sanctions against four of the republics this week, but they continue against the Serbia and its small ally, Montenegro.


Judge Allows McRae To Suit Up for Orange
Suspended center CONRAD McRAE obtained a court order yesterday permitting him to dress for the Syracuse game against Eastern Kentucky yesterday, his lawyer said.
ERIC ALDERMAN, a lawyer in Syracuse, said that State Supreme Court Justice PARKER STONE had issued a restraining order that set aside -- at least temporarily -- a decision by the National Collegiate Athletic Association that prevented the 6-foot-10-inch junior from playing in Syracuse's first three games.
On Thursday, the N.C.A.A.
Eligibility Committee announced that it had denied the university's appeal to restore McRae's eligibility.


In Glare of Latest Scandal, Kennedy Defends the Dynasty
On the witness stand in his nephew's rape trial today, Senator Edward M. Kennedy tried to remind the jury, and the nation, that the Kennedy family has its flaws, but it also has its ghosts and a tradition of more than simply scandal.
He was gray and grim as he entered the Palm Beach County Courthouse this afternoon, walking quickly past the roped-off pack of shouting reporters, past the straining tourists, past the peddlers hawking T-shirts with caricatures of the Senator and pseudo-heraldic crests that mocked the family's dynastic yearnings.


Paterson to Monitor Dig at Burial Ground
To insure that archeologists not be hurried in digging an 18th-century burial ground for blacks in lower Manhattan, State Senator David A. Paterson said yesterday that he would form a team to monitor the work.
The cemetery, known in the 1750's as the Negros Burial Ground, was discovered at a construction site on Broadway, between Duane and Reade Streets, where a 34-story Federal office tower is planned.
More than 90 skeletal remains have been unearthed there since October and there may be dozens more.


Russian Republic Backs 28 Percent Tax on Goods
The Russian republic held fast to its plan for sweeping price rises today as the Parliament approved a 28 percent value-added tax and as other Soviet republics were reported to be reluctantly following the giant republic's lead toward a free-market economy.
President Boris N. Yeltsin, the republic's leader, under pressure from neighboring republics to hold off on his reform plans, said after a Kremlin meeting that there would be no delay in the timetable to begin freeing prices on most foods and consumer goods in 10 days.


Maxwell Says The Daily News Still Has Several Weeks of Breathing Room
Kevin Maxwell, the publisher of the bankrupt Daily News, pledged again yesterday to keep the paper operating and invited unions to help decide how to cut costs, almost certainly including labor concessions.
"We have the cash to meet any obligation that may fall due in the foreseeable future, and the paper is not for sale," Mr.
Maxwell said, responding to two of the most urgent concerns of the paper's employees.


In Glare of Latest Scandal, Kennedy Defends the Dynasty
On the witness stand in his nephew's rape trial today, Senator Edward M. Kennedy tried to remind the jury, and the nation, that the Kennedy family has its flaws, but it also has its ghosts and a tradition of more than simply scandal.
He was gray and grim as he entered the Palm Beach County Courthouse this afternoon, walking quickly past the roped-off pack of shouting reporters, past the straining tourists, past the peddlers hawking T-shirts with caricatures of the Senator and pseudo-heraldic crests that mocked the family's dynastic yearnings.


Justice in the Inslaw Case
The case of Inslaw Inc. is either the most overblown event in recent Justice Department annals or a scandal that echoes Watergate.
It's long past time to find out which, as the new Attorney General, William Barr, has recognized in a statesmanlike action.
He has named Nicholas Bua, a highly respected retired Federal judge from Chicago, as his special counsel to investigate and advise him on the controversy.
Inslaw, a small computer software company that supplied Justice's earliest systems for case management tracking by computer, accuses the department of stealing its product and conspiring to drive it out of business.
While many a frustrated contractor harbors conspiracy theories about government agencies, Inslaw has acquired prestigious support and pointed to irregularities that remain unexplained a decade after the contract dispute began.


BRIEFS
*
Alfa International Corp., Hackensack, N.J., an electronic equipment wholesaler, said its shareholders had approved the acquisition of Nieman Machines Co..
Alfa will issue 2,764,006 common shares in exchange for all of Nieman's outstanding common stock. *
Appleton Papers Inc., Appleton, Wis., a subsidiary of Arjo Wiggins Appleton P.L.C., a British paper company, said it would spend $170 million for an expansion of its pulp and paper mill in Combined Locks, Wis.


Shopping: An Offer Too Good To Accept
In the slippery world of consumer electronics stores, people who compare prices scrupulously may think they can avoid being overcharged.
But they often fall prey to a different tactic used by retailers: making the customer an offer he can't accept.
Consider, for example, a shopper who wanted a Walkman-style tape player and recorder with radio.
Choosing the Aiwa HS-J470, he set out to compare prices in Manhattan.


Editorial Notebook; The Price Isn't Right
The waiter showed up with surprising alacrity.
After taking my order, he asked if I'd be paying in hard currency.
When I said I could, he said the meal would cost $20 and walked away.
I called him back and asked for the menu.
Quick addition showed that the total for four courses came to 70 -- but 70 what?
"Are the prices in rubles or dollars?" I asked.
When the waiter feigned incomprehension, I persisted.
Crestfallen, he acknowledged they were in rubles -- about $1.50 at the going exchange rate of 47 rubles to the dollar.
"Then I'd prefer to pay in rubles." He walked away, ever so slowly.


METRO DIGEST
NEW IMMIGRANTS, NEW DESTINATIONS
They still come for all the things that enticed their predecessors: economic opportunity, freedom, a better life for their families.
But unlike earlier immigrants, today's new arrivals often bypass New York City, settling in the towns and cities that dot the metropolitan region.
Quickly but quietly, areas that not long ago were fairly homogeneous have changed.
Indian saris swish down sidewalks in Edison, N.J.
Pastors deliver sermons in Portuguese and Spanish in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
Vietnamese restaurants and markets are springing up in western Hartford.
Iranians are becoming homeowners in in Great Neck, L.I.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY RISING DEMAND FOR AIDS TESTS


Argentina's Nazi File Has Answers to Mystery; Still No Cooperation
To the Editor:
In "The Bormann File" (Op-Ed, Nov. 13), I challenged President Carlos Menem of Argentina to acknowledge his country's pro-Nazi past and, as a first step, to release his Government's file on one of the most powerful men in the Third Reich, Hitler's personal secretary, Martin Bormann.


Waiting to See if 'Hook' Will Fly
Even before it opens next week, "Hook," Steven Spielberg's update of "Peter Pan," has become a symbol of all that is right and all that is wrong with the movie business.
With its magical special effects and its all-star cast -- Robin Williams as the grown-up Peter Pan, Dustin Hoffman as the pirate captain and Julia Roberts as Tinkerbell -- "Hook," from the Sony Corporation's Tri-Star Pictures, is the kind of big-screen spectacle that even competing studio executives say should rekindle the excitement of moviegoers.


Still 60 Days for Nixon
OTIS NIXON, the Atlanta Braves outfielder who received a 60-day suspension in September after testing positive for cocaine, lost his bid yesterday to have the penalty reduced to the 42 days he had served by the time the Braves' extended season ended with the World Series.
Nixon, who missed the last 19 games of the regular season, argued in arbitration that missing the National League Championship series and the World Series was such a severe penalty that he should not have to miss the first 18 days of the 1992 season as well.


Mickey Can Tell the Time! Oh Boy!
What would the Mickey Mouse watch be like in the year 2000?
That's the question Harold Pierce asked himself.
His answer was a digital animated timepiece that announces the time in Mickey's perky squeal.
Mr.
Pierce decided not to wait until the end of the century to design the Talking Time Mickey Mouse watch.
The watch is a bust of Mickey with a digital readout under his chin.
When you squeeze his hands along the base of the watch, Mickey's familiar voice is heard as his mouth moves in synchronization with the phrases he uses.
For example: "Hey, the time is 27 minutes after 5. Wow!" "Wow, it's 5:31. Oh boy!"


Pearl Harbor Survivors Parade in Honolulu


Many Reasons Prompt Donations to Neediest
Although lagging behind last year's pace, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund is receiving more than one hundred donations every day as the 80th annual appeal closes out its first week.
In the short notes and spirited letters accompanying their checks and money orders, donors have detailed a wide range of reasons for giving.
"We are the parents of a beautiful healthy girl," wrote Jill and Tim Stoller of Cedar Grove, N.J., who gave $384.
"We hope this money can be earmarked for less fortunate children, especially those infected with the H.I.V. virus."


Olajuwon Is Returning
All-Star center HAKEEM OLAJUWON will return to the Houston Rockets lineup Tuesday in Portland after being sidelined more than two weeks with an irregular heartbeat.
He will have missed eight games.
Olajuwon, who has been on the injured list since Nov. 23, will be at practice Monday, the Rockets said yesterday.


Close My Account
More and more people are trading in bank credit cards with interest rates of about 20 percent for ones with lower rates, as low as 9 1/2 percent these days.
You can transfer balances from an old card to a new card.
The issuer of the new card provides a special blank check that you fill out and mail to the issuer of the old card.
That amount is then put on the new card's balance sheet at the new interest rate.
Closing an account is not complicated, but it has to be done properly, or you can jeopordize your credit rating.
Here is how to close an account.
Call the Issuer Telephone the issuer of the old card through its toll-free customer-service number and explain that you want to close the account.
Some issuers will accept telephone instructions; others want them in writing.
When You Write If you write, cut up your card into several several pieces (to insure that the numbers and magnetic strip are unusable), and mail the card and letter to the issuer.
Keep a photocopy of both the letter and the cut-up card, showing that you've fulfilled your obligation to make the card unusable if it fails to get to the bank.
Follow-Up About two weeks after closing the account, call the issuer's customer-service number to see if the account has been closed or is in the process of being closed.
Final Payments Don't assume that because the balance is paid, the account is closed.
You may still owe money for purchases that were not posted when you asked that the account be closed, for an annual fee and for accumulated interest on unpaid charges.
Call and get the final balance, and tell the issuer to waive the annual fee. (Source: Bank Rate Monitor)


38 Arrested In Drug Raids Over 2 Weeks
The leaders of New York City's largest cocaine-smuggling ring have been arrested in the last two weeks in a series of raids in Manhattan, Queens, Long Island and Westchester County, Federal officials said yesterday.
Some suspects, trying frantically to get away, dashed for taxis and subway trains, the authorities said.
Others leaped up from half-eaten dinners.
When agents knocked on the door of an apartment in Queens, a group of 11 men carrying light canvas travel bags stood up with a smile, thinking, the authorities said, that their minibus had arrived to take them to the airport for their flight to Colombia, the base from which they operate.


Cincinnati Council Repeals Law Against Public Begging
The City Council has repealed an 18-year-old law that prohibited begging in public.
Robert Johnstone, an assistant city solicitor, told the council before Wednesday's repeal that the city had enforced the law only three or four times in the last 10 years.


Trieste Journal; Seaport's Grand Vista Dwindles to Old Indignities
A year ago, in the fall of 1990, this tired city on the Adriatic harbored visions of reborn glory as the fall of Communism seemed to unlock vistas of trade and riches in lands stretching across Yugoslavia to Hungary and even the Ukraine.
These days the view has narrowed.
The war in Yugoslavia has severed Trieste's crucial trade lines, revived the city's memories of lost land and butchered people, and reawakened its age-old fear of what people describe as a Slavic threat to its Italian identity.
The city has turned in on itself.


Pushing Aside Games for a World War
On Nov. 29, 1941, Navy defeated Army, 14-6, at Municipal Stadium in Philadelphia before a crowd of 98,497 spectators.
The team was one of Navy's better ones, losing only to Notre Dame that season.
Eight days later, on the Sunday afternoon of Dec. 7, the players were being honored by the superintendent of the Naval Academy, Rear Adm.
Russell Wilson, at his home on the Academy grounds.
The Midshipmen players brought dates.
"It was something like a tea dance," recalled Bob Woods, one of the players.
In midafternoon, Admiral Wilson was called to the telephone.
Urgent from Washington.


Doctor Arrested in Rape and Murder of Woman
A 28-year-old doctor has been arrested on charges of giving a woman a fatal dose of chloroform and then raping her in a California motel last August, the authorities said today.
After a bail hearing here this afternoon, the suspect, Samson G. Dubria, said through a court-appointed lawyer that he was not guilty and eager to return to California to contest the murder and rape charges.
He was arrested Thursday night.


Decorative Arts Sale Defies Auction Slump
The sale of French furniture and decorative objects from the Keck collection on Thursday night at Sotheby's proved that in this depressed auction season a touch of gilt and lacquer goes a long way.
Many pieces sold for more than their high estimates, a far cry from the disappointing results in last month's auctions of paintings, drawings and sculpture.
Of the 55 objects on the block on Thursday, only six failed to sell.
The auction's total, $10,212,400, confirmed what the art market already knew: fine French furniture appears to be recession-proof.
"It just doesn't fall," Jean-Marie Rossi, a Paris-based dealer, said after the sale.
"This is still a serious market." And that was exactly what Sotheby's was banking on.
With the auction house's bread and butter -- Impressionist, modern and contemporary paintings -- bringing in far less revenue, it is counting on the decorative arts to make up much of the difference.


H.I.V. Tests Up 60% Since the Disclosure From Magic Johnson
The number of people being tested for H.I.V. has increased almost 60 percent in New York City and has risen sharply throughout the nation in the month since Magic Johnson announced that he was infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
In New York, the increase has strained the resources of the City Health Department, which said it can now take up to seven weeks to get an appointment for a test at the city's counseling and testing centers.
Before Mr.
Johnson's announcement on Nov. 7, most centers provided tests without an appointment or had a maximum wait of two weeks.


Toe to Toe Over a Checkerboard
His bags were packed and his bride eagerly waited at home, but an all-night checkers game made James Searles miss the boat for his honeymoon cruise to Jamaica 40 years ago.
"They had a cash prize," Mr.
Searles wistfully recalled.
"That calmed her down a little bit."


Royals Offer Arbitration To Tartabull and 2 Others
The Kansas City Royals don't have much, if any, hope of re-signing Danny Tartabull, the second-most attractive hitter on this year's free-agent list, but they offered him salary arbitration today.
The Royals also offered arbitration to Kurt Stillwell and Jim Eisenreich, thereby retaining their rights to the players for at least another month and assuring themselves compensation if the free agents should sign with other teams.


With No Frills, New Bush Chief Signals Changes
Samuel K. Skinner, who will take over as the new White House chief of staff this month, flew here today from Washington to give a luncheon speech.
By commercial airline.
In coach class.
The no-frills travel was only one of several signals Mr.
Skinner sent on the first day after being named to the post that he planned to use a different style, political agenda and perhaps a different staff at the White House than John H. Sununu, whose manner, imperial tastes and economic and political judgments all led this week to his resignation.
Until the White House restricted Mr.
Sununu's travel this year, he often used Air Force planes for business and personal trips.


New Orleans Weighs Anti-Bias Law on Carnival
A law has been proposed that would ban discrimination of any kind in clubs that sponsor Mardi Gras, but opponents of the proposal say such a measure could mean the death of this city's famous festival.
The proposal, which was introduced in the City Council last week, is the latest chapter in the politics of race here.
Last month, State Representative David Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader and neo-Nazi, lost a race for Governor in which he ran a racially divisive campaign.


CHRONICLE
"This will be like a family reunion," FRANK PERRY said about a dinner on Monday that will bring 350 weekend and full-time residents of the Hamptons on Long Island together at the Plaza hotel in Manhattan for the seventh annual Guild Hall Lifetime Achievement Awards.
"What is remarkable about this event is that it never takes itself too seriously, it is communal, neighborly and fun, an excuse to get together in the winter," Mr.
Perry said.


The Hidden Heroes
When the orations are over today, most Americans who fought and died because of Pearl Harbor will have been well and fully remembered.
What happened 50 years ago will have been generously commemorated on television and in print, in speeches and sermons.
What remains very much in order is a special tribute to largely unremembered Americans like Ben, an Army Air Force sergeant from Hershey, Neb.
Ben flew 30 bombing missions in Europe.
At one point, when his B-24 Liberator was downed, he escaped internment in Spanish Morocco.
Though then entitled to home-front rotation, he requested duty in the Pacific and took part in 28 hazardous missions against Japan.


School District Stripped of Fiscal Power
The fiscal affairs of a Bronx school board with a steady history of corruption and mismanagement were taken over yesterday by a team appointed by Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez.
In a letter to the board of District 12 in the south-central Bronx, Mr.
Fernandez said he was taking the action because the district did not submit its school year budget until Dec. 4, more than a month after it was due, and had failed to put 13 working teachers on its payroll so that they might get paid.
The lapses, he said, were further evidence of a longtime pattern of mismanagement.


From Sotheby's High Gloss To Filth of Calcutta's Slums
The auctioneer cut an imposing figure, nearly six feet tall in heels, her English-accented contralto crisply authoritative.
"We're going to dash right in and start," she announced Wednesday evening.
In less than an hour she would sell Keith Carradine's lucky cowboy boots, Dorothy Hamill's favorite skates, Nolan Ryan's no-hit cleats, Ivana Trump's mules and the used footwear of more than a dozen other famous people as part of a benefit staged by the Fashion Footwear Association to help AIDS patients.


In Glare of Latest Scandal, Kennedy Defends the Dynasty
On the witness stand in his nephew's rape trial today, Senator Edward M. Kennedy tried to remind the jury, and the nation, that the Kennedy family has its flaws, but it also has its ghosts and a tradition of more than simply scandal.
He was gray and grim as he entered the Palm Beach County Courthouse this afternoon, walking quickly past the roped-off pack of shouting reporters, past the straining tourists, past the peddlers hawking T-shirts with caricatures of the Senator and pseudo-heraldic crests that mocked the family's dynastic yearnings.


Bush Signs Bill for Military, But Expresses Reservations
President Bush today signed into law the defense authorization bill for the 1992 and 1993 fiscal years, despite his reservations about some provisions, including curbs on shifting an F-15 fighter base from Spain to Italy.
Mr.
Bush also expressed reservations about parts of the bill relating to military cost-sharing with other nations, restrictions on nuclear missile deployment and troop levels in Europe.


2 Kennedys Take the Stand in Florida To Tell of Family Ties and That Night
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, whose wish for a nightcap last Easter weekend helped set the William K. Smith rape case into motion, came here today to testify in his nephew's trial.
But what he said in his long-awaited appearance in Judge Mary E. Lupo's courtroom was longer on wistfulness over the family's dead than on information relevant to the case.
Moreover, what information he produced was less helpful to the prosecution, which had called him as its own witness, than to the defense.


Coleman Blasts Fitch After Loss to Lakers
Derrick Coleman sat, seethed and spoke out in frustration against his coach, Bill Fitch, tonight.
The Los Angeles Lakers snapped the Nets' winning streak at two games with a 98-89 victory, leaving the Nets frustrated, Coleman most of all.
After aggravating his sprained left ankle in Milwaukee on Thursday night, Coleman said he was ready to play tonight, but he was held out by Fitch until 5 minutes 41 seconds remained in the third period, with the Nets trailing by 10 points.
"You let a player sit on the bench for three quarters, then you expect him to come out and turn it on?" Coleman said.
"I felt good. I told him that."
Then Coleman asked another pointed question: "You call that coaching?"
Fitch said he was concerned about Coleman's tender ankle.
"I was hoping we would be able to blow it open without him," Fitch said.
Take It From Haley
Not with two teams of such different abilities.
To determine the difference between the Nets and the Lakers, beyond the obvious gulf that exists in the standings, one need only examine the decisive stretch in the fourth quarter of a close game.
Of his former team, the Nets, Jack Haley said, "You just crossed your fingers and hoped you'd somehow pull it out."
Of his current team, the Lakers, Haley said: "You can feel the confidence in the veterans. They just expect to win."
Even these Lakers, minus their retired franchise player, Magic Johnson, and their injured center, Vlade Divac -- these Lakers, with Haley and Sedale Threatt as starters, and with a bench of waiver-list retreads like Rory Sparrow and Chucky Brown.
These Lakers, led by James Worthy and Sam Perkins, pulled away from those same old Nets tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, and headed for home following a grueling 13-day road test in which they won 4 of 7.
Dunleavy Delighted
"I'll take it," Coach Mike Dunleavy said, thrilled that his team's toughness had resurfaced after Los Angeles had lost blowouts in its previous two games at Milwaukee and Charlotte.
The Lakers weren't pretty tonight, shooting 41.3 percent from the field, but the Nets were worse, at 38.8
"The old Lakers liked to say, 'O.K., we'll turn it on in the fourth quarter,' " said Dunleavy.
"We don't have the talent to say that anymore. We have to be mentally tough for the entire 48 minutes."
As for Coleman, he might have saved his anger for his teammates, especially the guards.
He could barely contain his emotions as the game slipped away in the fourth quarter.
The Nets, after rallying to trail, 81-79, with 5:03 to go, did not score another field goal until Rafael Addison's meaningless jump shot with 33.7 seconds left.
It was another in a series of performances from the schoolyard playbook.
During that sequence, Drazen Petrovic, somehow miscalculating how far away the basket was, fired a 25-foot air ball with 9 seconds left on the shot clock.
Kenny Anderson missed a layup and forced up a 17-footer, another air ball.
At 81-79, Anderson also failed to deliver the ball on the low post to a pleading Coleman, who was so frustrated that he chucked up his own wild 3-pointer the next time he got his hands on the ball.
Then, during a timeout at 3:17, with the Nets down by 86-81, Coleman's eyes filled with rage as he stood behind Fitch as the coach addressed the players on the bench.
On the other side, meanwhile, composure was the reigning emotion.
The Lakers calmly executed their post-up offense.
In this post-Magic era, it features Worthy, tonight isolating on the hopelessly overmatched Chris Morris, or waiting to draw a double-team, creating an open shot elsewhere.
"We tried both ways to defend him," Fitch said, admitting neither worked.
At 83-80, Worthy went to the perimeter to Threatt, who swung the ball to Byron Scott, who buried an open 3-pointer.
Worthy's 15-footer made it 88-81, and then Sam Perkins followed Worthy's driving layup with a put-back basket that put the game out of reach.
Just as Haley expected the Lakers would.


Former Top C.I.A. Official Pleads Not Guilty to Perjury in Iran Case
Duane R. Clarridge, a former high-ranking official at the Central Intelligence Agency, pleaded not guilty in Federal District Court today to charges that he misled Congressional committees and a Presidential review board about his role in a secret arms shipment from Israel to Iran in 1985.
At a six-minute hearing before Judge Aubrey E. Robinson Jr., Mr.
Clarridge spoke only when the judge asked him how he would plead to the seven-count indictment.
"Not guilty," answered Mr.
Clarridge, once one of the agency's most aggressive and flamboyant clandestine agents.


Judge Allows McRae To Suit Up for Orange
Suspended center CONRAD McRAE obtained a court order yesterday permitting him to dress for the Syracuse game against Eastern Kentucky yesterday, his lawyer said.
ERIC ALDERMAN, a lawyer in Syracuse, said that State Supreme Court Justice PARKER STONE had issued a restraining order that set aside -- at least temporarily -- a decision by the National Collegiate Athletic Association that prevented the 6-foot-10-inch junior from playing in Syracuse's first three games.
On Thursday, the N.C.A.A.
Eligibility Committee announced that it had denied the university's appeal to restore McRae's eligibility.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Payrolls were slashed by 241,000 jobs in November, the Labor Department said, the biggest drop since late last winter.
The Federal Reserve moved swiftly to cut again the interest rate on overnight loans among banks, making the Federal funds rate 4 1/2 percent, its lowest level since 1972.
The nation's unemployment rate remained at 6.8 percent last month, but economists took little comfort from any part of the report.  [ Page 1. ]  With the recession biting deeper into New York's most important businesses, the city's unemployment rate climbed to 10.2 percent in November, the highest since the summer of 1984.  [ 25. ]  President Bush told workers at a flashlight factory in California that he knows "people are hurting."  [ 47. ]


William Droeger, 65; Led Clothes Companies
William H. Droeger, the retired president of two major clothing companies, died Thursday at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan and also had a home in Cutchogue, L.I.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


Yet Again, Knicks Fall Down In Boston
The Knicks' six-game winning streak ended tonight, but their frustration in Boston continued.
Using a decisive 10-1 run midway through the fourth quarter, the Celtics defeated New York, 103-92, at Boston Garden, giving Boston (12-6) sole possession of first place in the Atlantic Division, something the Knicks (10-6) were also looking for.


Beliefs
War is a word Americans toss around lightly: war against poverty, war on drugs, even war against war.
The latest of these martial metaphors is "culture war," the idea that two opposing world views are locked in mortal combat on the battlefield of American culture.
The culture war is engaged over issues like abortion, censorship, homosexual rights, school textbooks, Supreme Court nominations, religious symbols in public places, sex education and the distribution of condoms in public schools.


Patents; Simulated Browning In Microwave Ovens
Hoping to make microwave biscuits and breads more appealing, researchers at the Pillsbury Company and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have patented a new way to simulate the browning created in conventional ovens.
Baked goods do not naturally brown when prepared in microwave ovens, and researchers believe the reason is that heating takes place from the inside out.
Moisture is continually pushed from the center of a biscuit to the surface, keeping the outside surface too cool to turn crusty.


EXECUTIVES
*
Analysis and Technology Inc., North Stonington, Conn., a military consulting company, named Robert M. Gorman senior vice president. *
A &amp; W Brands Inc., White Plains, a soft drink company, announced that M. L. Lowenkron, chief executive, had assumed the additional post of chairman.


Tighter Safeguards On A-Arms Sought
The head of the International Atomic Energy Agency formally proposed strengthening the agency's system of safeguarding nuclear material, including special inspections at sites where violations are suspected.
He was responding to the discovery last summer that Iraq was running a secret nuclear arms program in violation of international agreements.


Your Money; Cash Isn't Best For Large Gifts
Affluent people have long given annual gifts of up to $10,000, generally to family members, to escape some taxes that might be levied on sizable one-time gifts or bequests.
But in doing so, many overlooked a way to save on income taxes, too.
Eli J. Warach, a tax lawyer and author of the Maxwell Macmillan 1992 Federal Tax Handbook, points out that giving appreciated securities, rather than cash, when the recipient is in the 15 percent tax bracket, can cut a family's overall tax bill.


Focus: Escondido, Calif.; D-Day for Mobile-Home Property Rights
CHARLES DuPONT owns a mobile-home park with about 100 spaces on an enviable site bordered one one side by an orchard and on the other by new one-family houses.
Yet because of a rent-control law he has been unable to raise most of his rents beyond what tenants paid in 1986.
Mr.
DuPont is one of eight owners of mobile-home parks in this city 25 miles north of San Diego who have challenged its rent-control law in court.
Their cases, grouped together, have won a review before the United States Supreme Court, which has become increasingly willing to hear property-rights cases as its membership has taken on a more conservative cast.
It is likely to hear the cases next month.


Making Taxation Fairer
To the Editor:
The continued truncation of our progressive income tax rates at 30 percent is preposterous.
Nor is Representative Dan Rostenkowski's timid proposal of an increase to 35 percent for a limited few the answer.


CAMPUS LIFE: Syracuse; A Pilot Program Brings Students To World Cuisine
Until recently, there was a cozy, petite establishment at Syracuse University where budget-conscious students could sample exotic cuisine from around the globe and take a welcome break from the palate-numbing dormitory meals and fast food.
The place was World's Fare 1991 and it was part of a pilot program at Syracuse in which nine students, aspiring restaurateurs, operated their own full-service restaurant.
World's Fare was open every Thursday evening in the university's Faculty Center.
The menu changed weekly, offering foods from different countries and regions, like Northern Italy, the French countryside and the Caribbean.
To celebrate United Nations Day on Oct. 24, customers sampled cuisine from 14 different countries -- and all for $12.95, prix fixe.
A regular dinner in the student dining hall is $9.50.


Sports of The Times; Will Simms Be the Tittle Of '92
FOR the first time this season, Phil Simms will be the starting quarterback at Giants Stadium today, prompting several questions.
Will he be greeted with cheers by all those who believed he should have been chosen by Coach Ray Handley as the starter instead of Jeff Hostetler when the season began?


Frengiz Surty To Wed in '92
Mr. and Mrs.
Rohinton J. Surty of Menlo Park, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Frengiz Rohinton Surty to Lee Scott Wolosky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Wolosky of Riverdale, the Bronx.
A fall 1992 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Surty, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of California at Los Angeles.
She is a consulting associate at Cambridge Associates, an investment advisory concern in Boston.
Her father is a senior engineer and project manager for I.B.M. in San Jose, Calif.
Her mother, Villoo R. Surty, is a graphic designer in Menlo Park and San Francisco.


Review/Cabaret; AIDS Revue, A Benefit
Is it possible to create a cabaret musical about AIDS that isn't forbiddingly grim or cloyingly sentimental?
"Here's to Our Friends: The AIDS Music Revue," which plays Monday evenings at Eighty-Eight's through the end of January, makes a brave effort to steer between these two pitfalls.
And while the show, whose performances will benefit God's Love We Deliver, has many lapses, it also has its touching and funny moments.
"Here's to Our Friends" is produced and directed by Erv Raible and performed by the singers Lina Koutrakos, Jay Rogers and Bill Wright, with Dick Gallagher at the piano.
It consists of two dozen songs by cabaret songwriters ranging in style from Michael Callen's angry, martial outcry "Living In Wartime" to Ann Hampton Callaway's quiet, tearful "Wherever You Are" to Brian Lasser and David Arthur's swiveling Broadway finger-snapper "I Ain't Goin' Yet."


Social Events
Rooms to Go
Dec. 9 -- Nineteen miniature rooms, decorated by leading interior designers on a scale of one inch to the foot, will be auctioned at Christie's for the benefit of the Kips Bay Boys and Girls Club.
The club provides after-school activities in the South Bronx.
Cocktails at 6 P.M.; auction at 7:30.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 893-8600.
For Future Chefs
Dec. 9 -- The culinary internship program of the Felipe Rojas-Lombardi Scholarship Fund, named for the late Peruvian-born chef and administered by the James Beard Foundation, will benefit from an evening of music, wine and Cuban and other Latin American food from 6 to 9 P.M. at Victor's Cafe 52, 236 West 52d Street.
Tickets, $40, from (212) 675-4984.
Helping Babies
Dec. 10 -- Steve Chapin, the songwriter and composer, will perform at a "Boarder Baby Shower" and tea from 6:30 to 8 P.M. at Grace Episcopal Church at Hicks and Joralemon Streets in Brooklyn Heights.
Sponsored by 26 Brooklyn organizations, the event is to benefit abandoned, sick or homeless babies and their mothers at Interfaith Medical Center in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.
No tickets, but bring a shower gift or a check payable to the center's Ob-Gyn fund.
RSVP, (718) 624-7765.
Alvin Ailey Premiere
Dec. 10 -- The premiere of a new ballet, "Rift" by Judith Jamison, will benefit the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater.
Performance at the City Center at 7:30 P.M.; cocktails, dinner and dancing afterward at the Hilton.
Black tie.
Tickets, $375, from (212) 767-0590, ext. 321.
"Nick and Nora"
Dec. 11 -- The American Liver Foundation will benefit from a performance of "Nick and Nora" at the Marquis Theater at 8 P.M., with a 6 P.M. pretheater reception at the Marriott Marquis.
Tickets, $150, from (800) 223-0179.
Ping Chong Benefit
Dec. 12 -- A 7:30 P.M. performance of Ping Chong's multi-media "Nosferatu -- A Symphony of Darkness" will benefit his theatrical company, Ping Chong &amp; Company.
A cocktail party at 5:30 P.M. at Passport, 79 St.
Mark's Place, between First and Second Avenues, will precede the performance at La MaMa E.T.C.,74A East Fourth Street.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 529-1557.
For the Hospitals
Dec. 12 -- A James Rizzi silkscreen, "A Lot of Fun for City Kids," will be a raffle prize at the United Hospital Fund's wine and cheese reception from 6 to 8 P.M. at the John Szoke Gallery, 164 Mercer Street (south of Houston Street), to benefit the city's voluntary, nonprofit hospitals.
Tickets, $35, from (212) 645-2500.
Colitis Foundation
Dec. 12 -- A dinner dance at the Sheraton New York, starting with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., will benefit the Crohn's and Colitis Foundation.
Matilda Cuomo will present awards.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 679-1570.
For Women In Need
Dec. 15 -- Conde Nast Publications and Women In Need will raise money for a holiday party for homeless women and children at a dance performance, narrated by a storyteller, reflecting the many meanings of giving.
From 2 to 3 P.M. at Mary Murphy Amphitheater at the Fashion Insitute of Technology, 227 West 27th Street.
Tickets, adults, $25; children, a $10 ticket plus a toy costing about $15; from (212) 880-8442.
Actors Workshop
Dec. 15 -- Actors will read and perform, and champagne and hors d'oeuvres will be served at an Actors Theater Workshop benefit for its programs for young people, the elderly and the homeless.
From 3 to 7 P.M. at 145 West 28th Street, third floor.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 947-1386.
At the 92d Street Y
Dec. 17 -- The opening of the new Tisch Center for the Arts of the 92d Street Y will be celebrated by a week of musical and literary events starting Dec. 17.
A champagne reception for the gala opening night will begin at 6:30 at the Y. Tickets, $50, or $200 to include supper afterward at the Regency, from (212) 415-5488.
Harry Benson at Christie's
Dec. 17 -- Photographs by Harry Benson will be auctioned at a 6 P.M. reception and exhibition at Christie's in honor of the new book "People: Photographs by Harry Benson." Dinner at Doubles will follow at 8:30.
Proceeds will benefit the American Cancer Society.
Tickets, $75 for the reception and $175 for reception and dinner, from (212) 586-8700, ext. 390.
Party at Asser Levy
Dec. 17 -- The Jewish Museum will benefit from a rock-and-roll party from 8 to 11 P.M. at the Asser Levy Bathhouse, 23d Street at Asser Levy Place, a block east of First Avenue.
Tickets, $50 for members of the museum's New Generation category, for individuals and couples under 40; $60 for others.
From (212) 399-3362; $75 at the door.
American Jewish Congress
Dec. 17 -- The American Jewish Congress will honor the investment banker Stanley S. Shuman at a dinner-dance starting at 6:30 P.M. at the Pierre.
Black tie.
Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 360-1556


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


Only Free Commonwealth Will Survive, Yeltsin Says
Hours before the beginning of crucial talks among Russia, Byelorussia and Ukraine, the Russian republic's President, Boris N. Yeltsin, said today that only a commonwealth of fully independent countries -- not the confederation envisioned by the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev -- could emerge from the old union.
The idea of a union of sovereign states delegating some responsibilities to a central authority is dead, Mr.
Yeltsin told members of the Byelorussian Parliament in the republic's capital, Minsk.


Hospitals Confront the Pain of Urban Warfare
THE 21-year-old man who lay quietly in a bed at Bridgeport Hospital, recovering from multiple gunshot wounds, described himself as one of the top drug bosses at Father Panik Village, a public housing development in the city.
A few days before, he said, another drug boss had shot him in the ribs, arm and heel as he fled through the passageways between the buildings in the complex.
"Fortunately I had a bulletproof vest on," he said.
"Otherwise I'd be dead."
Across the room, a 35-year-old man rested on his side as he stared reflectively out a window.
He had been shot four times around 6:30 P.M. on Halloween, he said, while standing outside his house in the East Bridgeport section of the city.


Applying Fertilizer Completes the Chores
NOW that the leaves are off the trees and raked up from the lawn, one final chore needs to be done: applying fertilizer.
This is a good time of year to apply it, since late fall rains and winter snows dissolve the nutrients down into the soil, and there is much less chance of runoff into the watersheds.
This deep penetration is especially true for the granular all-purpose garden fertilizers, like 5-10-5.
Fertilizer application now is an easy chore, since it does not require any tools -- just a gloved hand and strong back.
If fertilizer is applied now, the nutrients will have worked down into the root-zone level by the time spring rolls around, and they will be doing their job to nurture plants when they need it most.
Those who have several established bulb plantings will find that feeding now will provide these older bulbs with the extra soil nutrition they need.
This boost will be used for the 1993 flowers that will start to form almost as soon as the 1992 flowers bloom.


Transit Worker Slain in West Side Station
A 36-year-old transit worker was shot to death by her boyfriend, also a transit worker, as the woman was cleaning an Upper West Side subway station early yesterday, the police said.
The victim, Nicolette Smith, who lived at 1389 Herkimer Street in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, was washing a wall at the 86th Street and Broadway station on the No. 1 line at 12:32 A.M. when she and her boyfriend, Manley Morrison, also 36, began arguing, Officer Kim Royster, a police spokeswoman, said.


Owners Discover Spring Free-Agent Bargains Are Worth the Wait
The glare of the Bobby Bonilla signing, the Mets' aggressive pursuit of Bonilla and Eddie Murray, and the Los Angeles Dodgers' lightninglike deals with Orel Hershiser and Tom Candiotti might have temporarily blinded viewers to the plodding nature of this year's free-agent market.
But the fact is the pace of signings has been the slowest since the days of collusion.
No cries of Collusion IV have been heard -- how could there be when the lushest contract ever has been bestowed on Bonilla? -- but there could be another game afoot.
Call it the K Mart Caper.


Fujimori Aims for a Head-on Collision With 'Shining Path'
PERU'S President and Peru's Maoist rebels appear to be on course for a major confrontation in 1992.
Marshaling the forces on one side is Alberto K. Fujimori, the mild-mannered university president who after becoming Peru's president 16 months ago suddenly worked Latin America's most rapid and most radical free market revolution.
Last month, the determined leader turned from economics to counterinsurgency and issued a blizzard of decrees intended to give Peru's army a free hand in fighting terrorism.
On a recent visit to California, Mr.
Fujimori predicted that Peru would be pacified by the end of his term, in 1995.
His advisers say by the end of 1993.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-23  SECRET ARMS FLOW TO IRAN
Soon after taking office in 1981, the Reagan Administration abruptly changed United States policy and secretly allowed Israel to sell several billion dollars' worth of American-made arms, parts and ammunition to Iran, officials say.  1


Brett Hull: Stealth Bomber
TO BE IN THE GAME WITHOUT BEING IN THE COLLECTIVE consciousness of the opposition.
It is a one-man, clandestine operation Brett Hull launches again and again in the course of a night in the National Hockey League.
Hull, the pitiless scoring machine for the St.
Louis Blues, likes to slip onto the ice while the play is ongoing, to lose himself amid the fast-paced, often randomly evolving action and to find the patch of open ice everyone else has momentarily forgotten.


Cuomo Has Plenty of Precedent for a Late Presidential Run
To the Editor:
Some Democratic Party politicians and party leaders have hinted that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has upset some kind of timetable by not announcing whether or not he will be a candidate for President next year.


Applying Fertilizer Completes the Chores
NOW that the leaves are off the trees and raked up from the lawn, one final chore needs to be done: applying fertilizer.
This is a good time of year to apply it, since late fall rains and winter snows dissolve the nutrients down into the soil, and there is much less chance of runoff into the watersheds.
This deep penetration is especially true for the granular all-purpose garden fertilizers, like 5-10-5.
Fertilizer application now is an easy chore, since it does not require any tools -- just a gloved hand and strong back.
If fertilizer is applied now, the nutrients will have worked down into the root-zone level by the time spring rolls around, and they will be doing their job to nurture plants when they need it most.
Those who have several established bulb plantings will find that feeding now will provide these older bulbs with the extra soil nutrition they need.
This boost will be used for the 1993 flowers that will start to form almost as soon as the 1992 flowers bloom.


Sports of The Times; Corporate Weasels Are Sacked for a Loss
THE PIGGLY WIGGLY World Series is a few days further away from reality, thanks to the public servants at the Internal Revenue Service.
I have always felt the day would come when a lawyer would slap a court order on us, forcing us to call it the Twinkies Super Bowl, but that day has surely been postponed.
The corporate weasels have been dealt a major blow in their zeal to sponsor and rename traditional sports events. (And, indeed, other institutions -- why not the Chili Dog New York Public Library? What would stop these people?)


Robert Goldworm, 65; a Fashion Executive
Robert Goldworm, a retired fashion designer and executive who was a leader in developing women's knitwear, died on Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan and Pacific Palisades, Calif.
He had pancreatic cancer and died of an embolism, friends said.


No Frost for the Final And a Single Winner
Two years ago, Virginia and Santa Clara shared the collegiate soccer title after four overtime periods failed to break a 1-1 tie.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association learned a lesson from that game and when Virginia and Santa Clara play here tomorrow for the championship, there will be a winner, and no one will suffer from frostbite.


Smith Defense Witness Tells of a Meeting the Accuser Didn't Recall
The prosecution rested its case in the William K. Smith rape trial today after calling its 23d witness, and the defense got underway with the testimony of a bartender who says he met with Mr.
Smith's accuser only a few hours before she says the rape occurred.
Judge Mary E. Lupo barred the prosecution from calling an authority on rape trauma syndrome as its final witness.
The Judge ruled that prosecutors had waited too long to declare their intention to call him, and that allowing him to testify would throw off the trial schedule because the defense would need a recess of several days to prepare.
She has promised the jury the case will conclude by Dec. 20.


Veterans Talk of Horror of War and Forgiveness
"We watched them dig their graves and we watched their firing squads -- everybody had to fall out for that," said Arnold Bocksel, a 78-year-old survivor of the Bataan Death March, recalling the shootings and beheadings of hundreds of fellow prisoners along the 65-mile journey through the Philippine jungle.
Mr.
Bocksel spent three and a half years as one of the about 27,000 Americans who, military records show, were taken prisoner by the Japanese during World War II.
He was one of about 16,000 who survived captivity.


A 'Peter Pan' for the 90's
The pirate extras are milling about the deck of the Jolly Roger, a coal-black galleon the size of a Episcopal church.
A Japanese television crew, filming a commercial, hunches over a treasure chest, debating the number of doubloons that should appear in the frame, while the actors, bedecked in the requisite eye patches and earning tidy per diems, take time out from their attempts to appear craven.
The site is Stage 27 of the Sony Pictures lot.
For "Hook," Steven Spielberg's $60 million-plus updating of J. M. Barrie's classic "Peter Pan," it's all over but the shooting of this commercial.


Memories and Memorabilia Meet at Subway Auction
The first ones outside the door at the New York Transit Museum auction and tag sale yesterday were Ed Blomberg and Eric Machate, who showed up, rock-concert style, four hours early.
At 7 A.M., they were groggy but did not plan on being cheated out of a bargain.
And at 11 A.M., they led the two-block-long line into the museum in downtown Brooklyn for the biennial sale of pieces of New York City transit history: everything from conductors' hats ($30, all sizes), to a signal light ($15, purple), to a subway car (minimum bid $3,000, IRT line, undelivered).


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Allendale 176,000
211 West Crescent Avenue
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; deck, security system, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,554.
Edison 195,000
12 Dale Drive
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 26-year-old ranch; new furnace, eat-in -kitchen, finished basement; taxes $4,137.
Hillsdale 175,000
303 Piermont Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; fireplace, greenhouse; taxes $4,267.
Howell 153,500
30 Westbrook Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, fireplace, family room, finished basement; taxes $3,478.
Jackson 125,000
29 Dogwood Drive
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old contemporary; 1-car garage, pool, new kitchen, new carpeting; taxes $2,644.
Ramsey 205,000
37 Overlook Court
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 29-year-old ranch; fireplace, covered patio, h/w floors; taxes $4,800.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 348,000
4 Hastings Court
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, deck, formal dining room, Jacuzzi, 3.1 acres; taxes $6,532.
Deep River, Conn. 140,000
197 Westbrook Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 3-year-old cape cod; ceiling fans, wood stove, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $1,861.
Baldwin, L.I. 160,000
627 Baldwin Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.


Rembrandt Tour In Netherlands
An opportunity to see an international exhibition of Rembrandt's paintings and visit places in the Netherlands where he lived and worked is offered in a tour organized by Interhostel, the study-travel program for people over 50 sponsored by the University of New Hampshire Continuing Education.
The 10-day trip, which starts Jan. 12, includes two visits to the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam, where the exhibition, organized by galleries in Amsterdam, London and Berlin, is being held.
The exhibition is traveling to Berlin and London but not to the United States.
Accommodations on the tour are in a hotel (with private bathrooms), described as modest by Interhostel, in Leiden, Rembrandt's birthplace, and visits will be made to the Rembrandthuis Museum in Amsterdam, museums in The Hague and Haarlem, and the city of Delft.
The program includes lectures on the artist and his contemporaries.


The Keating 1
If the dictionary had an entry under "savings and loan scandal," it would probably say, "see Charles H. Keating Jr." In the course of his four-month fraud trial stemming from the $2.6 billion fall of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association -- the single most expensive savings and loan failure -- Mr.
Keating became known as the man who tempted powerful senators to their political disgrace, and plucked the life savings out of the purses of gray-haired ladies.
Last week, a Los Angeles jury found him guilty on 17 of 18 counts of violating a state law against selling securities without full disclosure of risk, for which he could get 10 years in prison.
It seems that Lincoln sales people talked depositors into investing in high risk junk bonds, and left many believing that their savings were as safe as if they were in insured deposits.
The bonds subsequently became worthless.
"We couldn't bring them their money back," the prosecutor said of the bondholders, "but we brought them a measure of justice."


Game Show
"PUT SOME OF THAT SMOKED perch roe in your mouth," bellowed George Giller, a brawny, bearded outdoorsman with a passion for any food that can't be found in a supermarket.
"One taste and you'll never be the same."
Giller caught the perch several days before while ice fishing in a nearby pond.
Another delicacy on the buffet table, exquisitely sweet smoked Canada goose breast, was a result of Giller's expedition to upstate New York the week before.


'Us' v. 'Them' in Palm Beach
ALL in all, no matter how sharp the talent of the lawyers or impressive the dedication of the judge, it was a week of ugly testimony.
The accuser was required to answer questions about the state of William K. Smith's erection and whether she felt aroused during what she testified was a rape.
Her bra and panties were passed among the jurors.
Her memory of exactly how she had supposedly screamed for help was picked over relentlessly -- had she turned her head toward the ocean or toward the Kennedys' Palm Beach estate?
And did she change her story knowing that the defense would demonstrate that someone would have heard her if she screamed toward the house?


Meyer Lansky and Little Caesar
To the Editor:
I think I can set the historical record straight as to where Meyer Lansky ate his tongue -- or corned beef or pastrami -- sandwiches (Letters, Nov. 17).
It was at Sussman-Volk, a large, wonderful kosher delicatessen located at 88 Delancey Street, which was managed for many years by my uncle Aaron Levine, and where I first learned the rudiments of the counterman's trade.
I distinctly remember my uncle's telling me that Meyer Lansky was a frequent customer -- though it was not something he boasted about, since he viewed Lansky as a disgrace to the Jewish faith.


Two Floridas, Or Maybe Three
THE destination snobs are out in force once again.
They emerge every year when I announce plans for my family's annual pilgrimage to see my mother, who was kind enough to decide to pass her retirement winters at a beach-front condominium in Naples, Fla., a state no self-respecting destination snob would visit, as they are fond of reminding me.
I always smile and ask, Which Florida?
Cartographers may beg to differ, but after more than a decade of obligatory visits, I have become convinced that there are in fact two states of Florida.
One is the place my friends snort at.
It is a land crisscrossed with line-ups of grumpy, sunburned Northern families.
Here, turnstiles set the pace and rhythm of daily life, as they exact a ceaseless financial toll.
Overdevelopment and traffic congestion approach the surreal.


Business Diary/December 1-6
INTERNATIONAL The Unraveling of Robert Maxwell's Posthumous Empire


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Edible Nuts and Berries Q.
Increasingly, I find recipes calling for pine nuts and juniper berries.
I would like to grow and harvest these conifers myself.
Please advise on hardy species. -- Joyce E. Carbine, Forest Hills, Queens.
A.
Since these costly flavorings do literally grow on trees, it is tempting to try to raise them yourself.
But that takes patience.
Juniper berries, which are used in stews (not to mention gin), are borne on the popular garden shrub Juniperus communis.
The berries take two to three years to ripen, changing from green to a handsome dark purple-blue.
Ripe and unripe berries may be on the plant at the same time, but only ripe ones are used.
To prepare them for culinary use, air-dry them until they shrivel and turn black.


A Simple Case of Neighborliness
When I went to Southold the day after the hurricane and walked up the street strewn with storm debris, she was out on her front walk, her small figure impeccable in a yellow-checked pantsuit, sweeping with neat effective strokes, against a background of enormous broken limbs piled high up and down the block.
"We'll, look who's here," was her greeting, and it made me feel good.
But then lots of things about Emeline Petty, my 82-year-old next-door neighbor for 10 years, made me feel good.
It was comforting to find the backdoor light on when I went out in the dark of the season and not to have to fumble for the lock, to see this week's Suffolk Times waiting on the back porch windowsill, along with a gallon of drinking water from the town filtering plant.


REMODELING THE CONDOR
It was with an aching heart that I read Jan DeBlieu's article about the United States Fish and Wildlife Service's plans for its captive California condors ("Remodeling the Condor," Nov. 17).
In efforts like the breed and release program, coupled with "behavior modification" of an endangered species, we wrongfully affirm our right to modify nature to our liking.
Playing God in this way, we ignore the implications of species failure.
The tragedy is not so much the extinction of this big, graceful, sexy animal at the top of the food chain as the loss of the ecosystems of which it was once an integral part.
Habitat destruction all across the country threatens a great number of species -- many more mundane than the condor but all critical to their ecosystems.
LENORE EPSTEIN
Flushing, Queens


Old Toys Get New Life:


How Much Is    He    Treading Water?
To the Editor:
"Trapped in the Impoverished Middle Class," (Nov. 17) quoted Donald V. Fites, chairman of Caterpillar Inc., as seeing the shrinking of American incomes as a good thing.
As the wife of a Federal employee, who has seen our family's income lag behind that of the rest of the middle class thanks to the anti-government-worker attitudes of the Carter and Reagan Administrations, I'm curious: What is Mr.
Fites's annual compensation?
How much of a pay cut has he taken in recent years?
How many perks and bonuses has he declined to accept or given back?
In short, has he had to "tread water" along with the rest of us?
REGINA F. McCORMICK  Arlington, Va., Nov. 17


THE EDUCATION OF PAUL WELLSTONE
Richard L. Berke's article "The Education of Paul Wellstone" (Nov. 10) was an illuminating look at the way political power can change people.
Particularly interesting was the remark by Senator Orrin Hatch that he knew Wellstone was "not a phony" when he saw that Wellstone was prepared to vote against his own convictions.
Most people assume that those who act according to what they believe are genuine.
In Washington, however, the phonies are those who are
not
willing to compromise their beliefs.
Negotiation and compromise are part of the political process.
However, politicians should keep in mind that the object of all the negotiation and compromise is the furtherance of the commonweal.
Right now our country is plagued by crises in the economy, in health care, in education.
Our leaders are paralyzed by party-line politics, powerful lobby groups and their own desire for re-election.
The current volatility of the electorate should be a signal to Washington that voters are dissatisfied.
While Hatch and Wellstone are cutting deals in the back room, they should remember that the public will perceive as phonies politicians who fail to honestly confront the terrible needs of the time.
CLARA RUBINSTEIN
Chicago


Making a Difference; A Two-Year Baptism of Fire at El Paso Electric
Since taking over as chief executive of the troubled El Paso Electric Company two years ago, David H. Wiggs Jr. has become steeped in the ways of crisis control.
Last week provided another lesson when the utility, buried under $900 million in debt, flirted with bankruptcy by edging close to a default on a key credit agreement.
Mr.
Wiggs managed to buy the company more time when he got creditors, including some 30 banks, to extend a Dec. 1 restructuring deadline to Dec. 16.
Analysts think there is a better-than-even chance that the restructuring will win approval before then.


An Age Without Poetry?
To the Editor:
In her essay "Has Poetry for Kids Become a Child's Garden of Rubbish?" (Nov. 10), Liz Rosenberg confidently states: "Ours is an age without poetry, and this is not news."


Corrections
An article on page 14 of the Travel section today, about bicycling in Florida, refers incorrectly to an instructor at the Walden School of Cycling.
He is Mike Walter.


David Watt to Marry Annie Hunter
Mrs.
Rial P. Ogden of Washington, Conn., and Fraser L. Hunter of Southern Pines, N.C., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Anderson Hunter, to David Rockwell Watt, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Watt of Mendham, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Hunter, who is 27 years old and is known as Annie, is an assistant buyer in New York for Belk Stores, a department store chain in the Southeast.
She graduated from Kenyon College.
Her father is the chairman of the Bethesda Group, a holding company in Southern Pines with a primary interest in furniture manufacturing.
Her stepfather is the president of Fiscal Dynamics, a financial planning concern in Avon, Conn.
The bride's mother, Emily Ogden, is a remedial-reading tutor.


Camera
How do you get a turkey to stand still for a picture?
Professional photographers in the New York metropolitan area could find the answer in the Nov. 20 issue of F Stop .001: Hold the turkey upside down by the feet for several minutes.
Just before taking the picture, stand it up.


THE EDUCATION OF PAUL WELLSTONE
You used the wrong headline.
It should have been "The Breaking of Paul Wellstone." WILLIAM M. IVLER
Stamford, Conn.


School Gets Preview of New Opera
WHEN the faculty of the Todd School here learned last summer that the composer John Corigliano would visit shortly before the Dec. 19 premiere of his new opera, "The Ghosts of Versailles," at the Metropolitan Opera, the response was as richly orchestrated as one of the composer's scores.
The third-grade music classes of Mary Ann Scialdo, who organized the visit as part of the elementary school's "Conversations in Creativity" assembly series, studied Mr.
Corigliano's "Pied Piper Fantasy," a work for flute and orchestra with parts for children.
Then they made shoebox dioramas to illustrate the piece.


Making a Difference; Whirlwind Courtship
Kenneth W. Simonds, the chairman and chief executive of the Teradata Corporation, got a call at 3 P.M. a week ago Friday from Gilbert P. Williamson, the chairman of the NCR Corporation, saying NCR was interested in a merger.
Just three days later, the two companies struck a deal: NCR, a unit of the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company, would buy Teradata for $520 million in A.T.&amp; T. stock, a 30 percent premium over Teradata's market value.
The deal came together so quickly largely because the companies already had close ties.
Teradata, a relatively small company that has pioneered the development of powerful computers used primarily for management and analysis of large quantities of data, was working with NCR on several projects, and A.T.&amp; T. is Teradata's largest customer.
Teradata is based in El Segundo, Calif.


A Perspective That Is Refreshing
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson has managed to put a much-needed alternative perspective on Magic Johnson's elevation to some kind of sainthood, and his column should be required reading for all the youngsters who have been urged to listen to Johnson's new-found religion.
The country may well thank Magic for his educational contributions about the contagion of H.I.V., but perhaps we can now soft-pedal the glory.
KATHRYN M. MILLER Portland, Ore.


Hector Orezzoli Is Dead at 38; Won Tonys for 'Black and Blue'
Hector Orezzoli, who created "Black and Blue" and other Broadway revues with his partner, Claudio Segovia, died Thursday night at his home in Manhattan.
He was 38 years old.
Mr. Orezzoli died of cardiopulmonary arrest, Mr. Segovia said.


Improper Tone Was Out of Place
To the Sports Editor:
The righteous, indignant tone of Dave Anderson's column is more suitable for a television evangelist than a sportswriter for The New York Times.


Are Apologies Needed?
Should Japan apologize for the attack on Peral Harbor? % in each country who said yes U.S.: 40% Japan: 55% Should the U.S. apologize for dropping the atomic bombs?
U.S.: 16% Japan: 73% (Source: The New York Times/CBS News/Tokyo Broadcasting System Poll) Article, page 26.


Quebec Isn't Feeling Especially Canadian
FOR both sides in the battle over Quebec's future in Canada, there was an irony in events last week in Ukraine.
Less than 24 hours after the referendum in which Ukrainians voted for independence from the Soviet Union, Canadian diplomats made a midnight visit to the country dacha of Leonid M. Kravchuk, the Ukrainian President.
With an eye to the million Canadians of Ukrainian descent, the Ottawa Government wanted Canada to be the first Western country to offer formal diplomatic recognition.
But for all the attention the Canadian leadership gave events on the other side of the world, it bristles at the idea of drawing a parallel to secessionist rumblings at home.
"There is no resemblance whatsoever," said Prime Minister Brian Mulroney.


Corrections
An art review last Sunday about Wallace Putnam's paintings omitted the site of the exhibition.
It is at the Museum Gallery of the White Plains Public Library through Dec. 20.


Ms. McGahren To Wed in May
Dr. and Mrs.
William J. McGahren of Demarest, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Grace McGahren to Christopher John Mulliken, a son of Ronald Mulliken and Sharon Mulliken, both of Tampa, Fla.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
McGahren, 28 years old, is the manager of promotional sales at ESPN Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her father is a senior research scientist at American Cyanamid in Pearl River, N.Y.


Bush, in Breaking Voice, Recalls Day of 'Infamy'
Sniffling a bit and trying to hold back his emotion behind a lopsided smile, George Bush grasped the hand of Lewis Robinson.
"Nice to see you," the President said to the architect from Solana Beach, Calif.
"What were you doing that day?"


A Prior Priority: Early Childhood
America is losing sight of its children.
In decisions made every day we are placing them at the very bottom of our agenda with grave consequences for the future of the nation.
That grim assessment comes from an impressively authoritative voice on American education, the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.
The foundation, which has conducted many studies of public schools and higher education, now takes up a prior priority.
In a new report, it concludes that more than a million children are not prepared to enter kindergarten.


Abe Peled's Secret Start-Up at I.B.M.
HAWTHORNE, N.Y.
On a hillside here in the heart of I.B.M.'s home territory, Abraham Peled, an I.B.M. computer scientist, is trying to recreate Silicon Valley.
To the extent that he succeeds -- or fails -- he will be a bellwether for I.B.M. in carrying out ambitious plans to redefine itself, arrest its declining earnings and bolster its falling market share.
Mr.
Peled has taken a small group of engineers and programmers and spawned a start-up company inside the International Business Machines Corporation to create a new computer.
Tucked away in a rented building within walking distance of I.B.M.'s computer science research laboratory, the group has worked in secrecy and outside the company's normal channels to translate basic research into a commercial product at a breakneck pace.


Equalizing Opportunities
To the Editor:
As a composer, I read the article "Run Into Any Mozarts Lately?"  [ Nov. 17 ]  with interest.
Contrasting possibilities for composers of today with those of the 18th century makes an intriguing study.
Yet all the composers cited as examples in the article are men, and this does not address a fascinating difference between our time and Mozart's.


A Symbol of a Different Era Collapses
THE story of Pan American World Airways can be read in its changes of address.
A little more than a decade ago, its logo was a beacon above the heart of mid-Manhattan, topping a tower that bestrode Park Avenue.
Last week, as some of its 7,500 New York employees were moving to the company's new lodgings at Miami International Airport -- the equivalent of a flat above the store -- Pan Am died broke.


Lisa Beth Nusbaum Has Wedding
Lisa Beth Nusbaum, the national director of graduate programs at the Stanley H. Kaplan Educational Center, and Ronald Mark Dickerman, a vice president at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, both in New York, were married last evening.
Rabbi Cary David Yales performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Dickerman, 28 years old, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Ronni Nusbaum of Hollywood, Fla., and Jack Nusbaum of New York and the stepdaughter of Margie Goldsmith Nusbaum.
Her father is a chairman of the New York law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher.
Her stepmother is the founder and president of MG Productions, a New York video production company.


Trying to End an Obsession With Work
"IN Japan, there are so many workaholics that widows of men who die on the job get a cash bonus known as karoshi, which means 'worked to death and died like an ox,' " said Ann, a 40-year-old painter.
Ann understands such things, for she is a compulsive worker.
Her husband, Matt, 42, also a workaholic, is a middle manager at a large corporation.
"He has the same traits as I do. That was our attraction for one another," said Ann.
She and the others interviewed spoke on the condition that only their first names be used.
"For years, we believed we were happily married, although we rarely saw one another, as both of us were working 15 hours a day."


Blood, Sweat and a Million Documents
CHURCHILL
A Life. By Martin Gilbert. Illustrated. 1,066 pp. New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company.


Political Talk
Words From Pulpit to Ponder
Is it "a long time" between now and the end of 1993?
Or does "a long time" mean something much longer?
To 1997, say, or even to 2001?


Drugs? She's Not Sure
The retired Olympic swimming star KORNELIA ENDER, reacting to confirmation last week that performance-enhancing drugs were given to East German swimmers, says she never believed she was given such drugs.
But Ender, the winner of four Olympic gold medals in 1976 and eight world titles, said in an interview published yesterday in The Times of London that it was possible she was given illegal substances in her food and drink while she was at an East German sports school.


Alicia Kopec Has Wedding
Alicia Marie Kopec, the daughter of Patricia T. Kett of Peekskill, N.Y., and Joseph Kopec of Shrub Oak, N.Y., was married yesterday to Adam William Ifshin, the son of Stephen N. Ifshin of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., and Beatrice A. Ifshin of New York.
The Rev.
Frank Meccia, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Arrowwood in Rye Brook, N.Y., with Rabbi Nathaniel Schwartz giving the blessing.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Fredonia and is the secretary-treasurer of Buchanan Pharmacy in Peekskill.
Her father is a pharmacist.
Her mother is the president of Buchanan.


OLD MONEY, NEW NEEDS
I read with great admiration your article about Brooke Astor and her philanthropy.
Her support for grass-roots causes as well as for more traditional cultural causes is commendable.
I am troubled, however, by the growing belief that donations to the arts reflect insensitivity to the plight of the poor.
It would be a disaster for all New Yorkers if philanthropists ignored the cultural institutions that have been their time-honored beneficiaries.
Treasures such as museums, libraries and the performing arts provide the vitality that makes New York City unique.


The World According to Gorbachev Disappears
AT last the question stands clear and pressing: is the Soviet Union to be or not to be?
Ever since the coup, politicians at all levels have hemmed and hawed, toying with a "union of sovereign states" and a "common economic area" while declaring independence and pillaging the property of the old union, issuing bold declarations about free enterprise while clinging to the old structures.


Have Rink, Will Travel
His green eyes looked weary and wary as Eric Lindros studied the press scrum that studied him after practice in a chilly rink.
The left eye was surrounded with purple and yellow bruises, left by a recent fist.
Below it was a stitched cut, left by a recent stick.
Lindros is playing for four teams and maybe more this season after refusing to join the Quebec Nordiques, who took him first over all in last summer's National Hockey League draft.


Miss Kim Weds T. A. Sablosky
Hyela Kim, a daughter of Ke Woon Kim of New Rochelle, N.Y., and the late Col.
Pang Ky Kim, was married yesterday to Thomas Alan Sablosky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Sablosky of Philadelphia.
Judge Arthur Kellman of White Plains City Court officiated at Reid Hall at Manhattanville College.
Mrs.
Sablosky, 36 years old, is a sales executive at the Andrew Fezza Company, a New York men's apparel concern.
She graduated from Manhattanville.
Her father, who was a colonel in the South Korean Army, was also a past president of the Korean Association of New York and the owner of the Asian Art Gallery in New York, which her mother now heads.


Ms. Chernotsky Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Chernotsky of White Meadow Lake, N.J., have announced February wedding plans for their daughter Dara Lyn Chernotsky and Todd Adam Siegel, the son of Mrs.
Benjamin Fisher of Long Branch, N.J., and Murry Siegel of River Vale, N.J.
Ms.
Chernotsky, 28 years old, is a marketing consultant and special-events planner in Rockaway, N.J.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a developer in Rockaway.


A Fight To the Death
THE BAREFOOT WOMAN IN faded jeans and a pink turtleneck is curled in a chair in her Oregon farmhouse.
Ann Humphry, 49 years old, is an attractive blonde whose hair is knotted above her head Katharine Hepburn-style.
She doesn't look like a woman who, for two years, has waged a fight against breast cancer.
"You know, I'm tough," she says.
"I can look after myself." The words and the image of Humphry have been preserved on a grainy, amateurish videotape, which was made on Oct. 1.
The next day Humphry trailered a horse into the Oregon wilderness 100 miles from the farm, watched the sun set over the blue-gray peaks of the Cascade Range and swallowed an overdose of barbiturates.


In Montreal, the New Makes Way for the Old
The new wing of the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, the Jean-Noel Desmarais Pavilion, designed by Moshe Safdie and opened to the public on Nov. 26, is the most recent example of a new kind of architectural program that has become increasingly common during the last decade: the museum addition.
A partial listing of recent additions to prominent museums would include those to the Louvre in Paris and the Tate Gallery and the National Gallery, both in London.
Notably, all three projects were the focus of public debate.
I.
M.
Pei's glass pyramid in the courtyard of the Louvre enraged traditionalists, as did James Stirling's polychromatic Clore Gallery at the Tate.
The original design for the expansion of the National Gallery was denounced by the Prince of Wales as a "monstrous carbuncle," and led to an international competition that was won by Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown, whose semiclassical building has just opened, to mixed reviews.


Speak Up or Move Out: Harazin Means Business
Maverick or madman?
Al Harazin, the general manager of the Mets, said he wasn't sure how he would be perceived by his counterparts at baseball's winter meetings in Miami Beach.
Harazin, though, was quite convinced about how he would be received: with open arms and ulterior motives.
"I imagine people are going to want to talk to us," Harazin said.
How interesting or productive that talk becomes is subject to speculation at the moment.
For his part, Harazin said he had no plans to waste his breath.


Ellen Gwynne, Editor, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Gwynne of Stony Brook, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ellen Eade Gwynne to Nikhil Sudhan Sathe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sudhan Dinker Sathe of Bombay, India.
A fall wedding is planned.
Miss Gwynne, 23 years old, graduated from Lafayette College, where her fiance was a summa cum laude graduate.
She is an editor of Gallery Guide/Europe, a bimonthly directory of European art exhibitions published in Clinton, N.J.
Her father is the director of flight operations at the Grumman Corporation in Calverton, L.I.
Her mother, Margaret A. Gwynne, an anthropologist, is a consultant on women's and children's health issues in the West Indies.


Results Plus
TENNIS Becker Over Lendl


Bugsy in Love, on Stage and Off
Warren Beatty is tooling through the Beverly Hills night, looking the picture of Hollywood cool with his brown leather jacket and his black Mercedes convertible and his car phone on the dash.
He stops at a large, dramatic-looking white house at 810 Linden Street.
"This was the house Virginia Hill rented, the one where Bugsy Siegel was killed," he says.
"Every time I drove past here while we were making the movie, my car phone would go out."


Four Contemporary Artists Offer Surprises at Prezant Gallery
THE illustration is not of a giant Galapagos tortoise but of a snapping turtle in Van Cortlandt Park.
Taken by Ulrich Naf, the photograph is only one of many surprises awaiting visitors to the exhibition by four contemporaries at the Prezant Gallery here.
Jack Prezant inaugurated the gallery two years ago with a show of his own paintings, and you could say that this never closed, for the space is in a house replete with his art.
It also contains his studio and the living quarters that he shares with his wife and animals -- a superbly whiskered gray and white cat and a black almost-collie.


Q and A
Christmas at Yosemite
Q.
We will be visiting Yosemite National Park at Christmas for the Bracebridge Hall Dinner.
What areas of the park are accessible at that time, and what activities are available? -- Elizabeth Ann Hillman, Darien, Conn.


Bush Picks A New Crew And Prays For Updraft
IN 1984, President Reagan and Vice President Bush won re-election by asking Americans if they were better off than four years earlier.
In 1992, unless there is a quick economic recovery, the Democrats may well use that question to torment President Bush.
But as he moved last week to put himself and the White House in a campaign mode, the President showed signs that he plans an approach aimed at minimizing his vulnerability in the event the recession doesn't just go away.


Rights of Suspects May Decide Watkins Case
A jagged line separates the constitutional rights of criminal suspects and the tricks and deceptions detectives use to get suspects to incriminate themselves.
Defense lawyers in the Brian Watkins murder trial that goes to the jury tomorrow contend that the police repeatedly crossed the line in getting the four defendants to admit taking part in the subway robbery that ended in the fatal stabbing of the Utah tourist.
The defendants, Pascal Carpenter, Johnny Hincapie, Emiliano Fernandez and Ricardo Nova, all 19 years old, face sentences of at least 8 1/3 years in prison if convicted of robbery and assault and from 25 years to life if convicted of murder.


Sarah E. Ricks and Tom Dolgenos, Law Clerks, Married in Philadelphia
Sarah Elizabeth Ricks, a law clerk to Federal District Judge Thomas N. O'Neill Jr. in Philadelphia, and Tom Dolgenos, a law clerk to Judge Walter K. Stapleton of the United States Court of Appeals in Wilmington, Del., were married yesterday at the Racquet Club in Philadelphia.
Judge O'Neill performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Ricks, 29 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of David and Anne Ricks of Cincinnati.
A summa cum laude graduate of Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, she has a law degree from Yale University, as does her husband.


Anne E. Applebaum to Wed in June
Anne Elizabeth Applebaum, the Warsaw correspondent for The Economist, and Radek Sikorski, a writer and correspondent for The National Review, are engaged to be married in June.
Ms.
Applebaum, 27 years old, is a summa cum laude graduate of Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a bachelor's degree from the London School of Economics, where she was a Marshall scholar, and attended Oxford University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey M. Applebaum of Washington.
Her father is a partner in the Washington law firm of Covington &amp; Burling.
Her mother, Elizabeth Applebaum, is the volunteer coordinator at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington.


More Cuts Sought of New York Agency Heads
The heads of all New York City agencies were summoned to special budget meetings yesterday because the plans they submitted last week for long-term cuts fell short of their targets, the city's budget director said.
The director, Philip R. Michael, said several of the agencies had submitted plans that relied too heavily on work-rule changes and labor concessions that they have no control over.
He said the purpose of the meetings yesterday was to begin finding cuts that could be made without the help of municipal labor unions.


Style Makers; Mark Lingley, Shirt Maker
Ten years ago, Mark Lingley had $1,000 and a dream, a dream of dressing power brokers.
Today, he owns Mark Christopher of Wall Street, a custom shirt maker that has a solid following in the financial district despite hard economic times.
Mr.
Lingley's shirts, which are made of fine cottons and are hand finished, cost $110 to $275 and require about 20 measurements for a fitting.


The Mysterious Scent of White Truffles
LATE November is the time that white truffles arrive from Italy.
Eaten raw, shaved over pasta or risotto, they are one of the great treats of the holiday season.
My introduction to white truffles took place in Venice several years ago.
A friend who was not an adventurous eater but actually a rather cantankerous companion at the dinner table, had ordered fettuccine as a first course.
When the waiter, who spoke no English, proceeded to grate something that looked like wood shavings on his plate, he tried to wave him aside, but to no avail.
After the waiter had gone, my friend methodically pushed the pieces aside, lining them up with his fork around the rim of his plate.


If Israel and the Arabs Can Pencil Each Other In
WHILE Israelis and Arabs were demonstrating last week that old habits die hard, there were two intriguing notes in their posturing over negotiations in Washington: nobody packed his bags and Americans seemed not to care.
The United States had invited Israel, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and the Palestinians to Washington to resume the peace talks begun last month in Madrid.
The meeting was originally called for Wednesday, but Israel, which for decades had said it would meet Arabs for peace talks any time, anywhere, decided to reject that date to protest Washington's unilateral invitation to the parties to meet in America rather than in the Middle East.


Rental Cars
To the Editor: May I add another caveat emptor to renting a car abroad.
In October I signed up with Hertz's "World on Wheels" rental program for a vehicle out of Rome airport.
This is a prepaid deal whereby all insurance, except for personal liability, and all taxes are included.
Not so.
The Hertz clerk in Rome advised me that if I did not take out further insurance, I would be liable for the tidy sum of 2 million lire  [$1,664 ]  if the car was stolen during my stay.
That was not a very interesting prospect so I grudingly signed up for an extra 5,000 lire a day  [$4.16 ] , which I will protest when the bill comes in.
Clients of my company, At Home Aboard, will be forewarned.
CLAIRE PACKMAN President, At Home Abroad New York, N.Y.
A Hertz spokeswoman replies:
The World on Wheels program does indeed include all insurance except for personal liability and Ms.
Packman should not have been charged for further insurance.
Hertz is investigating how this mistake happened.


New York's Newest Maestro Is Also a Hot Recording Star
When Kurt Masur was named in the spring of 1990 to succeed Zubin Mehta as music director of the New York Philharmonic, he was relatively unknown in this country.
Not surprisingly, the last 18 months have seen an onslaught of Masur recordings.
One of his principal labels, Teldec of Germany, has finally found proper American distribution and has signed Mr.
Masur and the Philharmonic to an exclusive contract.
The first result of that relationship, a Bruckner Seventh Symphony commemorating his first concerts as Philharmonic music director in September at Avery Fisher Hall, has been rushed onto the market.
Mr.
Masur is also busily recording for Philips and EMI/Angel with his Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra and others.


Cells, Blindfolds, Pain and Hope: The Hostages Tell of Their Ordeal
They vanished like phantoms, one by one, from the lawless streets of Beirut, and while life for the kidnapped went on in the dungeons of captivity, it was a kind of dying: the world that made sense was gone, time seemed to stand still, hope lay almost beyond recall.
It was underground mostly, this netherworld of the 18 American hostages, a realm of dark cells and blindfolds, of chained limbs and forced silence, where faceless gunmen kept the keys, gave meager food and sometimes savage beatings or staged mock executions as endless days became months, then cruel years.


Tourists Trickle Into Cambodia
With a peace agreement in place in Cambodia and preparations being made for democratic elections in 1992, tourists are beginning to return in small numbers to the Southeast Asian nation and its most famous attraction, the Angkor temple complex.
The complex near Siem Reap includes a number of sites, the most famous of which is a moated temple on several levels that is a masterpiece of Khmer architecture.
Although there has been guerrilla activity around the 12th-century temples for more than two decades, restoration work sponsored by Unesco has been going on.
Many of the statues and friezes have been cleaned or reconstructed.
The best way to arrange a tour to the site is through a travel agent in Bangkok in neighboring Thailand.
Bangkok now has direct air links to Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, a distance of about 350 miles.
Tourists almost always go to the temple on day trips by air -- it's 150 miles northwest of Phnom Penh -- because the surrounding jungle areas make it difficult to reach by road and because of the fear of guerrillas.
There are no accommodations in the vicinity thought suitable for foreign tourists.


Vincent L. Pitaro, 78, Ex-New York Official
Vincent L. Pitaro, a lawyer and former New York State official, died on Tuesday at his home in Flushing, Queens.
He was 78 years old.
Mr. Pitaro died of pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Coins
Fifty years ago today, Hawaii was still stunned by the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
For months afterward, fears of a Japanese invasion swept the islands, and residents began hoarding money against a day when they might have to buy their way to safety.
In fact, they stashed so much currency that the United States Government issued orders against hoarding, limiting each person to $200 in cash. (Enforcement was another matter.)
As another way to prevent hoarding, the Government also ordered that a new type of currency be issued for Hawaii, the Palmyra Islands about 1,100 miles southwest of Hawaii, and Midway.
The special currency consisted of regular United States bills with the word Hawaii overprinted in large letters across the back, and smaller along the two sides of the front.


The Executive Computer; Windows Word Processors Do Battle
Three of the biggest personal computer software companies -- Microsoft, Lotus and Wordperfect -- are using everything short of sticks and stones in a battle for supremacy in the category of word processing for Windows.
Wordperfect is the most popular word processing software for DOS-based personal computers, but that does not guarantee it primacy under a different operating system.


The Mysterious Scent of White Truffles
LATE November is the time that white truffles arrive from Italy.
Eaten raw, shaved over pasta or risotto, they are one of the great treats of the holiday season.
My introduction to white truffles took place in Venice several years ago.
A friend who was not an adventurous eater but actually a rather cantankerous companion at the dinner table, had ordered fettuccine as a first course.
When the waiter, who spoke no English, proceeded to grate something that looked like wood shavings on his plate, he tried to wave him aside, but to no avail.
After the waiter had gone, my friend methodically pushed the pieces aside, lining them up with his fork around the rim of his plate.


Putting the Consumer's Interests First
FOR Jennifer Kohn, the hardest part of her job as a consumer advocate and lobbyist is standing in the State House hallway waiting to buttonhole legislators scurrying from one committee meeting to another.
It's not that Ms.
Kohn minds confronting the busy lawmakers, and it's not that the three or four minutes she gets to deliver her pitch might be forgotten in even less time.


Currency; Dollar Falls As Fed Eases
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
129.99
129.99
130.70
per Dollar
W.German Mark
1.6354
1.6354
1.4725
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1342
1.1342
1.1581
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.7682
1.7682
1.9530
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$368.75
$367.50
$369.30
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Italian Agency Joins Space Lab Venture of U.S.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration, eager to enlist more international participation in its proposed space station, has signed an agreement to have the Italian Space Agency design and build two pressurized modules for servicing the orbiting platform.
Italy, which is already a major partner in building a European segment for the station, agreed to spend about $400 million to make a pair of modules that will be used to transfer payloads and supplies to and from the station, called Freedom.


Bridge
The Fall National Championships of the American Contract Bridge League, which ended a week ago in Indianapolis, were the smallest in four years, with fewer than 10,000 tables in play in the 10-day tournament.
The poor turnout can be attributed to the recession, a preference for Thanksgiving at home, and the lack of a big local bridge population.
Those who did play enjoyed themselves, and that included nearly all the country's top players.
But among those with big reputations on the international bridge scene, only two were able to capture titles.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The vanity tops in my bathrooms are badly stained.
It looks as if the marks were caused by cigarette burns and hairpins that rusted on the surface.
Can you recommend anything to remove these marks and stains without damaging the vanity tops?
A.
You do not say what the tops are made of, but I assume that they are covered with plastic laminate.
Rust stains can be sometimes removed with a chemical rust remover.
If that does not get all the stains off, try a scouring powder or rubbing with an abrasive pad like the kind sold for Teflon pots.
Burn marks are probably not removable, unless they are very shallow.
You can try rubbing off the scorched material with the same type of abrasive pad, but if the burn has penetrated all the way through the surface pattern, it will still leave an off-color stain.


In Some Cities, Women Still Battle Barriers to Membership in All-Male Clubs
When a 1988 Supreme Court ruling prompted the Rotary Club in Lansing, Mich., to admit women, Kelly Rossman was one of the first to join.
She expected that membership would give her access to business and political leaders, bolstering her public relations firm.
Her experience has surpassed her expectations.
"Suddenly I was having lunch every week with all the movers and shakers in town," Ms.
Rossman said.
"Now they think of me when business opportunities come up, and I think of them."


Yeltsin and the Union
Hours before the beginning of crucial talks among Russia, Byelorussia and Ukraine, the Russian republic's President, Boris N. Yeltsin, said that only a commonwealth of fully independent countries could emerge from the old union.
He said President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's idea of a confederation with some degree of central authority was dead.
Article, page 18.


Marcus Allen, the Constant Star
Marcus Allen is among the first to admit that the Raiders' success through three decades of professional football has been caused not only by a commitment to excellence but also by the building of an insular world where the concept of family supersedes all criticism from the outsider.
Once a Raider, always a Raider.
This philosophy comes from the team's owner and president, Al Davis, who took it over in 1963 and built it into a contender that has won three Super Bowls.


Feinstein Says Use of Control Board Deserves Study
As the Dinkins administration struggled yesterday to squeeze a new round of budget cuts from New York City agencies, a major municipal labor leader said it was time to consider the merits of having the State Financial Control Board step in to oversee the city's fiscal affairs so the painful cuts might be stretched over more time.
In raising that prospect, the union leader, Barry Feinstein, president of Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, appeared to be stepping up public pressure on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins to agree swiftly on a plan to address huge budget shortfalls in the coming years.


Door Closers Old and New
STORM and screen doors are usually equipped with automatic closers.
Although closers seldom break, they can be a nuisance if they cause a door to close too quickly or too slowly, and repairs are needed if their mounting brackets loosen or pull away from the door or door frame.
With hydraulic door closers, usually found on solid doors, the speed at which the door closes can be adjusted by turning a screw on the cylinder.
Pneumatic door closers, which feature a long, horizontal tube and are usually found on storm and screen doors, are adjusted by rotating the tube.


Style Makers; Mark Lingley, Shirt Maker
Ten years ago, Mark Lingley had $1,000 and a dream, a dream of dressing power brokers.
Today, he owns Mark Christopher of Wall Street, a custom shirt maker that has a solid following in the financial district despite hard economic times.
Mr.
Lingley's shirts, which are made of fine cottons and are hand finished, cost $110 to $275 and require about 20 measurements for a fitting.


Students Rewrite Fashion Rules In Styles From Baggy to Bizarre
School is not meant to be a fashion show, yet the halls of high schools could pass for runways.
For it is in these places of learning -- and the streets leading to them -- that many fashion trends are born.
But often by the time a designer picks up on a fancy of youth and adds it to a new line, the teen-age world has moved on to something else.
What's hype today is whack tomorrow.
In collections shown earlier this year, Karl Lagerfeld, Charlotte Neuville and Issac Mizrahi used styles of clothing once, but no longer, pervasive among rap artists, like layered hooded sweatshirts, baseball caps and cable chains with large medallions.


A Record-Setting Former Titan Gears Up for the Jets
Wayne Fontes, the Detroit Lions' head coach, had one bright moment with the New York Titans of the old American Football League back in 1962?
Does that mean he has an affinity for the Jets, the Titans' reincarnation?
"I left that team when that guy broke my record," Fontes said with a chuckle.
"What did Eric McMillan run for? Ninety-some yards. I don't think I could run that far. When that happened, I just lost all contact with the New York Jets."


Don't Compare Magic to Tyson
To the Sports Editor:
I appreciate Dave Anderson's concern that we are deifying Magic rather than examining the conduct that led to his tragedy.
Johnson certainly seems to have ignored years of warnings as to the importance of "safe sex." Yet to term Johnson a sexist and compare his behavior with that of Mike Tyson is unfair.
There is no indication that Johnson's sexual partners were anything but consenting adults, even if they were careless and un thinking.
BARRON LERNER  Seattle


Commercial Property: Grand Central; Adding to the Area Where Air Rights Can Be Used
HOW far will city planners go to find development sites where Grand Central Terminal's air rights can be used?
East 48th Street, it would seem.


'Us' v. 'Them' in Palm Beach
ALL in all, no matter how sharp the talent of the lawyers or impressive the dedication of the judge, it was a week of ugly testimony.
The accuser was required to answer questions about the state of William K. Smith's erection and whether she felt aroused during what she testified was a rape.
Her bra and panties were passed among the jurors.
Her memory of exactly how she had supposedly screamed for help was picked over relentlessly -- had she turned her head toward the ocean or toward the Kennedys' Palm Beach estate?
And did she change her story knowing that the defense would demonstrate that someone would have heard her if she screamed toward the house?


Latest Land Deals Link County Trails
WESTCHESTER'S acquisition of the 14-mile-long Putnam railroad right of way adds 137 acres to the county's inventory of open space and nearly completes a network of parks and trails that would allow hikers to walk from one end of the county to the other.
Overcoming an 11th-hour glitch late last month, county officials saved a deal they had been negotiating for the last six years, agreeing to buy the Westchester part of the old Putnam Division roadbed, which runs from the county's southern border to Eastview in Mount Pleasant, for $2.1 million.


Barbara Mather To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Mather of Ship Bottom, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Barbara Anne Mather, to John Cleveland Cobb, the son of Elizabeth Cleveland Burke and James David Cobb, both of Spartanburg, S.C.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mather, 30 years old, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and has a master's degree in English from Rutgers University, where she is a doctoral fellow.
Her father retired as a sales manager for Biddle Instruments, an electronics manufacturer in Blue Bell, Pa.


THE EDUCATION OF PAUL WELLSTONE
It would appear that it didn't take much to transform Wellstone from Public Servant into Very Important Person.
I guess it's so much fun being a big shot that the smallest taste of power ruins the palate for any other diet.
RICHARD C. SOMMER
New York, N.Y.


Middle Class Can't Pay More in County Taxes
The lead article on Nov. 24  [ "1992 Spending Cuts Anger County Employees" ] , concerning the proposed 1992 county budget, quotes Legislator Herman Keith of Yonkers as saying, in part, that "the people who will be the beneficiaries of a zero percent property tax increase are people who can afford to pay taxes. . . . Someone has got to pay taxes if we are to maintain the quality of life for people we are required by charter to assist." This argument is specious at best.
First and foremost, the proposed cuts primarily affect the size of the government workforce, not mandated services.
In light of a recession, where the largest corporations in the region must resort to massive layoffs, one can only expect that government would need to limit its size.
That those remaining employees will have longer, more arduous work days is a reality of the economic climate.
We are all working harder for seemingly less compensation.


May Russia End the War At the Piano
As Eastern Europe and the West begin their post-Berlin-wall merger of cultures, one loss I shall not mourn is the Soviet school of pianism.
It has been an awesome machine, as anyone who has looked inside an international competition knows.
Rows of glum young virtuosos have regularly rolled over their soft-bellied capitalist rivals, accomplishing with 32d notes and thundering fortissimos what their political leader and potential missile-launcher of a generation ago, Nikita Krushchev, could only threaten.
Vladimir Feltsman, one of the most celebrated and more sophisticated products of this school, said a few years ago that among his American pupils he has found sufficient musical talent but, with it, techniques hopelessly weakened by a lack of systematic primary training.
Mr.
Feltsman proposed an American school in which gifted children aged 6 or 7 could -- like their Soviet counterparts -- begin on the long road toward glistening scales, faultless acceleration and coolness under pressure.


Don't Assign Blame With AIDS
To the Sports Editor:
In the decade since we first learned about AIDS, there have been a number of conservative journalists who have encouraged bigotry among their readers by preaching that AIDS is God's punishment for being gay, or for other kinds of immoral behavior.
Dave Anderson's column, "Sorry, but Magic Isn't a Hero" (The New York Times, Nov. 14), is another unfortunate example of this attitude of blaming the victim.


IRT Power Plant
To the Editor:
I was outraged to read in your article on Nov. 17 titled "The Power of Design vs. Con Ed Power" that the Landmarks Preservation Commission is going to try again to designate the IRT power plant at 59th Street and 11th Avenue -- an incredibly ugly building that, as your story points out, was obsolete when it opened in 1904.


Why Managers Leave the Company
To the Editor:
"When the Signal Is 'Move It or Lose It' " (Forum, Nov. 17) omits what happens when subordinate managers grow weary of complying with or challenging their superiors' unrealistic demands.
Some of them drop out.
My acquaintances of the last decade include a disturbing number of former managers -- intelligent, able, sincere men and women -- who have turned away from the character-bending expectations of some corporations.
All now work outside of their fields of primary expertise and at far less pay -- as store clerks, laborers and operators of small businesses.
And, yes, their spouses are working now, too, so their families can maintain a fair fraction of their former standard of living.
JACK LABUSCH  Niles, Ohio, Nov. 18


TAKING SIDES AGAINST OURSELVES
It is a tragic commentary that Anita Hill, a model of grace and fortitude under fire, is viewed as taking sides when she breached unspoken taboos in the black community and "put her private business in the street," as Bray pointed out in her article.
It seems obvious to me that Hill would have maintained her silence and would still be protecting a black man whom she undoubtedly admired in some respects if she had not been asked a direct question about him.
Professor Hill did not
volunteer
the information about Clarence Thomas; she offered it only after she was asked.


Sarah M. Griffin To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
James Quigley Griffin of Hopewell, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sarah Moorehead Griffin to Newell McLain Thompson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Thompson Jr. of Hopewell.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Griffin teaches in the Lower School at the Collegiate School in New York.
She graduated from Lake Forest College.
Her father is a partner at Wilmerding, Miller &amp; Company, an investment concern in Princeton, N.J.
Her mother, Barbara Griffin, is the director of the Center for Civic Leadership in Princeton.


An Age Without Poetry?
To the Editor:
As an elementary-school librarian, I would like to respond to Liz Rosenberg's essay, which is seriously misleading in stating that "the trouble with most poetry intended for children is that it is so bad."


Corrections
The Travel Watch listing of air fares on page 21 of the Travel section today includes an outdated reference to Pan American World Airways and its New York-Caracas and Miami-Buenos Aires routes.
After the section went to press, Pan Am ceased operations.


A Penalty On a Goal Hurts Oilers
FIRDAY NIGHT
The Edmonton Oilers thought they had it made. But all they had was a tie.
"I think that it was questionable, at best," said Ron Lowe, the Edmonton assistant coach, after an apparent goal that the Oilers lost because of a goalie-interference call.


Duval Slingluff, Banker, to Wed
Duval Cross Slingluff, a bank administrator, and Gregory Paul DiGasper, a computer sciences student, both in New York, are engaged to be married in October.
Miss Slingluff, 24 years old, graduated from Boston University and is the Community Reinvestment Act administrator for Fuji Bank and Trust Company in New York.
She is the daughter of Patricia Slingluff of New York and David D. Slingluff of Jamestown, R.I.
Her father is a consultant to small businesses.
Her mother retired as a sales manager at WINS Radio in New York.


Navy Crushes Army, Delighting Stars of 1941
Neither Charles Thomspon nor Lindsey Waters had ever been to an Army-Navy game before.
Bill Busik and Bob Woods had played in a total of five -- including the 1941 game -- and attended many more.
Thompson and Waters, as veterans of Pearl Harbor, were guests today of the Military and Naval Academies at their 92d game, which fell on the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack.
They had great seats, on opposite 50-yard lines, and a great time, they said, as the spectacle in Veterans Stadium swirled around them.


Corrections
An entry in the Performance Art listing of the Arts and Leisure Guide today misstates the address for Dixon Place.
It is at 258 Bowery.


Cynthia Smith to Wed C. E. Wilson
Dr. and Mrs.
David M. Smith of Princeton, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Cynthia Ann Smith to Charles Ernst Wilson Jr., the son of Charles Wilson and Marilyn L. Morrison, both of St.
Louis.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Smith, 25 years old, is a teacher at the Pike School in Andover, Mass.
She graduated from Dartmouth College, as did her fiance, and received a master's degree in education from Northwestern University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Princeton.
Her mother is the executive director of the Y.W.C.A. of Princeton.


Ms. Scavullo Has Wedding
Frances Marie Scavullo, a psychotherapist, and Gordon Tsou, a managing director at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Joseph Juracek, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Stephen of Hungary Church in New York.
The bride is in private practice in New York and is affiliated with St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
She graduated from Mary Washington College and has a master's degree in social work from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Scavullo of Ventnor, N.J.
Her father retired as an aerospace engineer for the Federal Aviation Agency in Pomona, N.J.


Frank S. Kristof, 74, Ex-Official Who Criticized Rent Regulations
Frank S. Kristof, a retired housing official for New York City and an outspoken opponent of rent control, died on Friday at his home in Highland Lakes, N.J.
Mr.
Kristof, who also had a home in Manhattan, was 74 years old.
He died of Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


REMODELING THE CONDOR
I am baffled.
Your article notes that lead shot embedded in the carcasses of animals killed by hunters is a major cause of the demise of the wild California condor and is today a threat to the successful reintroduction of the species.
How can California continue to allow the use of lead shot, given that it is a proven killer not only of condors but also of waterfowl and other wildlife?
Can it be that wildlife officials have opted for the costly process of spreading carrion "along an 80-mile line through the national forest" over the simple expedient of banning lead shot?
Many states already have taken this obvious step.
Your article does not even mention the possibility.


Sunday Menu; An Old Favorite, Fried Potatoes, With an Indian Accent
For those who have always loved fried potatoes and green peppers, here is an ancient but updated version, one with an Indian accent.
It is prettiest with yellow potatoes, like the Finns or Yukon Golds.
But any potato with a thin edible skin will do.


D-Day Nearing for a Mobile-Home Case
Charles DuPont owns a mobile-home park with about 100 spaces on an enviable site bordered one one side by an orchard and on the other by new one-family houses.
Yet because of a rent-control law he has been unable to raise most of his rents beyond what tenants paid in 1986.
Mr.
DuPont is one of eight owners of mobile-home parks in this city 25 miles north of San Diego who have challenged its rent-control law in court.
Their cases, grouped together, have won a review before the United States Supreme Court, which has become increasingly willing to hear property-rights cases as its membership has taken on a more conservative cast.
It is likely to hear the cases next month.


Report Says Too Many Aren't Ready for School
Warning that American children are arriving at school unprepared to learn, a report made public today sounded a nationwide call to action, urging the country to spend more money on health care and more effort educating parents.
The report, "Ready to Learn: A Mandate for the Nation," says that at least one-third of American students struggle in school from the start because of preventable health problems or failure to stimulate their minds in the preschool years.


It's Robinson to Rescue, But Spurs Still Stumble
When the Spurs are undermanned, they call on the Admiral.
David Robinson's performance was admirable.
It just wasn't enough.
Blue Edwards made a 15-foot bank shot with 4.7 seconds left Friday night and the Utah Jazz beat San Antonio, 93-92.


CZECH HIERARCHY BARS SOME PRIESTS
During four decades of Communist rule, an underground Roman Catholic Church ministered quietly to this nation's people alongside the strictly controlled official Catholic Church.
Underground bishops secretly ordained several hundred priests, who held regular jobs by day and led illegal prayer meetings or gave religious instruction at night and on weekends.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Baldwin 160,000
627 Baldwin Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Commack 155,000
15 Rita Crescent  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,500.
East Islip 166,500
156 Overlook Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old colonial; dining room, den, Florida room, finished basement; taxes $5,100.
Glen Cove 230,000
44 Circle Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 44-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, den, basement, enclosed porch, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.
Levittown 150,000
20 Mistletoe Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, den, aluminum siding, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.
Williston Park 175,000
59 Capitol Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, deck, 1-car garage; taxes $2,700.
OTHER AREAS South Salem, N.Y. 348,000
4 Hastings Court
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, deck, formal dining room, Jacuzzi, 3.1 acres; taxes $6,532.
Deep River, Conn. 140,000
197 Westbrook Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 3-year-old Cape Cod; ceiling fans, wood stove, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $1,861.
Hillsdale, N.J. 175,000
303 Piermont Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; fireplace, greenhouse; taxes $4,267.


The Refugees Match Wits With Uncle Sam
THE lawyers who represent Haitian refugees being held by the thousands aboard Coast Guard ships and at the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay had in hand a major legal victory.
Yet they had a strangely solemn look about them as they emerged from a Federal District Court in Miami last Tuesday.
The court had upheld an injunction temporarily preventing the repatriation of the mounting population of Haitians, and it had granted the refugee advocates other concessions.
But the advocates knew that the Government was far from having exhausted all its weapons, and that the most important one may prove to be time -- time in which to erode the Haitians' desire to reach America and thus persuade them to return to Haiti without being forced.


Dublin in the Rear-View Mirror
THE LILAC BUS
Stories. By Maeve Binchy. 327 pp. New York: Delacorte Press. $20.


Style Makers; Cheryl Munson, Greeting Card Designer
Each Christmas Eve, Cousin Mattie's Daddy's Sister's People gather in Aunt Samella's kitchen as she cooks collard greens, black-eyed peas, yams, turkey and cornbread dressing with "lots of tender loving care."
"You've got to be stirring, picking or washing dishes to be in my kitchen," she tells them.


'Us' v. 'Them' in Palm Beach
ALL in all, no matter how sharp the talent of the lawyers or impressive the dedication of the judge, it was a week of ugly testimony.
The accuser was required to answer questions about the state of William K. Smith's erection and whether she felt aroused during what she testified was a rape.
Her bra and panties were passed among the jurors.
Her memory of exactly how she had supposedly screamed for help was picked over relentlessly -- had she turned her head toward the ocean or toward the Kennedys' Palm Beach estate?
And did she change her story knowing that the defense would demonstrate that someone would have heard her if she screamed toward the house?


U.S. Cites Crime in Spain, Italy and Africa
Americans going to Spain for the Olympics, Expo '92 in Seville and other events next year should beware of thieves who break the windows of cars stalled in traffic, according to a travel advisory issued by the State Department.
Observing that Spain has little history of violent crime but does suffer from petty crime in tourist areas, the department says unsuspecting visitors can lose their belongings to bicyclists and motorcyclists but most often to pedestrians.
They can also see purses grabbed from beneath car seats.
The advisory warns tourists not to leave valuables in cars but in a hotel safe or other secure place and suggests they make copies of all tickets, passports (and carry only a copy of their passport) and traveler's checks.


CAMPUS LIFE: Berkeley; Race and Sex Tied to Disparities In Professors' Pay
Women, black and American Indian professors at the University of California at Berkeley are paid significantly less than their white male counterparts, according to a recent university study.
The two-year study, conducted by the Office of the Faculty Assistant on the Status of Women, found that sex and race were a direct link to lower salaries, with greater disparities at higher professorial levels.


KEEPING SHOP
WILLIAM P. LAUDER LIKES USING THE following adjectives: comforting, soothing, nonthreatening.
He could be describing a cup of mint tea -- or a teddy bear.
But Lauder, the vice president and general manager of Origins, a two-year-old line of natural skin-care products, is talking about the new Origins store, a long, narrow, maple-shelved boutique on a busy block near Harvard Square in Cambridge, Mass.
The store is a near hermetically sealed environment, with none of the distractions -- rival cosmetic counters, Giorgio spritzers -- found in department stores.
Most of the shelves hold the company's lotions and potions -- fragrances called "plant spirits," eye shadows named Kiwi and Eucalyptus and a weird-looking organic honey that's supposed to calm a cold.
There's an array of complementary accessories -- bathrobes, candles, recycled wrapping paper.
There's even an environmentally correct lending library with books on rain forests and vegetarian cooking.
And in the background is a continuous new-age hum -- flutes, bells, crickets, chimes.
"Some say it's serenity," says Lauder, trying to describe the airtight atmosphere.
"Some say it's 'The Stepford Wives.' I say it's serenity."


Long-Term Investment Deserves Reward
To the Editor:
"Let's Reward Investments That Aid Economy," Barton A. Pasternak's Nov. 17 letter, focuses on capital asset production as a desired result of investment.
The purchaser of stock from the original investor, however, is not necessarily a culprit who drains wealth from the investment-production cycle.
Secondary investors provide the original investors assurance that they can dispose of their stock; otherwise the original investment would never have been made.


Applying Fertilizer Completes the Chores
NOW that the leaves are off the trees and raked up from the lawn, one final chore needs to be done: applying fertilizer.
This is a good time of year to apply it, since late fall rains and winter snows dissolve the nutrients down into the soil, and there is much less chance of runoff into the watersheds.
This deep penetration is especially true for the granular all-purpose garden fertilizers, like 5-10-5.
Fertilizer application now is an easy chore, since it does not require any tools -- just a gloved hand and strong back.
If fertilizer is applied now, the nutrients will have worked down into the root-zone level by the time spring rolls around, and they will be doing their job to nurture plants when they need it most.
Those who have several established bulb plantings will find that feeding now will provide these older bulbs with the extra soil nutrition they need.
This boost will be used for the 1993 flowers that will start to form almost as soon as the 1992 flowers bloom.


Miss Anderson To Wed in 1992
John and Greta Anderson of Canon City, Colo., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sharon Jeanine Anderson to Burton Morris Prince, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Prince of Rye Brook, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Anderson, 25 years old, is a student at Albert Einstein Medical College.
She graduated from the University of Colorado, as did her fiance.
Her father is a State District Court judge in Freemont County, Colo.


Argentina Finds a Kidnapping Ring of Policemen
The Government claims to have broken up a major kidnapping-for-ransom ring made up of active and retired police officers who some say have ties to groups that abducted suspected leftist extremists during Argentina's so-called dirty war.
In the last week, the police have announced the arrest and detention of 12 people they say were members of a gang that carried out a series of spectacular kidnappings over the last decade.
All but one of the detainees have ties either to Argentina's intelligence service or its federal police.
Many were, until their arrests, very senior officials in the police force.
The gang is thought to have as many as 30 members.


Baltic Republics Hope for Donations From Abroad for Olympics
The headquarters of the Lithuanian Olympic Committee, situated in ornate offices in the center of this capital city, stand in sharp contrast to the grim, boxlike buildings that house the country's rowing program on the outskirts of the city.
The small gymnasiums used for winter training feature posters of high-tech rowing machines, but there are only a handful of these expensive machines in Lithuania.
In Latvia, the only modern training center is a bobsled track and training center built by the Soviet Union in the 1980's.
And in Estonia there is no velodrome, so the country's most accomplished athlete, the cyclist Erika Salumae, has been training in Moscow instead.


U.S. Takes Downhill in Cup Surprise
A.
J.
Kitt from Rochester outskied every European on the slate today to win the first men's downhill of the 1991-92 World Cup season at the site of February's Olympic race.
Kitt, the first American to win a world-class men's downhill since Bill Johnson took the gold medal at the 1984 Olympics, covered the Oreiller-Killy course in 1 minute 55.69 seconds, .49 seconds faster than Leonhard Stock, an Austrian who won this race last year.


Historic Hudson Sites Present Holiday Carols
A TWO-FOOT-HIGH St.
Nicholas cookie, a "kissing bell" made of apples, oranges, evergreens, candles and mistletoe, wooden shoes by the hearth, tables heaped high with glazed fruits, marzipan and Madeira wine -- these are just some of the holiday enticements greeting December visitors to several properites of Historic Hudson Valley.
Today between 5 and 9 P.M., the festive caroling and country dancing at Philipsburg Manor is accompanied by hot mulled cider and cookies, then followed by a candlelight service across the street at the Old Dutch Church of Sleepy Hollow.


POSTINGS: Project Opposed; A Tale of Two Cities
Although the Dataswitch Corporation, a maker of computer equipment based in Shelton, Conn., wants to build a 250,000-square-foot research and development center in Trumbull and had planned to begin in September, it now has no date for construction.
Why?
Because Bridgeport, Trumbull's neighbor, objects.
Although Bridgeport is a mile from the project site, at Route 25 and the Merritt Parkway, it owns a park in Trumbull that borders it.
In November, it sued, saying the complex would generate too much pollution and traffic.
A hearing is scheduled for next Tuesday in Superior Court in Bridgeport.
Meanwhile, the mayors of Bridgeport and Trumbull are negotiating.


Applying Fertilizer Completes the Chores
NOW that the leaves are off the trees and raked up from the lawn, one final chore needs to be done: applying fertilizer.
This is a good time of year to apply it, since late fall rains and winter snows dissolve the nutrients down into the soil, and there is much less chance of runoff into the watersheds.
This deep penetration is especially true for the granular all-purpose garden fertilizers, like 5-10-5.
Fertilizer application now is an easy chore, since it does not require any tools -- just a gloved hand and strong back.
If fertilizer is applied now, the nutrients will have worked down into the root-zone level by the time spring rolls around, and they will be doing their job to nurture plants when they need it most.
Those who have several established bulb plantings will find that feeding now will provide these older bulbs with the extra soil nutrition they need.
This boost will be used for the 1993 flowers that will start to form almost as soon as the 1992 flowers bloom.


Merger of New Haven U. and Bridgeport Proposed
The University of New Haven has asked officials at the financially troubled University of Bridgeport to consider merging the two schools -- an idea that was considered a decade ago.
"I've resurrected this idea because I can't stand idly by and see an institution like the University of Bridgeport -- with the same genesis and the same philosophy -- go under," said Lawrence J. DeNardis, the president of the University of New Haven.


Take Psychics, Add Malls, Watch Business Grow
For expatriate urban dwellers who have long believed the future was in the suburbs, now comes evidence that this is true, perhaps beyond their wildest dreams.
And like most things in the suburbs, the future is available at the mall.
Nothing flashy, no thunderbolts, no Steven Spielberg.
Just a few tables, perhaps booths for privacy and 8 or 10 astrologers or psychics to help the earth-bound see beyond the horizon.


Mariners Shocked by Sale
Seattle Mariners players reacted with uncertainty, disappointment and shock to the announcement on Friday by the owner, Jeff Smulyan, that the team was for sale.
Some think it is the first step along a road that will take the franchise to St.
Petersburg, Fla.


Carbon Dioxide Emissions Dropped in 1990, Ecologists Say
Emissions of carbon dioxide, a gas scientists believe is the biggest contributor to climate change, fell in 1990, according to the Worldwatch Institute, a Washington-based environmental organization.
The organization predicted a continuing decline in 1991 and 1992.
Worldwatch attributed most of the drop to the collapse of the economies of the Soviet Union and countries in Eastern Europe.
Those economies are heavily based on coal, which produces more carbon dioxide per quantity of energy than other fuels do.
In addition, these countries use more energy per unit of production than Western economies do, so any economic decline means a sharp drop in fuel use.


A.N.C. Figure to Lead Communists
Despite initial reluctance from the African National Congress, its popular military leader, Chris Hani, was named today to lead the South African Communist Party as the party mobilizes support for what it hopes will be a Marxist future for South Africa.
Chris Hani, who is chief of staff of the congress's guerrilla wing, Spear of the Nation, was elected at the Communists' four-day congress to succeed Joe Slovo as General Secretary.
Mr.
Slovo, who is ailing, assumed the largely honorary role of national chairman.
The congress was the party's first inside South Africa in 41 years.


No Jump Starts
To the Editor:
It would be a contribution to clarity of thought if we all took a pledge to avoid speaking of jump starts and kick starts for the economy.
Apart from lowering interest rates, there is little the Government can do to affect the economy in the near term, by which I mean 6 to 12 months.
Any significant action such as a tax reduction would not make itself felt at the consumer level for at least a year.


Playthings for the Holidays
Video equipment tops many Christmas lists, so this is a good time to pinpoint standout designs and good values.
Camcorders continue to be the most popular video items.
Even in a troubled economy, their sales soar, despite list prices that start around $1,000.
Many novice videographers prefer the VHS-C format, which combines compactness and compatibility.
Tapes made with these camcorders can be played in any standard VCR after they are placed into an adapter shell.


Miss Wainger Plans to Wed
Dr. and Mrs.
Jules M. Wainger of Norfolk, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lauren Beth Wainger, to Jeffrey Ian Carton, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul S. Carton of New Rochelle, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Wainger, 24 years old, graduated from Princeton University and is a student at Cornell University Medical College.
Her father is a dentist in Virginia Beach, Va.
Her mother, Patti Wainger, is a freelance writer.


Review/Dance; Recapturing Childhood
Alexis Eupierre and Yvonne Meier had adult dancers behave like children in the program they offered last Monday night as part of the Movement Research series of choreographic showcases at Judson Memorial Church on Washington Square.
Mr.
Eupierre and Clarinda Mac Low hopped about while squeaking and growling like small animals in their improvisation "Dubbers." Then they raced back and forth, arns stretched wide, as children do when they pretend to be airplanes.


Cloning Casinos With Appeal for the Masses
When William G. Bennett and a partner scraped together $4 million to buy the money-losing Circus Circus hotel and casino here in May 1974, they were convinced that, by applying financial discipline and some marketing flair, they could turn the operation around quickly.
It took them all of one month.
"We made a large profit in June and never looked back," said Mr.
Bennett, chairman and chief executive.
Over the last 17 years, in fact, Mr.
Bennett has built Circus Circus Enterprises Inc. into one of the gaming industry's largest and most profitable companies.
Its seven Las Vegas casinos netted $84.3 million on sales of $618.5 million in the nine months ended Oct. 31.


Door Closers Old and New
STORM and screen doors are usually equipped with automatic closers.
Although closers seldom break, they can be a nuisance if they cause a door to close too quickly or too slowly, and repairs are needed if their mounting brackets loosen or pull away from the door or door frame.
With hydraulic door closers, usually found on solid doors, the speed at which the door closes can be adjusted by turning a screw on the cylinder.
Pneumatic door closers, which feature a long, horizontal tube and are usually found on storm and screen doors, are adjusted by rotating the tube.


BROOKLYN SLAYING TIED TO MOB FEUD
A 30-year-old man was shot in the back of the head as hung a Christmas garland on the door of his Brooklyn home Friday -- the latest victim of a struggle for control of the Colombo crime family, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The man, Vincent Fusaro, was shot once in the head at 3:55 P.M. as he hung the garland on the door of his home at 310 Bay 11th Street in the Bath Beach section of Brooklyn, where he lived with his mother and grandmother.
So far, the police have not identified any suspects in the case, said Lieut.
Timothy Dowd, head of the detective squad at the 62d Precinct in Brooklyn.


Germans Follow Own Line on Yugoslav Republics
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's promise to recognize the independence of Slovenia and Croatia before Christmas has provoked a split among Western allies and has led Bonn into an unusual conflict with Washington.
The Presidents of the two breakaway Yugoslav republics visited Germany this week, and Mr.
Kohl told both of them of his decision to recognize their republics as sovereign nations.
Several other countries, including Sweden, Italy, Austria and Hungary, are likely to follow Germany's lead.


Nifty Gifties
EVERY YEAR AT this time I am overwhelmed with the urge to plug language books.
These are not the
bodice-rippers
(novels with heaving covers) piled up in
dumps
(cardboard display cases) at the front of bookstores; these are the bodice-soothing books about words tucked away in the back that the language lover's lovers, searching for the appropriate gift, must ask for.
Here's what to ask for this season, preferably in an assertive tone, followed by "Whattya mean, 'out of stock' -- you call yourself a bookstore? Order it now!"


Making a Difference; Where There's Smoke . . .
THERE'S nothing soft about the politics of hard science, as James E. Woods has recently discovered.
Last month, Dr.
Woods, an engineer who studies indoor air quality and teaches at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute, received a $1.2 million grant to study building ventilation -- from Philip Morris, the big tobacco company.
Bad form and perhaps a conflict of interest, cried anti-smoking groups, citing his membership on the Environmental Protection Agency's science advisory board, which addresses issues relating to tobacco smoke.


Hanky-Panky Within Hanky-Panky
THOSE legs in Polynesian pantyhose have not wandered from another part of the newspaper.
Titled "Marquesan Tattoo," they belong with this review of "Gauguin's Daughter," an exhibition here at A. J. Lederman Fine Arts, 309 Court Street.
By the way, does everyone know that some of "On the Waterfront" was filmed in this cobbled mews?
For the time being, though, Marlon Brando must move over for Jean Charles Blanc, the French Conceptualist and Duchampian slyboots, who has invented a daughter for Gauguin named Jessie Bee.
Or did he discover her, as he asserts?
The viewer is never completely sure for, playful though he is, Mr.
Blanc seems to know all the tricks of the revisionist trade.
After all, Gauguin sired a son; could there have been daughters overlooked by sexist historians?
Then again, this Jessie Bee shares initials with Mr.
Blanc, so she may just be his Rrose Selavy.
You figure it out.
As the artist tells the story in a statement, he was on the Marquesan island of Hiva Oa when he stumbled upon the first clue to Jessie Bee's rumored existence.
It was, he says, the remains of a bicycle embedded in a tree trunk, and three gallons of herbicide were required to extricate them (the other parts of the bicycle appear later in the story, on a yacht).
Defoliant as a research tool: this is only one of the many puckish conceits that hint at hanky-panky within hanky-panky.
There are plenty more in the show, like the pantyhose Cibachromes and the components of a shirt that are unsewable because they are glued to wood and lead slabs of the same shape.
The green and rust pattern on the fabric could be Polynesian, as it might have been painted by a French 18th-century landscapist.
Then there is the collection of Marquesan "Walkmen" -- blocks of wood fitted with headphones made of shells and decorated with photo reproductions of Polynesian beauties.
Shades of the Flintstones and their all-modern neolithic convenience residence.
But the show's climax is in the black-and-white reproductions of three Gauguin self-portraits.
These were photographed in color -- you can tell from the pinkish photographs of cowrie shells that are superimposed on the eyes and mouth in each picture.
Though the foregoing images are the most striking in the show, they are but a preamble to the art works of Jessie herself.
The best of these are seemingly genuine Marquesan petroglyphs, drawn in ink and colored crayons; the worst are the almost life-size "pinups" of Polynesian maids, done smearily in pencil and charcoal.
Returning to the story line, it seems that when Mr.
Blanc exposed the bicycle parts, he also released his heroine's "tupapu" ghost and had to leave the island -- for Papeete, in Tahiti.
There, he runs into a mysterious cosmetician from California, who turns out to be the daughter of Jessie and who completes her mother's biography.
A story as whimsical as the show, it begins with Jessie's birth (in New Zealand, yet), continues with her adventures in Canada, United States and Europe, where she marries a German Jewish anthropologist only to lose him in the Holocaust.
It ends in the Marquesas with Jessie on the yacht, investigating her father's death, which is deemed mysterious.
Apparently supporting the story are some black-and-white photographs of a young woman that were taken in the 1930's.
One is a montage that has her standing with Matisse under palm trees.
Ms.
Lederman reports, however, that the subject (who wears beautiful shoes) was actually a French-Madagascan model for Lawrence Durrell's Justine.
And if that is not complexity enough, try the video, "Histoire d'un Blanc," which comes with the show and which features the artist doing a Gauguin of his own in a tropical mirage.
Mostly, he rows a boat that never moves and takes endless Polaoroids that, the subject regardless, are always of the same blond mermaid.
Cutting them out, he arranges the silhouettes in a fan, then tosses the lot into the water.
Still, the best part is when Mr.
Blanc opens a can of sardines to find the mermaid inside, wriggling seductively.
The show comes with the assurance that Mr.
Blanc is serious, but even that is debatable.
He may indeed be considering sociopolitical questions like "the role of native versus Westernized culture." Yet he could as easily just be having a good time, shrugging off the possibility that art and the world have grown tired.
In any case, he himself is an artist without a past: the only chronology here is that for his numerous shows over the last decade, three of which have taken place in New York City, five in Paris and one in Papeete.
Many of his images are reproduced in the limited-edition books that are on sale in the gallery.
This viewer left the show exhausted, entertained and persuaded that the only good Duchampian is a French Duchampian.
The gallery is open Thursday and Friday from noon to 7 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday from noon to 4 P.M.
"Gauguin's Daughter" closes Dec. 18.


Linda M. White To Wed in June
Thomas E. White of Larchmont, N.Y., has announced the engagement of his daughter Linda Marie White to Mark Garrett Banta, a son of Norma Banta of Fair Haven, N.J., and the late Robert Banta.
Miss White is also a daughter of the late Joan Caroline White.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss White, 31 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia and is a senior account representative at Wang Laboratories in New York.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.


And So Who Shot The Deputy Mayor?
THE plot of Neil Simon's "Rumors," now at the Arena Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale, consists of the kind of material on the front pages of many newspapers.
In the comic farce, a group of high-powered prime movers attends a party to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the Deputy Mayor of New York City.
As the guests arrive, they are bombarded with a set of bizarre facts that they embroider until the pattern becomes a patchwork quilt of suspicion, elaboration and conjecture.


Deborah Turk Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Turk of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deborah Ruth Turk to Mark Steven Levy, a son of Suzzette Levy of Short Hills and the late Martin Levy.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Turk, 28 years old, is a retail management consultant for Coopers &amp; Lybrand in New York.
She graduated cum laude from New York University and received an M.B.A. from Rutgers University.
Her father retired as a vice president of A. T.&amp; T. in Berkeley Heights, N.J., and is now a management consultant in Short Hills.


Racquet Experts Match String and Swing
THE busiest tennis racquet stringers in the state work year round in a small two-story frame house in Darien.
On a recent morning Fran Bouton and Carmen Minning strung racquet after racquet in what used to be the family room of Ms.
Bouton's home.
The outdoor tennis season may be over, but business is booming at Gut Reaction, the business operated by the two women.
Nearby, Chris Hayes of Greenwich, who teaches tennis at the Shippan Racquet Club in Stamford, was busily stringing racquets, too, before hurrying off to classes at Fairfield University, where he is a senior.
Mr.
Hayes, who played varsity tennis at Fairfield last spring, is a part-time employee at Gut Reaction, but he works full time during the late spring and summer.
An apprentice, Fran McKinney of Stamford, was at work on the fourth computerized Babolatstringing machine, which shared the cramped space with a vast stock of gut and synthetic stringing material, racquets to be strung and various other tennis accouterments.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The vanity tops in my bathrooms are badly stained.
It looks as if the marks were caused by cigarette burns and hairpins that rusted on the surface.
Can you recommend anything to remove these marks and stains without damaging the vanity tops?
A.
You do not say what the tops are made of, but I assume that they are covered with plastic laminate.
Rust stains can be sometimes removed with a chemical rust remover.
If that does not get all the stains off, try a scouring powder or rubbing with an abrasive pad like the kind sold for Teflon pots.
Burn marks are probably not removable, unless they are very shallow.
You can try rubbing off the scorched material with the same type of abrasive pad, but if the burn has penetrated all the way through the surface pattern, it will still leave an off-color stain.


CAMPUS LIFE: Iowa State; Despite Protests, Buyers Are Sought For TV Station
Despite a soft market and opposition from some journalism faculty members and students, Iowa State University's commercially run television station has been put up for sale.
The Iowa Board of Regents, which runs the three universities in the state, decided to seek buyers for WOI-TV, an ABC affiliate, after the Iowa State president, Martin Jischke, recommended in September that it be sold.


UP AND COMING: Desmond Richardson; For Him, the Dance Is as Important as the Dancer
They laughed when Desmond Richardson auditioned for the High School of Performing Arts.
He had never had a dance class.
He was chubby.
And all he could think to do, dancing to a street music tape, was imitate the moves he had seen Mikhail Baryshnikov perform on television.
Nobody is laughing now.
Over the past two seasons, Mr.
Richardson has been singled out by critics and audiences for his dazzling technique and charismatic presence.
At 22, he is a leading dancer with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, and on Thursday he will perform the Baryshnikov role in "Pas de Duke" at City Center.


CAMPUS LIFE: Smith; Anonymous Tests For AIDS Virus Given on Campus
Tests for the virus that causes AIDS that allow students to keep their identities secret, even from those who test them, are being offered at Smith College.
The tests, which have been available since Oct. 29, are in addition to the campus confidential H.I.V. tests, which the college has offered for three years.
The results of those tests are not public, but unlike the anonymous test results, do become part of the student's health record.


Rental Cars
To the Editor: The Practical Traveler column ("Trials of Renting a Car in Europe," Oct. 20) reports that the Miami Metro Commission has voted to ban any insignia that identifies a car as rental.
While this might be an effective step, it would be useless in regard to any vehicle registered in New York State.
The first letter of every registration plate of a rental car here is "Z" so these vehicles are readily recognizable by anyone.
This practice applies even to vehicles registered here in New York, but temporarily in the Miami fleet.
This practice should be stopped if it is making the identification of targets for burglars easier.
WILLIAM R. ELLIS Staten Island, N.Y.


Town Cancels Its Parade After Klan Enters
The small town of Gainesville near here has canceled its annual Christmas parade because many organizations pulled out after the Ku Klux Klan decided to enter a float.
The City of Gainesville and the Hall County Recreation Departments announced the cancellation of the Dec. 14 parade on Friday.
In a written statement, officials of the city and county said, "It is the determination of our joint management team that, based on our standards of participation, the parade entries have diminished to the point that it is not practical to conduct the event."
The parade, which had been held for 10 years, normally attracts about 70 groups and as many as 1,000 participants.
More than half had pulled out after the Klan announced it would participate.
The Klan said its float would be titled, "I'm Dreaming of a White Christmas."


Diane Wichard Has Wedding
Diane Wichard, the advertising director of Allure magazine, and Michael Silberstein, the managing director of the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza Hotel in New York, were married last evening in Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Robert Lennick officiated at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Baraf.
Mrs.
Silberstein, 35 years old, graduated from the Laboratory Institute of Merchandising.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Tvrdik of Orlando, Fla.
Her father was the director of communications for the New York Metropolitan Transit Authority before his retirement.


Ms. Bogen to Wed
Sol Bogen of New Rochelle, N.Y., has announced the engagement of his daughter Melissa Louise Bogen to Justin Joseph Porter, a son of Emily Porter of Riverhead, L.I., and the late Albert Porter.
Ms.
Bogen, 29 years old, graduated from Wellesley College.
She is also the daughter of the late Joan Bogen.
Mr.
Porter, 35, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
The future bride is a production supervisor at Pergamon Press in Elmsford, N.Y., where her fiance is the software manager.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The vanity tops in my bathrooms are badly stained.
It looks as if the marks were caused by cigarette burns and hairpins that rusted on the surface.
Can you recommend anything to remove these marks and stains without damaging the vanity tops?
A.
You do not say what the tops are made of, but I assume that they are covered with plastic laminate.
Rust stains can be sometimes removed with a chemical rust remover.
If that does not get all the stains off, try a scouring powder or rubbing with an abrasive pad like the kind sold for Teflon pots.
Burn marks are probably not removable, unless they are very shallow.
You can try rubbing off the scorched material with the same type of abrasive pad, but if the burn has penetrated all the way through the surface pattern, it will still leave an off-color stain.


In Hard Times, Helping Hands for New York's Neediest Cases; Winter Dreams of Summer Camp
In December's cold, the thought of overcoats for the homeless or gifts for poor children may prompt contributions to The New York Times Neediest Cases Funds.
But when a disabled girl from Washington Heights takes a swim next summer, donations made now will be at work.
The annual Neediest Cases appeal has become a winter tradition for many New Yorkers, but the seven charities that receive its funds use them year round.
And Betty Cabrera, a shy 11-year-old who uses a wheelchair, is already looking ahead to repeating the freedom she found at summer camp with the help of the Fund this year.


Nations Lining Up for the Big Drawing
The world is a political caldron, but one passion remains constant and nonaligned: Nearly every nation wishes desperately to qualify for the World Cup soccer finals.
Today at the Paramount Theater in Manhattan, FIFA, soccer's international governing body, will kindle these cravings with a fresh qualifying draw for the 1994 World Cup, which will be played in the United States.


Lee Huttner to Marry Ms. Belzer
Mr. and Mrs.
Morris Belzer of Walton, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Madeline Belzer to Lee Michael Huttner, a son of Justice and Mrs.
Richard Huttner of Brooklyn.
A December 1992 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Belzer, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Brooklyn College and is a student at the Phillips Beth Israel School of Nursing in New York.
Her father is a special-education teacher at O'Neill High School in Walton.
Her mother, Judith Belzer, retired as an elementary-school teacher.


Diabetes and Other Ills Hit Indians in Canada
LITTLE BLACK RIVER INDIAN RESERVE, Manitoba --
As community health representative on this reservation of 447 Ojibwa Indians, Jackie McPherson helps deliver babies, bandages cuts, splints fractures and drives emergency cases in her 1988 Chrysler LeBaron to the hospital in Pine Falls 28 miles away.
The 2,000-acre reservation is in a remote area of pines and birches at the junction of the O'Hanly and Black rivers, 110 miles north of Winnipeg.


River at European Meeting Site Is a Reminder That Unity Can't Be Just Talk
The gentle hills of this southern corner of the Netherlands hold several dirty secrets.
European presidents and prime ministers gathering here next week only need to look out of the window to see one of them.
Below their meeting hall runs the Meuse River, which arrives at Maastricht loaded with human sewage and chemical waste from Belgium and France.
Tributaries haul in further refuse from Luxembourg and Germany.
Although the Dutch have pleaded with their neighbors for more than 25 years, no one has bothered to stem the flow of filth.


Kempff's Intimate Schubert
Between 1965 and 1970, Wilhelm Kempff recorded 18 Schubert sonatas, a survey now re-released on seven Deutsche Grammophon CD's (423 496-2).
Kempff's insouciant tempos and simplicity of line employ a strategy of concealment.
They reveal Schubert's mysterious world by hiding it from us, or almost hiding it.
For while Kempff's playing is all innocent demeanor and happy briskness, he knows just when to drop his guard.
Through deflected image, glimpse and implication, the pain, nostalgia and wonder beneath this surface are allowed to come through, made even more powerful by indirection.
Where pianists like Sviatoslav Richter, Serkin and Arrau attempt to meet Schubert's dark side head-on -- with heavy declamation and groaning seriousness -- Kempff has wisely kept a straight face and a light touch.


In Hard Times, Helping Hands for New York's Neediest Cases; A Question A Mother Has Feared
A few weeks ago Lillian O. abruptly pulled her daughter off the bus after the 7-year-old pointed to an AIDS poster and asked, loudly, if that was why her mother was sick so often.
It was a few days after Earvin (Magic) Johnson had announced that he was infected with H.I.V.
The child's second-grade class had spent hours discussing his future, and their teacher had said that Magic was going to die.


Grandpa Was a Cowboy
ALL BUT THE WALTZ
Essays on a Montana Family.
By Mary Clearman Blew.
Illustrated. 223 pp.
New York: Viking. $19.95.


Lisa Gersten Is to Wed in Summer
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Gersten of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lisa Michelle Gersten to David Milton Gerwin, a son of Dr.
Robert D. Gerwin and Dr.
Brenda I. Gerwin of Bethesda, Md.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gersten, 23 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College and is a law student at Columbia University.
Her father retired as the owner of Lila Food Packers, a Bronx wholesale grocer.
Her mother, Roslyn Gersten, is the owner of R. G. Domestic Employment Agency in Hartsdale, N.Y.


Matt Brown and Jill Jacoby to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
A.
James Jacoby of Short Hills, N.J., have announced April wedding plans for their daughter Jill Elyse Jacoby and Matt Brown, the son of Judith Brown of Stroudsburg, Pa., and the late Lester Brown.
Ms.
Jacoby, 25 years old, is a psychiatric social worker at Bergen Pines County Hospital in Paramus, N.J.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father is a managing partner at Asiel &amp; Company, a securities brokerage in New York.
Her mother is a special-education teacher at the South Orange-Maplewood Middle School in Maplewood, N.J.


Good Things Come in 3's for Kentucky
With a Final Four backdrop of Kentucky blue and Indiana crimson squeezed under the Hoosier Dome roof, Indiana's Greg Graham took a pass beyond the 3-point line, squared his shoulders and released the final shot of an intense afternoon.
And everything suddenly slowed down.
"It was like in slow motion, on a TV show," said Kentucky's Richie Farmer, who waited near the basket.


Earnhardt Not Happy About His Fifth Title
Dale Earnhardt has won enough major championships by now that he has the luxury of taking a cold, hard look at his 1991 Winston Cup stock-car title and saying it just wasn't one of his better efforts.
"It was a bad year," said Earnhardt, referring to the season in which he won his fifth title in stock-car racing's most prestigious series.
"I felt like we should have won more races." Although he won 4 of the 29 races this season, in the latter part of the year he drove relatively conservatively.


What's in a Handbag? Cab Fare and Whimsy
An evening bag can look like Humpty Dumpty, a flower or a pyramid.
It can be tiny enough to fit into the palm of a hand and barely contain lipstick, keys and cab fare.
Or it can be large enough to carry basic makeup, keys and cash, not to mention sunglasses, spare hosiery and a hairbrush.
What is essential is that an evening bag -- large or small, jeweled or feathered -- look frivolous.
It is a hand-carried ornament, a frippery.
It is most delightful when its function is almost totally disguised.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE CHRISTMAS WITCH.
Retold and illustrated by Ilse Plume.
Hyperion. $13.95. (Ages 4 to 8) This version of the Italian folk tale of Befana, the Christmas witch who brings toys to children, is simply told and charmingly illustrated.


A Treasury of Spanish Design
THE Spanish have long had a gift for decoration, for enhancing the doings of everyday life with a beauty distinctively theirs.
In fourth-century Almeria, on the southern coast of Spain, women wore green and blue glass-bead necklaces that looked like malachite and lapis lazuli.
Cooks in 12th-century Aragon poured olive oil from shiny green and mulberry earthenware jugs.
Medieval Valencian priests carried processional crosses of engraved silver and gold.
Spanish genius for design is celebrated in Madrid's Museo Nacional de Artes Decorativas, a 19th-century ducal mansion one elegant block from El Retiro Park.
The building, designated a Historic Artistic Monument, has 60 rooms on six floors, a central courtyard and grand staircase.
A stroll through its rooms is a stroll through the lives of Moors and monarchs, burghers and monks.


Argentina Shops Shares in Its Telephone System
The Argentine Government, hoping to sustain its economic turnaround and hasten its privatization program, went on the road this week to persuade international investors to buy shares in the country's telephone system.
Officials want to capitalize on the global popularity of telephone stocks, especially of Latin American companies.
But investors are complaining that Argentina is rushing its deal to market with too high a price and inadequate documentation, leaving them too little time to analyze the company and bid aggressively.


OLD MONEY, NEW NEEDS
I could not help noting with amusement the similarities between the subjects of two articles in your issue of Nov. 17 -- "Old Money, New Needs" and "Remodeling the Condor." Both are about tough, awe-inspiring old birds who are the last of their kind.
And although they are at opposite ends of the continent, each struggles to survive in a hostile and deteriorating environment.
A good deal of controversy swirls about each of them, and both have taken more than their share of cheap shots for following their natural instincts.


Business Trip
Having gotten the parades and rallies out of the way during his initial, celebratory visit last year, Nelson Mandela returned to the United States last week on a mission that was strictly business.
In New York City, Mr.
Mandela, the leader of the African National Congress, appeared at the United Nations to urge the ending of sanctions against the Pretoria Government only in steps matching those made by the Government toward democracy.
Then he took the same message to the White House in hopes of persuading President Bush to change his view that the de Klerk Government has already done enough to warrant the ending of sanctions.
After their meeting, it did not appear that anybody's mind had been changed.
But Mr.
Mandela demonstrated a Washingtonesqe skill at constructing a gossamer ball of verbiage to toss, spinning positively, at the press.
"I come out of this meeting," he said, "full of confidence and hope that we are seeing eye to eye with the President on a number of issues."


Americana Revived


Taking Full Advantage of the Off Season
THE crowds heading for the Bay Shore Marina or rushing to catch Fire Island ferries on Maple Avenue are no more.
But the restaurants on the seaside street remain open, and winter may well be the opportune time to enjoy them.
There is ample parking and an off-season mellow mood.
It is now that Il Garofano, a candlelighted, white-tablecloth, fresh flowers type of place, comes into its own.
Who can enjoy a leisurely meal in a sandy bathing suit or with one eye always on the ferryboat schedule?


Sunday Lunch; Along Fifth Avenue, Oases for Shoppers
Restaurants in department stores are perfect for quick, light snacks during the holiday shopping season.
As this Fifth Avenue roundup indicates, they can be quite stylish, too.
Cafe SFA
Saks Fifth Avenue, 611 Fifth Avenue at 50th Street, eighth floor; (212) 940-4080 -- This full-scale restaurant is one of the most comfortable on the midtown shopper's circuit.
The dining room is expansive and attractive, with polished wood wainscotting, well-distanced tables and fabric-covered banquettes.
For those on the run, there is a spacious wooden counter.


A Seeming Paradox
To the Editor:
A letter in this space on Nov. 17 from David Resnicow, president of the Arts and Communications Counselors subsidiary of Ruder Finn, disputed a point made in my article "The Art of P.R. and Vice Versa"  [ Oct. 27 ] .
I had written that some of the country's biggest public relations companies, including Ruder Finn, have recently begun accepting artists as clients.
Mr.
Resnicow took exception to that statement, saying that his subsidiary deals only with cultural institutions and corporations.


History's Refraction Illuminates 2 Views Of a Date of Infamy
On Japan's airwaves this week, the battleship Arizona has sunk a dozen times, the aging Zero pilots have been interviewed so many times that dedicated viewers know their exploits by heart, and a stream of commentators have talked -- and talked, and talked -- about how the United States and Japan must seize this weekend to reaffirm the most critical alliance linking East and West.
But in subtle and telling ways, the images and explanations being offered here and in the United States to explain how two great powers came to battle each other are strikingly different.


Review/Music; Mulligan's Jazz: Mainstream With a Twist
Gerry Mulligan's show at the Blue Note on Wednesday night was an example of how mainstream jazz can still afford experimentation.
Mr.
Mulligan, leading a quartet that included the young pianist Geoff Keezer, worked his way through a set made up mostly of originals, tunes that were carefully arranged, with riffs, written figures, tempo and rhythm changes interrupting the normal jazz process.
Not that his compositional techniques in any way interrupted the essential pleasure Mr.
Mulligan and mainstream jazz have cooked up together over the last 40 years; Mr.
Mulligan, one of jazz's last iconic figures, long ago figured out an airy, lithe musical personality.
But by avoiding the regular jazz routine, he managed to produce music that kept what works about mainstream jazz, and threw out the repetitive.


Tough Call
In "The Last Boy Scout," Bruce Willis plays a private detective who helps a former pro quarterback (Damon Wayans) clear his name of charges of drug use and gambling.
Tony Scott's action-thriller opens Friday. (Warner Brothers)


They Say Even Barosaurus Danced
The fall social season soared to its peak in New York City this week with a rush of parties.
THURSDAY -- Elizabeth Taylor, national founder and chairman of the American Foundation for AIDS Research, was ill and had to cancel her appearance at the masked dinner-dance at the Winter Garden at the World Financial Center.
A model, Vendela Kirsebom, carried the $2 million diamond mask that Miss Taylor was to have brought in for her entrance.
It will be auctioned at Christie's at the foundation's 1992 jewelry auction.


Finding God in a Double Foldout
THE SISTINE CHAPEL
By Frederick Hartt.
Photographs by Takashi Okamura.
Two volumes, boxed. 746 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf in association with Nippon Television Network Corporation. $1,000.


The United Fates of Europe
The leaders of the 12 nations of the European Community assemble in the Dutch city of Maastricht tomorrow to propel Europe toward a united future.
The road to Maastricht has been tortuous.
Disputes rage because no nation finds it easy to sacrifice prerogatives.
What's required is a common commitment to compromise -- no matter how painful.
On the agenda are economic and political treaties that would reshape Europe along lines only visionaries like Jean Monnet could have imagined after the bloodletting of World War II.
The questions to be resolved are momentous, like whether to adopt a single currency, or impose a single standard for working conditions and workplace management.


A's Sign Lansford
The Oakland Athletics turned to a familiar face to solve their vacancy at third base: CARNEY LANSFORD.
The 34-year-old Lansford, who was a free agent, signed a one-year contract Friday.
Lansford, Oakland's third baseman since 1983, missed virtually all of the 1991 season because of a knee injury suffered last New Year's Eve in a snowmobile accident.
In January, he underwent surgery to repair torn left knee ligaments and, in July, he attempted to play but his return to the game proved to be premature.


SPORTS PEOPLE: Track &amp; Field; Carl Lewis Wins Jesse Owens Award
The one he wanted most got away, but two world records are still better than one -- good enough, anyway, to establish CARL LEWIS as the nation's top track and field athlete of 1991.
Lewis, who set the world record in the 100 meters (9.86 seconds) at the 1991 World Championships and also anchored the team that set the records in the 400-meter relay (37.50) at the August event, won the 1991 Jesse Owens Award Friday night, barely beating MIKE POWELL who outjumped Lewis at the world championships to break BOB BEAMON'S 23-year-old long-jump record with a leap of 29 feet 4 1/2 inches.


No Silver Lining to the Job Statistics
ON the surface, it looked as if Westchester had a bit of good news when the latest unemployment figures were made public late last month: the county's unemployment rate for October was 5.3 percent, down from 5.7 percent the month before.
The newest figures, released by the state Department of Labor, compared favorably with the 6.4 percent unemployment rate for the nation as a whole and the 6.9 percent rate for the state in October.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about holiday television programming misidentified a CBS animated special with characters from comic strips by Berke Breathed.
It is "A Wish for Wings That Work."


TAKING SIDES AGAINST OURSELVES
I, too, was a victim of sexual harassment several years ago and continued to work for my employer in the hope that the situation would change.
Carol Gilligan's statement that Anita Hill was "trying to resolve conflict without breaking connection" is completely plausible to me; this is exactly what I did at the time.
I applaud Rosemary Bray for her intelligent and most sensitive article.
MONIKA KOLOS
New York, N.Y.


The Iran Pipeline: A Hidden Chapter/A special report.; U.S. Said to Have Allowed Israel to Sell Arms to Iran
Soon after taking office in 1981, the Reagan Administration secretly and abruptly changed United States policy and allowed Israel to sell several billion dollars' worth of American-made arms, spare parts and ammunition to the Iranian Government, according to former senior Reagan Administration officials and Israeli officials.
The flow of arms began only a few months after the American hostages seized at the United States Embassy in Teheran in 1979 were released on Inauguration Day in 1981.
The United States specifically authorized Israel to make the sales to Iran for a period that by different accounts ranged from 6 to 18 months.
But the United States watched them continue after that, even as the Reagan Administration aggressively promoted a public campaign, known as Operation Staunch, to stop worldwide transfers of military goods to Iran.
First Evidence of Link
Occasional published reports since 1981 have linked Israel to the sale of some American-made arms and spare parts to Iran in the early 1980's, but no United States Government authority for those sales has been publicly demonstrated before now.
The change in policy came before the Iranian-sponsored seizure of American hostages in Lebanon began in 1982, eventually leading the White House to trade arms for hostages in the Iran-contra affair.


CRIME
The crucial thing is that the deal should go through, come hell, high water or murder.
Ms.
Lathen, a pseudonym for the writing team of Mary Jane Latsis and Martha Henissart, has a wonderful knack for turning the driest, most complicated corporate maneuvers into high drama, and occasionally burlesque.
Shuttling her high rollers from Japan to Alaska to England, she drolly observes them trying to conduct delicate business while such land-mine scandals as industrial sabotage and wholesale government corruption burst all around them.


Review/Dance; The Ailey Company Gives Louis Falco's 'Escargot' a Run for Its Money
Forget the title; enjoy the dancing.
"Escargot," a work that Louis Falco created in 1981, was performed for the first time by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater on Friday night at the City Center.
There is nothing of a snail's pace about the choreography, which is in Mr.
Falco's bouncing limb-flinging style and intended to keep the dancers on the move.
"Escargot" ends where it begins; it is essentially a party piece in which the dancers suggest they are having a good time and invite the audience to empathize while the fun lasts.


The Greatest Sea War of All
THE PACIFIC CAMPAIGN
World War II: The U.S.-Japanese Naval War, 1941-1945.
By Dan van der Vat.
Illustrated. 430 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.


Is There Life Beyond Broadway? Yes and No.
We have two distinct problems on our hands this morning, and one common ambition.
The problems are "A Wonderful Life" at Arena Stage in Washington and "Adventures in the Skin Trade" at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven.
The ambition is to build a better mousetrap, which, in the theater, has come to mean concocting the next big Broadway musical.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
WALL STREET By Walter Werner and Steven T. Smith. Columbia University, $35.


Rangers, in High Drama, Surrender a 3-Goal Lead
FRIDAY NIGHT
The Rangers, who have squandered an assortment of two-goal leads this season, managed worse on Friday night here at Joe Louis Arena.
They lost a three-goal bulge, in a breathtaking game filled with deflections, breakaways and open-ice surprises.
The result was a 6-5 overtime defeat by the Red Wings that was nearly worth the drama, though certainly Coach Roger Neilson disagreed.
This was hardly his sort of bump-and-grind affair, and the lightning pace produced the wrong ending when Detroit wing Brent Fedyk knocked in an acrobatic pass from Steve Yzerman with just 36.9 seconds left in the overtime.


Mutual Funds; How Can a Fund Be This Bad?
A long-suffering mutual-fund investor, John Sattler, recently wrote to Charles W. Steadman, chairman of the Steadman Oceanographic and Technology Fund, to "find out what has been going on with this investment of my wife's, which appears to have been about the worst we have made in our investing lifetime."
A reasonable question, from one in a shrinking pool of shareholders.
The four Steadman funds rank among the six worst performers of the 244 stock funds tracked by Lipper Analytical Services for the 15 years that ended on Oct. 31.
The Oceanographic Fund comes in at No. 243 and Steadman American Industry Fund, No. 244.


In Montreal, the New Makes Way for the Old
The new wing of the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, the Jean-Noel Desmarais Pavilion, designed by Moshe Safdie and opened to the public on Nov. 26, is the most recent example of a new kind of architectural program that has become increasingly common during the last decade: the museum addition.
A partial listing of recent additions to prominent museums would include those to the Louvre in Paris and the Tate Gallery and the National Gallery, both in London.
Notably, all three projects were the focus of public debate.
I.
M.
Pei's glass pyramid in the courtyard of the Louvre enraged traditionalists, as did James Stirling's polychromatic Clore Gallery at the Tate.
The original design for the expansion of the National Gallery was denounced by the Prince of Wales as a "monstrous carbuncle," and led to an international competition that was won by Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown, whose semiclassical building has just opened, to mixed reviews.


Robin Berlin to Wed S. H. Mackauf
Robin Lois Berlin and Stephen Henry Mackauf, both New York lawyers, plan to marry in June.
Ms.
Berlin, an associate at Molod &amp; Berkowitz, graduated cum laude from New York University and received a law degree from Pace University.
She is the daughter of Jeanne Berlin of Little Neck, Queens, and the late Solomon Berlin, a hospital administrator.
Her mother retired as an administrative assistant at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park.


The Mysterious Scent of White Truffles
LATE November is the time that white truffles arrive from Italy.
Eaten raw, shaved over pasta or risotto, they are one of the great treats of the holiday season.
My introduction to white truffles took place in Venice several years ago.
A friend who was not an adventurous eater but actually a rather cantankerous companion at the dinner table, had ordered fettuccine as a first course.
When the waiter, who spoke no English, proceeded to grate something that looked like wood shavings on his plate, he tried to wave him aside, but to no avail.
After the waiter had gone, my friend methodically pushed the pieces aside, lining them up with his fork around the rim of his plate.


CAMPUS LIFE: Swarthmore; Students' Rap Song Tops Charts in Zagreb
At the top of the song charts in war-torn Croatia is not a national anthem or patriotic march, but a rap song written and recorded by three Swarthmore College students, two of whom have families in Croatia.
"Croatia's Gotta Be Free" was No. 4 last week, slipping slightly from the No. 2 position it held shortly after it was introduced on Radio 101 in Zagreb.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE PRIZE: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power, by Daniel Yergin. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $16.) Humming beneath the ideological conflicts of the century has been an equally powerful engine: the insatiable thirst for hydrocarbons.
In documenting this addiction, Daniel Yergin has written "a work that deserves to become the standard text on the history of oil," Leslie H. Gelb said here last year.
MY SON'S STORY, by Nadine Gordimer. (Penguin, $9.95.) The son of a "colored" South African schoolteacher is stunned to find that his father, a leader of the anti-apartheid movement, is having an affair with a white woman.


Trying On One Idiom After Another
Among American Museum debuts of recent date, both the most monumental and the longest delayed is the exhibition of paintings and prints by the Swiss-born Felix Vallotton (1865-1925) at the Yale University Art Gallery.
It consists of more than 100 paintings (many of them large), 18 drawings and 33 prints.
Not only does it fill the entire first floor of the museum, but it has a redoubtable annex -- an enormous room, decked out for the occasion with carpet, center table, flowers in plenty and wall upon wall of Vallotton's very large paintings of the female nude.


Free Speech Is at Issue as a Palestinian in U.S. Fights Deportation
Khader Hamide is the kind of immigrant the United States says it does not want.
Although he arrived here legally and holds a regular job as an airline ticket salesman, Mr.
Hamide, a Palestinian, holds politically unwelcome views and expresses them loudly.
In a deportation case the Government has pursued against him since 1987, Mr.
Hamide and seven other immigrants who entered the country legally are accused of being members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a self-described Marxist group that was involved in several airline hijackings in the 1970's in its quest for a Palestinian state.
The Federal authorities say the eight were distributing literature of the popular front, advocates subversive activities.


The Executive Life; Image-Making, From Soup to Sales Pitch
Dressed in conservative business attire -- dark suits, sheer stockings, low pumps -- five executives milled around a buffet table, sipping coffee and nibbling on muffins in an office high above midtown Manhattan.
They discussed the weather, the current crop of movies, the holiday season -- anything but who they were and what they were doing there.
At 9 o'clock sharp, Camille Lavington called for order.
"Why are we eating breakfast together?" she demanded.
"Does anybody know?" Shrugs.
"It's not because we're hungry," Ms.
Lavington said.
"It's because we're trying to build camaraderie. Lesson No. 1: Always share a meal to develop rapport with your business associates."


Recalling Pearl Harbor, Bush Urges an End to Rancor; 50 Years After Attack, Survivors Are Told to Forget Animosity
Amid solemn ceremonies honoring the Americans who died in the Japanese surprise attack on Pearl Harbor 50 years ago today, President Bush told an assemblage of more than 2,000 survivors that the time had come to put aside their animosity toward Japan.
"I have no rancor in my heart toward Germany or Japan -- none at all," said the President, a former Navy pilot who was himself shot down by the Japanese in the Pacific in 1944.
"I hope you have none in yours. This is no time for recrimination."


Cuomo Has Plenty of Precedent for a Late Presidential Run; What He's Thinking
To the Editor:
I own three nightclubs in New York City, the Nile, the Blue Angel and the Jewel Box, and as such am privy to many of the bar conversations that go on during cocktail hour.
Much of it is political, and nowadays most of it seems to be expressing opinions about why Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo doesn't declare himself a candidate for President of the United States.


Correction
Because of an editing error, an "All About" article last Sunday on marketing travel to children misstated the affiliation of Karen Blair.
She is director of marketing programs for Holiday Inns Worldwide.


Talking: 2-Families; Bias Now Prohibited In Rentals
TRADITIONALLY, the rental apartments in two-family houses in New York City have been exempted from the laws that prohibit racial and other forms of discimination in housing, provided the owner or a member of the owner's family lived in the house.
While owners of two-family houses could not publicly advertise that they would accept only, say, a white Christian family, they were able to legally make such a distinction when an applicant called at the door.
The rationale was that renting the second unit in a two-family house was like bringing someone into one's home and thatcontrols would be an unfair restriction on private property rights.


James McAloon to Wed Dr. Hughes
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Hughes Jr. of Riverdale, the Bronx, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Maureen Ellen Hughes, to James Earl McAloon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James H. McAloon of Hingham, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
The prospective bride, 27 years old, and her fiance, 28, are graduates of Trinity College in Hartford.
Dr.
Hughes, who has a Ph.D. in chemistry from Tufts University, is a research fellow at the California Institute of Technology.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of DeMaio &amp; Hughes.


Team Is Named
The owners of the Arena Football League's newest franchise announced today that the team will be known as the Arizona Rattlers.
The name was chosen as part of a newspaper contest that a team spokesman, Ray Artique, said drew some 6,000 ballots.
Danny White, a former Dallas Cowboys and Arizona State quarterback, will be head coach of the team.


Taxi Numbers
To the Editor: My wife and I have just returned from a trip to Portugal, and one of our experiences is an excellent object lesson..
On our last day in Lisbon, we took a cab from the Meridien Hotel to St.
George Castle.
Five minutes after we left the taxi, we realized that we had left my wife's bag in the cab.
Very distressing.


Rental Cars
To the Editor: Betsy Wade missed some other unwelcome surprises in her column on car rentals.
Budget Rent a Car at the airport in Heraklion, Crete, refused to honor the rate American Express Travel had confirmed, based on Budget's local manager's insistence that they "would lose money." Budget graciously offered what they considered "a better deal" -- $88 versus my original $15-per-day rate!.
I graciously declined (well, maybe not so graciously), and used public transportation and cabs instead.
I guess Budget did me a favor by not renting to me.
At least my involvement ended without any charges billed to me months later, as was the experience of others.
ROBERT ZLOTNICK Hollis, N.H.


Quitting School
In a way, all the fuss about David Baltimore was simply about all the fuss about David Baltimore.
And it just would not stop.
Last week, Dr.
Baltimore, whose appointment as president of Rockefeller University last year was strongly backed by David Rockefeller, resigned the post.
Though some of his actions at Rockefeller irked some faculty members, the Nobel laureate was seen as an able administrator.
But in 1986 he and a colleague published a paper in the journal Cell, and the colleague was later accused of research fraud.
Dr.
Baltimore was not accused of any impropriety, but his vigorous defense of his co-author raised eyebrows.
The incident became a lens through which his other actions were viewed.
The end came when, amid rumors that there would be further ado about the paper, a university vice president recently said he no longer had confidence in Dr.
Baltimore.
Mr.
Rockefeller commented, "What just hadn't been anticipated was the continuing uproar over the Cell paper."


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Homeless With a Purpose
"I'VE got my three layers of L. L. Bean on," said Dr.
Monica Brennan of Woodside.
"And my longjohns are guaranteed to 60 below." Dr.
Brennan was about to test that warranty by sleeping outdoors, in a cardboard box.


To Ellington Fan, Duke Is the King
IN his career dating from 1924, Duke Ellington made more than 10,000 commercial recordings, including innovative jazz compositions and hits like "Mood Indigo" and "Sophisticated Lady."
Last month, Jerry Valburn of Plainview donated his collection of Ellington music and memorabilia to the Library of Congress.


IN SHORT: FICTION
MY FATHER, HIS SON By Reidar Jonsson. Arcade/Little, Brown, $19.95.


Biking for the Sheer Pain of It
ON a sunny morning last March, we were skimming across the central Florida landscape at 21 miles an hour.
The 10 of us were moving along in two parallel files of five.
I was trying hard not to stare at the wheel a foot or so in front of mine.
I remembered what Mike Walden had said: Keep your eyes up and on the road ahead.
Rely on your peripheral vision to keep from running over the fellow in front of you.
I had come to the Walden School of Cycling to get a taste of bicycle racing.
Mike Walden holds his school from February into April, in weekly segments at Camp Challenge, a youngsters' summer camp in Mount Plymouth, about 20 miles north of Orlando.
There were 85 of us the week I went, ranging in age from college kids to two men in their 70's.
Most campers were in their 30's; men outnumbered women six to one.


Prescription: Guidelines
To the Editor:
The American Medical Association was pleased to see Jan Hoffman's article on the subject of physicians reporting medical news  [ "Doctor, Doctor, Give Us the News," Oct. 27 ] .
However, it carried a tone of derision toward physicians who wish to educate and inform the public through broadcasting medical and health-related news.
In an effort to cooperate with Ms.
Hoffman, the names of numerous physicians who maintain a full-time practice and report medical news as a public service, free of charge, were offered for interviews.
Had they been quoted, the article would have reflected a more balanced view of medical broadcasting from a broader range of physicians who practice and report medicine.


On the Street; Like Seasons, Indian Look Returns
American Indian fashion influences have returned, as they have many times over the years, appearing alongside the popular cowboy hats and boots.
This fall, Indian motifs are showing up on suede jackets, colorfully stenciled with tepees and Indians on horseback, like the one at the far right.
Leather jackets are decorated with fringe, feather quills and bead embroidery.
Indian jewelry has a long history in fashion, but collars made from feather quills and beads worn by men are new accessories.
Men are also wearing traditional turquoise bead necklaces, even with a Cleveland Indians baseball cap.


Sarah E. Hays To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Lee Hays of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sarah Elizabeth Hays, to Kevin Sean Reilly, a son of James and Diana L. Reilly of Lebanon, Pa.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hays, 24 years old, is the assistant curator at the Kendall Whaling Museum in Sharon, Mass.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in American Maritime Studies from Boston College.
Her father is a freelance writer and television producer in New York.
Her mother, Betty M. Hays, teaches at Grace Church School in New York.


Testing Supported For N.F.L. Players
To the Sports Editor:
When one considers the blood that is shed and the open cuts that football linemen and others endure game after game, it seems that Harry Gamble and the Philadelphia Eagles should be commended for providing their players with an additional health benefit via the H.I.V. test. (Sports People, Nov. 3).


TAKING SIDES AGAINST OURSELVES
Rosemary Bray's rage about the conflicting roles of black American women, revealed in Anita Hill's allegations of sexual misconduct at Justice Clarence Thomas's hearings, is apparent and powerful ("Taking Sides Against Ourselves," Nov. 17).
However, her rage does not justify a feminist trivializing of Thomas's fury about the language and myth surrounding the sexual prowess of black men, by dismissing it as a fling "across history like little Eva clinging to an ice floe." Nor ought gender politics, in her moving essay, be allowed to convey the historical inaccuracy that the myth of black men's sexual potency grows out of the ideas of whites about "hot- natured black women."
Greeks in the sixth century B.C. used the satyrs for their myths about the sexual powers of black men: naked figures, half-man, half-beast, with powerful horse-like legs and Negroid features such as woolly hair, broad noses and thick lips.
Satyrs were known for their great erotic lust, fertility, bacchanal fondness for wine and revelry with unsuspecting nymphs.


Castro Meets Dissent With an Iron Hand
Two months after a congress of the ruling Cuban Communist Party hinted at limited democratic reforms, the Government of President Fidel Castro has unleashed a violent crackdown on political dissent.
In recent weeks, according to international human rights monitors and diplomats, members of Cuba's embryonic political opposition have been imprisoned after hasty trials on charges like "illicit association" and "defamation." Some have been beaten by angry crowds, directed by plainclothes security agents, or otherwise menaced.


Can a 'Who's He?' Rekindle His Fame?
Thirty years ago, before "Born to Shop" bumper stickers and platinum charge cards, Rodeo Drive was a quiet neighborhood thoroughfare where Doris Day pedaled her bike and Beverly Hills locals ate sandwiches at Elizabeth's coffee shop.
That was before Fred Hayman hoisted a buttercup-and-white striped awning above a tiny boutique called Giorgio, crammed with extravagant clothes, not to mention a pool table and a bar.
It eventually became the fashion playpen for the rich and famous and a catalyst for transforming the street.


Review/Jazz; Nascimento Goes Northern
For Milton Nascimento, the singer and songwriter who is a superstar in Brazil, playing a rare jazz-club date means bringing out the jazzy side of his songs.
For his engagement through tonight at the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Mr.
Nascimento has brought together Brazilian musicians (Hugo Fattoruso on piano and Robertinho Silva on drums) with American jazz players (Ron Carter on bass and, on Thursday night, an unannounced guest, Pat Metheny on guitar, who had clearly rehearsed with the group).
They are reworking his songs from the inside out, retaining Mr.
Nascimento's melodies and the lyrics of his co-authors while toying with rhythm and structure.
Mr.
Nascimento has often collaborated with American jazz musicians on his albums.
But on recordings and in larger theaters, Mr.
Nascimento treats his songs as the exemplary pop melodies they are.
The instruments defer to his luminous voice, which glides from a fond, limpid tenor to an angelic falsetto, the perfect vehicle for lyrics that seek spirituality in nature and in human love.
Yet behind Mr.
Nascimento's seemingly natural melodies are ingenious harmonies, subtly shifting chords that offer jazz musicians something to dig into.


Pamela Nolan to Wed J. B. Little Jr.
Gerard and June Nolan of Forest Hills Gardens, Queens, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Ellen Nolan, to John Bertram Little Jr., a son of Drs.
John and Francoise Little of Brookline, Mass.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Nolan, 28 years old, is the publicity coordinator at Bergdorf Goodman in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her parents own Parkington Associates, an insurance brokerage in New York.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Nov. 23 MANHATTAN  Greenwich Village 305,000
25 East Ninth Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,150-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; manned elevator, windowed, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, high-beamed ceilings; maintenance $978, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: Sheila Cornacchini Real Estate)  Greenwich Village 440,000
31-33 West 12th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; maid's room, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $870, 22% tax-deductible (Brokers: Kanelba &amp; Robilotti-Halstead Property Co.)  Inwood 107,500
251 Seaman Avenue  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,305-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; dining room, renovated eat-in kitchen, 3 exposures; maintenance $597, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Simone Song Properties)  TriBeCa 330,000
335 Greenwich Street (Ave. J)  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 2,300-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, dining area, 200-sq.-ft. terrace; maintenance $934, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Tabak Real Estate)  West Midtown 510,000
106 Central Park South (6th Ave.)  (Trump Park)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, 2 exposures; common charge $709, taxes $8,520 (Broker: Corcoran Group)  West Side 1.4 million
115 Central Park West (71st Street)  (The Majestic)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevators, maid's room, library and solarium; maintenance $2,300, 41% tax-deductible (Broker: William B. May)  BRONX  Riverdale 89,000
445 West 240th Street  (Fieldston Plaza)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 900-sq.-ft. postwar condo; windowed, eat-in kitchen, dining area, 3 exposures; common charge $290, taxes $1,524 (Broker: Trebach Realty)  Soundview 185,000
2224 Homer Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, 1-car garage, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Century 21/Best Match Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Kensington 225,000
201 Albemarle Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, stucco house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage, 30- by 105-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Homes 'R' Beautiful)  Park Slope 136,000
449 9th Street  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a brownstone; dining foyer, fireplace, laundry room, rear deck to private rear garden; maintenance $685, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  QUEENS  Bayside 350,000
42-12 223d Street  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, terrace in other; 2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 50- by 95-ft. lot; taxes $3,200 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  South Ozone Park 112,000
121-40 133d Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, Florida room, enclosed front porch, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $700 (Broker: Century 21/ Elms Real Estate) STATEN ISLAND  Huguenot 224,500
23 Eugene Place  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, 6-year-old, detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, c/a, finished basement, rear patio, 38- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  Manor Heights 145,000
193 Melba Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached, frame house, dining area, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, rear deck, 1-car garage, 23- by 105-ft. lot; taxes $1,900 (Broker: Rand Properties)


One of Giants' Faithful Keeps the Faith
THE evening was special for the Fairfield County Football Officials Association.
The speaker at the group's annual meeting was to be an assistant coach of the New York Giants.
So the 130 people on hand at the Continental Manor in Norwalk were more than a little surprised when the coach was introduced.
Their guest turned out to be Sister Carol Ann Nawracaj, a 5-foot-2-inch Bernardine Franciscan nun, wearing her black-and-white habit and a captivating smile.
Carmine Vaccaro of Stamford, a member of the association, had promised the appearance of a Giants coach, and few of his fellow members initially saw any humor in the situation.
But about an hour later the group gave a standing ovation to the exuberant nun, who had won them over with an inspirational talk that had included slides of the Giants and some magic tricks.


End of Story?; Hostages Go Free at Last, But Iran Bears Watching
NOTHING marked the senselessness of hostage-taking so well as the release last week of Terry A. Anderson for no easily understandable reason or discernible gain for his Lebanese captors.
While there were scenes of joyous reunion as the last American captive of Beirut's dungeons blinked his way into the daylight and there were some sickening tales of abuse at the hands of the kidnappers, who remain at large, there was also a sense that the whole thing had been a grotesque exercise in futility.


Cuttings; Now, for Politically Correct Tomatoes: All Hail the Hairy Vetch
When the United States Department of Agriculture starts mulching its tomato patch with a plant called hairy vetch instead of plastic, something is up: Organic gardening has gone mainstream.
More than a year ago, after a number of meetings with commercial vegetable growers and horticultural scientists, Dr.
Aref A. Abdul-Baki, a plant physiologist for the Department of Agriculture in Beltsville, Md., decided to conduct a test with hairy vetch, a nitrogen-fixing legume that has long been used as an organic means to enrich and hold the soil.


Yes, Yet Another New Italian Place!
AFTER months of finding that the only new restaurants to review were Italian, we were ready to head for the nearest barbecue house for a change of pace.
But discovering Spazzi, a self-styled trattoria in a small shopping complex called the Brick Walk in Fairfield, stopped us.
At first we were overwhelmed by the noise and hyperactivity -- staff dashing here and there, patrons waiting for tables, cooks working full throttle at the brick oven and wood-fired grill on full display in the open kitchen, the intrusive beat of taped music.
To add to the confusion, multiple television screens blinked incessantly at the rear bar.
But once seated, we were charmed by the wit of the minimal decor, with trompe l'oeil renderings of Italian ruins and Roman columns, and by the menu, which was intriguing.


Door Closers Old and New
STORM and screen doors are usually equipped with automatic closers.
Although closers seldom break, they can be a nuisance if they cause a door to close too quickly or too slowly, and repairs are needed if their mounting brackets loosen or pull away from the door or door frame.
With hydraulic door closers, usually found on solid doors, the speed at which the door closes can be adjusted by turning a screw on the cylinder.
Pneumatic door closers, which feature a long, horizontal tube and are usually found on storm and screen doors, are adjusted by rotating the tube.


Wall Street; An Ill-Fated Remark Sends a Stock Into Freefall
EXACTLY when did things start to go sour for the Ratners Group P.L.C., the London-based jewelry retailer?
Was it in November 1990, when it paid a premium price for Kay Jewelers in the United States?
Or perhaps it was in April, when Gerald Ratner, the company's chief executive, publicly referred to some of his own products with a mild scatological term and then drew further attention to his remark with store promotions that tried to put a humorous twist on what he had said.


Time for a Change in Builder Incentives?
UNDER the combined weight of budget deficits, a deep recession and a surplus of new buildings, New York City officials are facing off against the construction industry in an attempt to overhaul the city's generous incentives for real estate development.
The incentives include tax breaks for developers and have become a fixture of New York construction over the last 15 years.
Beginning in 1976, a time of fiscal crisis, they were created, modified and layered in an attempt to foster new construction, steer it to the commercial backwaters of the five boroughs and keep big business from leaving the city.


Washington at Work; A Bush Campaign Chief Who Knows Questions
Robert M. Teeter, the poll taker chosen Thursday to run President Bush's re-election campaign, knows what proportion of Americans favor the death penalty and how many voters think the country is in recession.
But do not expect him to lead the 1992 Bush campaign to focus on any abstract discussion of issues, with the candidate artfully trying to take the same positions that polls indicate are held by the American public.


Mets Offer Arbitration to Viola, Boston
The Mets, as expected, offered salary arbitration to Frank Viola today, but the move was aimed more at retaining their rights to compensation for the pitcher when he signs with another team than at re-signing him themselves.
They also offered arbitration to reserve outfielder Daryl Boston.
The Mets have acknowledged they have no serious thought of bringing Viola back because they are not prepared to give him the kind of contract he seeks.
The veteran left-hander rejected the club's offer of $13 million for three years last April, and they have had no real negotiations since.


May U.S.-Japanese Friendship Grow Stronger
To the Editor:
The 50th anniversary of Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor is upon us.


Speed-Up of Fiber-Optic Network Debated
A $1 BILLION plan by New Jersey Bell to make New Jersey the first state to have fiber-optic communications available to virtually every household and business has provoked an intense debate between proponents of the plan and a powerful coalition of forces opposing it.
With fiber optics, New Jersey Bell officials say, they can create a vast network of high-speed audio, video and data services that will revolutionize the way residents and businesses in the state communicate.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Current account in billions
$2.97
-$5.0
Wednesday
Trade deficit, percent change
0.8
-0.1
Thursday
Producer price index, percent change
0.7
0.1
Retail sales, percent change
-0.1
0.1
Friday
Consumer price index, percent change
0.1
0.2
Monday: European economic summit meeting begins.
Tuesday: Bank of Japan report *
American international transactions  Wednesday: World agriculture supply and demand  Thursday: American chain-store sales  Friday: American business inventories *
American real earnings report  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Three Who Made a Revolution
FOR A NEW RUSSIA
The Mayor of St.
Petersburg's Own Story of the Struggle for Justice and Democracy.
By Anatoly Sobchak.
Illustrated. 191 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $22.95.


Smith Trial Displays the Strengths And Weaknesses of Cool Prosecutor
For the past week, as the rape trial of William K. Smith has saturated the airwaves, Moira K. Lasch has been perhaps the most widely watched, discussed, analyzed and second-guessed lawyer in America.
Yet all this attention seems to have changed her working style not one whit.
Mrs.
Lasch has not granted any interviews since the start of the case.
But on public display, thanks to the single television camera in the corner of Judge Mary E. Lupo's courtroom here, is the prosecutor whom local lawyers have come to know, with all her strengths and weaknesses.


...And About Bringing Down Wages
To the Editor:
It was gratifying to learn that Donald Fites of Caterpillar believes that increases in living standards of people in poor countries require some constraints on resource use by people in rich countries.
Inevitably, however, that approach has limitations.
For example, the real wages of Caterpillar workers have declined.
Have Caterpillar executives sacrificed along with their workers?
And what insures that workers in the developing world benefit as the United States standard of living declines?
Mexican workers, mentioned by Mr.
Fites, suffered a 3.5 percent average yearly
decline
from 1980 to 1987.
Having American incomes "tread water" while developing-country workers catch up, as Mr.
Fites proposes, is not necessary if we pursue rising living standards in environmentally sustainable and community-enhancing ways.
This could be done by building a less violent society, both at home and abroad -- one with greater social concern for families, and with secure, interesting and less-stressful work for all who want it.
JUNE ZACCONE  Hempstead, L.I., Nov. 20  The author is an associate professor of economics at Hofstra University.


Howard Receives Honor As Nation's Top Player
Desmond Howard, the quicksilver receiver-returner who brought magic to Michigan's offense and misery to its opponents during a spectacular 23-touchdown season, won the Maxwell Award yesterday as the year's outstanding college football player.
At the same time, one of Howard's chief rivals for the Maxwell, quarterback Ty Detmer of Brigham Young, won the Davey O'Brien Award as the nation's finest quarterback, for a second year, And the junior Steve Emtman, the giant Washington defensive tackle, won the Outland Trophy as the nation's outstanding interior lineman, just two days after he had been awarded the Lombardi Trophy as the top defensive lineman.


Chess
The semifinal candidates matches, the next stage of qualifications in selecting a challenger for the world champion, Gary Kasparov, will not take place until April in Linares, Spain, but speculation on who will win has already started.
Anatoly Karpov, Kasparov's Soviet countryman and opponent in the last five title matches, is paired with the British grandmaster Nigel Short.
Jan Timman, the top Dutch grandmaster, will face the Soviet grandmaster Artur Yusupov.


Miss Rush Wed To L. X. Cusack
Jennifer Anne Rush, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David M. Rush of Fairfield, Conn., and Lawrence X. Cusack 3d, a son of Mrs.
Cusack of Palm Beach, Fla., and the late Mr.
Cusack, were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
Msgr.
Anthony J. Dalla Villa performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Cusack, 24 years old, is a manager at Edmond Chittendon Inc., a restaurant company in Fairfield.
She graduated from Fairfield University.
Her father is the vice president of Saab of Westport in Connecticut.


'Means of Escape'
To the Editor:
Writers should be able to take their lumps without complaining, but Morley Safer's review of my latest book, "Means of Escape" (Oct. 27), cannot be passed over without comment.


BEST SELLERS: December 8, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
9
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
2
3
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the lives and fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
3
3
8
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
4
4
16
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
5
5
3
THE SAPPHIRE ROSE, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in "The Elenium," a fantasy saga.
6
7
10
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
7
6
6
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing may help save others.
8
9
13
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
9
8
6
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $22.50.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide. (LP)
10
1
WLT, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $21.95.) The birth, prosperity and decline of a down-home Minneapolis radio station.
11
12
39
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
12
13
89
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
13 *
1
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) The story of an Auschwitz survivor in the Catskills, told in comic-book form.
14 *
10
7
SLEEPING BEAUTY, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $22.) A lawyer returns to her estranged family to attend a funeral.
15
11
7
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) A new volume in the science fiction series "The Dragonriders of Pern."
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
12
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
2
1
5
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
3
3
8
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
4
7
5
CHILDHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Putnam, $14.95.) The entertainer recalls his boyhood and reflects on the ways of today's kids.
5
4
15
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces. (LP)
6
14
3
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media, the fashion and beauty industries and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
7
1
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A reporter's account of an N.B.A. championship season spent with Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls.
8
5
6
PRAIRYERTH, by William Least Heat-Moon. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A close look at the people and mores, past and present, of Chase County, Kansas.
9
10
4
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene by the Texas journalist.
10
8
25
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
11
9
55
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
12
1
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
13
6
6
THE NEW WORLD ORDER, by Pat Robertson. (Word Publishing, $17.99.) A clergyman discusses the significance of global changes.
14
15
16
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
15
13
5
DANCE WHILE YOU CAN, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress examines her feelings about relationships, aging and the future.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
THE BEST TREATMENT, by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice from a physician on a host of medical problems.
2
1
17
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness.
3
3
3
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice.
4
2
56
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
5
1
AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.) Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial destiny.
6 *
5
39
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) Illustrated games.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE GOLDEN AGE OF AMERICAN GARDENS: Proud Owners, Private Estates, 1890-1940, by Mac Griswold and Eleanor Weller. (Abrams/Garden Club of America, $67.50; $75 after Dec. 31.) Meticulous documentation by horticultural historians of over 500 great gardens, created when wealth was both bold and showy.
HIRSCHFELD: Art and Recollections From Eight Decades, by Al Hirschfeld. (Scribners, $50.) An abounding retrospective of the work of this great visual chronicler of the theater since 1926.
NO MINOR CHORDS: My Days in Hollywood, by Andre Previn. (Doubleday, $22.50.) An amiable, intelligent memoir of Mr.
Previn's early life as a movie music maker, with anecdotes of many first-rate colleagues, producers, directors and stars.
SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY: A Book About the Building of a Boat, by Louis D. Rubin Jr. (Atlantic Monthly, $21.95.) A distinguished scholar's fine and atypical boat book, combining a 55-year passion for sailing with wise insights into the relation of work to play.
THE WALLS AROUND US: The Thinking Person's Guide to How a House Works, by David Owen. (Villard, $21.) Solid research, experience and personal enthusiasm inform this guide to the rationale and methods of keeping the outdoors out.
PASSAGE: A Work Record, by Irving Penn. (Callaway/Knopf, $100.) This beautifully produced book, the most complete and successful collection of Mr.
Penn's photography to date, embraces and honors a career vast in scope and more than 50 years long.
WILDERNESS TIPS, by Margaret Atwood. (Nan A. Talese/ Doubleday, $20.) Most of the stories in Ms.
Atwood's third volume of short fiction uncannily superimpose past and present, trying to fill the gaps of lives made mysterious by missing information.


America Is Only as Great as Its Shoppers
So there he was, the President of the United States, preparing to lead by example, offering to show us the way out of our economic morass.
It was the day after Thanksgiving.
The President had come to Frederick, Md., to go to the mall.
It was a typical middle-income, middle-class mall, filled with Foot Lockers and Radio Shacks, Thom McAns and Fashion Bugs.
The President headed straight for J. C. Penney.
He bought four pairs of tube socks and a toddler's sweatsuit.
He paid $28.
None of the accounts I read mention whether he paid in cash or with a credit card.
I'm guessing cash.
You see a thing like this and you don't know whether to laugh or cry.
Tube socks?
Twenty-eight dollars?
This is how we're going to spend our way out of the recession?


Pick a Tree, Any Tree


New York State to Install 3,000 More Prison Beds
Saying they are out of space to handle an overflow of prisoners, New York State authorities began installing 3,000 bunks last week under an emergency $40 million-expansion program.
With no new prisons on the drawing board and with the inmate population still rising, officials said as many as 6,000 bunks might have to be added to the 57,000 beds now in the state prison system.
The new bunks will be placed atop existing beds in medium-security dormitories.
There will be no double-bunking in maximum-security cells.


Saints Faltering as the Falcons Fly High
It's shaping up as the wild, wild West.
The race for the National Football Conference West division has tightened now that New Orleans has lost three consecutive games.
The Saints are watching their near-stranglehold on the division title weaken as Atlanta and San Francisco make a late surge.
If the Saints (9-4) falter, the Falcons (8-5), arguably the hottest team in the division, will be right there to claim their first division title since 1980.
Atlanta Coach Jerry Glanville was the Falcons' defensive coordinator, the creator of something called the Grits Blitz, the last time the team won the N.F.C.
West title.
He thinks he has his team poised to make a run for the title again this season.


In Hard Times, Helping Hands for New York's Neediest Cases; So a Crying Child May Someday Smile: In a Cold World, Hope Means Helping
"Leave me alone," is the refrain of this holiday season. "It's tough all over."
And so it is.
People cling to jobs by their fingernails, forego presents and plans, try to scrape by.
It is a dim Hannukah, a hard-candy Christmas, an unhappy New Year.
"If one more smelly bum sticks his face too close to mine and demands just a dollar . . ."


Should Ice Cube's Voice Be Chilled?
Ice Cube must be pleased about the reception for "Death Certificate." In the last month, the album of angry raps zoomed up to No. 2 on Billboard's album chart and brought denunciations from groups that believe Ice Cube's virulent diatribes are racist: proof that he's not only popular but important.
Welcome to the bitterly contested zone of hate speech, which can lead to disciplinary action on some college campuses, arrest in some states and, now, a best-selling album that some people want to squelch.
In the past, rockers who slipped into bigotry accused their accusers of nit-picking a line or two.
Ice Cube devotes long stretches of his album to knee-jerk racial and class prejudices.


Yanks Are Slow to Spend But Eager for a Bargain
While Robert Nederlander counts his final days as the general managing partner of the Yankees, at the winter meetings in Miami Beach, the club must make certain its disarray off the field does not deter it from improving the product on the field.
Nederlander is said to still be in charge of the Yankees and he has not shown much willingness to spend George Steinbrenner's cash on free agents.


Seeing Art in Wash Sticks, Shad Nets and Thistle Tongs
Nobody feels nostaLgia for axes, yet people collect them anyway.
These days, virtually any attractive or weird-looking tool, utensil, measuring instrument or useful thingamajig qualifies as a design object worth collecting.
As it turns out, axes are among the more visually compelling tools exhibited in "Utilitarian Objects as Art," at the American Primitive Gallery, 596 Broadway, south of Houston Street, through Jan. 4.
Forged in the 19th century or earlier to fell trees and hew wood, the 10 iron axes and blades on display include the hefty and lethal as well as the thin and sharp.
Among the latter are a three-sided cleaver, a grafting froe with a tang for trimming branches and a thin arrow-tipped ax for mortising fences.


Linda Chadwick To Wed in July
Michael Chadwick of Charlotte, N.C., has announced the engagement of his daughter Linda Jean Chadwick to Dr.
Antony Edward Pfaffle, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Anton Pfaffle of Brooklyn.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Chadwick, 28 years old, is a daughter also of the late Sheila Chadwick.
She graduated from Molloy College and is a nurse at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.
Her father, who is retired, owned a construction company in Belle Harbor, Queens.


POSTINGS: New Dorp's Lane; Landmark Theater to Disco?
The Lane theater in the New Dorp section of Staten Island, renowned for its intergalactic, Buck Rogers motif, may soon become a disco under a proposal now before the Landmarks Preservation Commission.
The theater, at 168 New Dorp Lane, is one of the borough's oldest; it was built in 1938 by John Eberson and closed in 1989, when it was Staten Island's last single-screen movie house.
A designated landmark since 1988, it is also contains one of the city's few largely intact examples of a Depression-era, Art Moderne-style theater interior.


Winning the Heisman for God, for Country and for Iowa
The Heisman Trophy, the most prestigious award in college football, will be awarded on Saturday at the Downtown Athletic Club in Manhattan.
One of the previous recipients was Nile Kinnick, a running back at the University of Iowa who became a national celebrity after winning the award in 1939.
Kinnick's moving Heisman Trophy speech is included among selected letters to his family and entries from his diary in a recently published book, "A Hero Perished" (University of Iowa Press, $27.95).


Gathers's Settlement
The cardiologist who treated Hank Gathers before the Loyola Marymount star collapsed during a game and died in March 1990 has reached an out-of-court settlement in a suit filed by the Gathers family and has agreed to pay $1 million.
As the cardiologist, Dr.VERNON T. HATTORI, agreed to the settlement, negotiations with other defendants, including former coach PAUL WESTHEAD, seemed to be stalled.
"We've reached an impasse," WAYNE BOEHLE, a Loyola Marymount lawyer, told The Daily Breeze of Torrance, Calif.
A trial has been scheduled in Torrance Superior Court for Feb. 24. (AP)


Navah Perlman To Wed in June
Toby and Itzhak Perlman of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Navah Miriam Perlman to Robert David Frost, the son of Susan and William Lee Frost of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Perlman, 21 years old and a senior at Brown University, is a concert pianist.
She graduated from the Brearley School.
Her father is the violinist.


Ms. Goldsmith Has Wedding
Karen Lisa Goldsmith, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Goldsmith of Port Washington, L.I., was married last evening to Clay Shepard Harrow, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herb Harrow of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Eugene Katz officiated at the Mark Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Harrow, 27 years old, graduated from Syracuse University.
She is a freelance public-relations consultant in the fashion industry.
Mr.
Harrow, 30, graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton and Brooklyn Law School.
He is an associate at the White &amp; Case law firm in New York.


Editorial Notebook; 1941, as Seen From Tokyo
Mild weather has lingered into early December here this year, but the conversational climate grows chilly whenever Americans suggest that Japan should accept blame for its attack on Pearl Harbor.
Because Tokyo is 19 hours ahead of Hawaii time, the 50th anniversary of that attack falls here on the morning of Dec. 8.
Americans remember Pearl Harbor as a treacherous surprise attack.
The 2,403 Americans who died there were victims not of an ordinary act of war, but of a cowardly shot in the back.
Japan, many Americans feel, is morally obliged to accept blame for this dishonorable conduct before the American people can grant historical absolution.
But so far, the Japanese Government has not been able to get the Diet to offer even vaguely worded expressions of regret.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'THE GUISE' IN PURCHASE
England in the 1640's, when censorship was rampant and the country was on the verge of civil war, is the setting for "The Guise," a play about a theatrical troupe of that period.
Based on a 17th-century work by John Webster, it will have a single Westchester performance Friday at 8 P.M. in the Performing Arts Center at the State University of New York at Purchase.


Aimee Eichen, Physician, Wed
Dr.
Aimee Leigh Eichen, an ophthalmology resident at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, was married last evening to Dr.
Jeffrey Lynn Shakin, a vitreoretinal surgeon in Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Dale Polikoff officiated at Great Neck Synagogue.
Dr.
Eichen, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she received a medical degree from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Eichen of Holliswood, Queens.
Her father retired as a senior fashion designer of women's clothing for Fairbrooke Enterprises in New York.
Her mother is a secretary at Halsey Junior High School in Rego Park, Queens.


Thousands Demonstrate Against Extreme Rightists in Belgium


Do Employees Have a Right to Electronic Privacy?
When Alana Shoars arrived for work at Epson America Inc. one morning in January 1990, she discovered her supervisor reading and printing out electronic mail messages between other employees.
As electronic mail administrator, Ms.
Shoars was appalled.
When she had trained employees to use the computerized system, Ms.
Shoars told them their mail was private.
Now a company manager was violating that trust.
When she questioned the practice, Ms.
Shoars said, she was told to mind her own business.
A day later, she said she was fired for insubordination.
She has since filed a $1 million wrongful termination suit.


Allison Schneirov, Lawyer, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Allan B. Schneirov of Elkins Park, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Allison Rachel Schneirov to Dr.
Steven Lloyd Fisch, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Solomon Fisch of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Schneirov, 25 years old, is an associate in the law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father is a senior partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Mesirov, Gelman, Jaffe, Cramer &amp; Jamieson.
Her mother, Miriam A. Schneirov, is president of Schneirov Management Consultants in Philadelphia, and a past president of the Jewish Federation of Greater Philadelphia.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the changing subject matter of political thriller novels misidentified a book by Carl A. Posey.
It is "Bushmaster Fall."


Hotel Pulls Back In Kyoto Dispute
Those who had despaired of halting the destruction of old Kyoto have something to cheer about.
After a yearlong battle, the Kyoto Hotel surprised most observers when it succumbed to pressure by a group of Buddhist temples and agreed to reconsider its plan to construct a new tower.
The building would have been the tallest in the central part of the ancient capital city.
Opponents feared that if it rose to the planned height of nearly 200 feet it would have unleashed a wave of building at that scale and changed the traditional character of many older neighborhoods.


NEW YORK MOVING TO LIMIT TB SPREAD
Responding to a surge in the number of tuberculosis cases and the alarming spread of a deadly drug-resistant form of the infection, New York State and New York City health officials plan to hire more workers to supervise tuberculosis therapy, require hospitals and prisons to build environmentally sound rooms to prevent spread of the bacterial disease, and start a hot line for doctors to get information about cases more quickly.
These and other measures will be part of a joint effort by the city and the state to overhaul their systems to control tuberculosis.
The steps were discussed in interviews and at a two-day meeting of tuberculosis experts at the Federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.


All About/Baby Products; Smaller Families Perhaps, but So Much More to Buy
This is not your parents' baby boom.
They bought cribs and strollers from Sears Roebuck; today's new parents might spend up to $3,000 on their newborns for everything from backpacks to electronic monitors.
Increasingly, the emphasis is practical -- safety, function and good design.
Fueled by a mini-baby boom, sales of products aimed at newborns to 2-year-olds hit $2.45 billion in 1990, up 8 percent from $2.25 billion the year before, according to the Juvenile Products Manufacturers Association, a trade group in Marlton, N.J.
And that is not counting clothing, toys or disposable diapers.


Data Bank/December 8, 1991
Auto Sales
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
In units
608,920
705,086
674,790
Employment
In thousands
116,758
116,967
117,165
Unemployment/Rate
In thousands/percent
1,605 (6.8)
1,614 (6.8)
1,624 (6.7)
Index of Leading Indicators
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Monthly percent change
0.1
-0.1
0.0
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
1.9
-2.3
-2.0
Consumer Credit
Monthly percent change
1.3
0.1
-1.4
New Home Sales
Monthly percent change
2.2
-4.9
4.1
Gross Domestic Product
III Q'91
II Q'91
I Q'91
Annual rate, 1987 dollars, in percent
1.7
1.4
-2.5


Perkins Seeks Job
A year after he became a coach without a team, RAY PERKINS is on the campaign trail to win the coaching job at the University of Minnesota.
Perkins, the former Giants and University of Alabama coach who was fired by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers with three games left in his fourth season last year, told KARE-TV in Minneapolis on Friday that Minnesota officials "know I'm very interested, but I haven't talked to anybody yet."


Pamela Bowers Wed in Boston
Pamela Goodrich Bowers, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Whyte Bowers of Weston, Mass., and Donald Douglas Notman Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Notman of Washington, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Stephen Wade officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church in Boston.
The bride, 30 years old, was until recently an associate marketing manager for the Guinness Import Company of Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Bates College.
Her father is a management consultant in Wellesley Hills, Mass.


Wall Street; What's Keeping Concord on a Roll?
The disappearance last month of the chief executive of one high-flying little company, Cascade International, should have prompted small-company investors everywhere to check for warning signs elsewhere in their portfolios.
A good place to start would be the Concord Camera Corporation in Avenel, N.J.
Concord makes inexpensive cameras with perky names like Neon and Le Clic, and it has reported stellar sales and profit growth.
But company documents filed at the Securities and Exchange Commission this year contain enough red flags to deck out the Queen Mary -- including a recent report that the S.E.C. is looking into allegations by Concord's former chief financial officer that its chairman, Jack C. Benun, has embezzled from the firm.


Of the Vampire Within
"Dreaming in public -- that's what we do as artists," said Ping Chong.
No wonder, then, that he chose "Dreaming in Public" as the title of the retrospective he is offering this season.
The series of performances and lectures, which began in October, celebrates 20 years of works by Mr.
Chong, a 45-year-old dramatist, stage director, choreographer and performance artist.
A revival of his "Nosferatu: A Symphony of Darkness," a critically acclaimed production of 1985, opens today and runs through Dec. 22 at La Mama.
Inspired by F. W. Murnau's "Nosferatu," a vampire film of 1922 that is a silent classic, Mr.
Chong's work depicts well-to-do people menaced by a deadly plague.


Review/Dance; Bill of Ailey Highlights
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater honored its founder on Thursday night at the City Center with "Ailey Classics," a program featuring his choreography.
Most of the fast-paced and varied evening was devoted to excerpts from dances.
But one work was performed in its entirety.
That was "Revelations," a tribute to spirituals that Ailey choreographed in 1960.
It remains his masterpiece and deserves to be presented uncut.
Each of its many scenes is effective in itself.
Yet as this rousing performance demonstrated, the episodes build toward a triumphant and spiritually meaningful conclusion.
With its choreographic confessions of sin followed by assurances of salvation, "Revelations" has theological significance as well as kinetic excitement.


In Search of the Perfect Christmas Tree
THE best-looking blue spruce in the United States was grown last year in Connecticut, on Ski's Christmas Tree Farm in Lebanon.
A blue ribbon on the wall of the office of the farm's operators, B. John and Mary Skawinski, attests that their tree was judged the top prize winner for spruces by the National Christmas Tree Growers Association at its annual convention in Anaheim, Calif.
"It was the first time that anyone from Connecticut ever won a blue ribbon for Christmas trees in a national competition," Mr.
Skawinski said.


Q and A
Buying Blind in a Co-op  Question: I own an apartment in a building that was converted into a co-op.
Through an amendment to the offering plan, the sponsor is giving tenants and owners for 90 days the right to buy the unsold 66 apartments at very low prices.
One of the apartments for sale is contiguous to mine.
Even though it has a rent-stabilized tenant, I am interested in buying it.


How Many Does It Take To Staff a Squad Car?
For the first time since the New York City Police Department began to use cars, some sergeants made their rounds alone last week -- with a shotgun in lieu of their usual partner.
The numbers involved were small, and will remain so since the solo patrols are for now employed in only 14 of the city's 123 precincts.
But this new deployment -- which follows by less than a month a similar change for lieutenants in the same precincts -- exemplifies both the changes that are slowly being made in the country's biggest police department and the resistance they are getting from traditionalist front-line officers.


POSTINGS: Planning Commission Hearing; A Long View of New York
In the next 12 months, the New York City Planning Commission will be taking a long view of "its vision for the city and the planning policies to realize it." To that end, it has invited concerned officials and organizations to share their thoughts.
Under the new charter, the commission must produce a planning and zoning report every four years.
The first one is due Dec. 31, 1992.
To prepare for that, the commission expects to hear tomorrow from all five Borough Presidents and a variety of groups including the American Planning Association, Citizens Union, New York Housing Partnership, Municipal Art Society, Neighborhood Open Space Coalition, Parks Council and the Real Estate Board of New York.
Topics include economics, housing, infrastructure, environment, waterfront, open space and social services.


There's a Lot of Hockey Left in Burke
Well, speak of the former Devil.
The difference in the hockey game between Canada and the United States this afternoon was goaltending and the best goalie was Sean Burke.
Burke, a professional free agent who left New Jersey this fall and now plays for the Canadian Olympic team, made 32 saves as his team beat the Americans, 5-3, before 7,319 fans at Knickerbocker Arena.


Monica Moody To Wed in '92
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald L. Moody of Duncan, Okla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Monica Lee Moody to Mark Edward Anderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James T. Anderson of Farmington, Conn.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Moody, 24 years old, is a flight attendant with American Airlines.
She graduated from the University of Oklahoma.
Her father is the president of Insurance One, a brokerage in Duncan.
Her mother, Beverly Moody, is the sales manager of Real Estate One there.


Where the Money Goes
To the Editor:
In "Packing Up Retirement Funds" (Mutual Funds, Nov. 17), which advocated rolling over pensions into individual retirement accounts, one reason individuals do not do this is because they need the money.
This is especially true for those individuals departing because of layoffs.
The tone of the article is similar to that of President Bush and his advisers: There isn't any problem out there, folks.
People's lives are being destroyed and nobody gives a damn.
MARTIN MANGAN  Brooklyn, N.Y., Nov. 17


Corrections
A quiz about Canada and Mexico on Nov. 3 in the special Education Life section referred incorrectly to Canada's leadership structure.
The Prime Minister, currently Brian Mulroney, is head of government; the head of state is Queen Elizabeth II.
The answer to a question about Mexico's population misstated the percentage of people of "various ethnic heritage." The figure is 11 percent, not 1 percent.


Abby Sternschein Is to Wed Bruce Mendelsohn
February wedding plans have been announced for Abby Sternschein, an associate with the law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, and Bruce H. Mendelsohn, an associate in investment banking at Lehman Brothers, both in New York.
Ms.
Sternschein, 27 years old, a daughter of Joseph and Florence Sternschein of Oceanside, L.I., is a graduate of the State University of New York at Binghamton and Brooklyn Law School.
Mr.
Mendelsohn, 29, a son of Janet Mendelsohn of Franklin Square, L.I., and the late Paul Mendelsohn, graduated from Emory University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.


Rip Van Winkle Emerges
When he was 22 years old, Thomas Pakenham climbed Wenhi, the legendary Ethiopian mountain to which deposed princes were exiled.
On that first journey, the young explorer discovered a medieval church and was bitten by what he calls "the African bug." In the intervening 36 years he hasn't been able to shake it.
"The Scramble for Africa" is his fourth book and his third on Africa.
The Boer War, the subject of his previous book, "was one chapter out of 38" in the new history, Mr.
Pakenham said in a telephone interview from his home in London.
"I spent 22 years on the two books. I feel a little like Rip Van Winkle. I was a young man when I started all this, and now I've got a white beard."


New Jersey Moves to Standardize the Cleanup of Toxic Waste
New Jersey is about to chart the future of its industrial economy, its land and its water in a way no state ever has.
The vehicle is a set of guidelines being drafted by the state's environmental regulators to cover the cleanup of almost 200 toxic compounds.
The guidelines represent a benchmark in environmental management and control, but just as important is their potential as a catalyst or an obstacle to development.


Smith Defense Witness Tells of a Meeting the Accuser Didn't Recall
The prosecution rested its case in the William K. Smith rape trial today after calling its 23d witness, and the defense got underway with the testimony of a bartender who says he met with Mr.
Smith's accuser only a few hours before she says the rape occurred.
Judge Mary E. Lupo barred the prosecution from calling an authority on rape trauma syndrome as its final witness.
The Judge ruled that prosecutors had waited too long to declare their intention to call him, and that allowing him to testify would throw off the trial schedule because the defense would need a recess of several days to prepare.
She has promised the jury the case will conclude by Dec. 20.


Scientist Challenges View of Himalayan Flooding
An Indian environmentalist has touched off a furious debate by challenging the conventional view that deforestation in the Himalayan foothills is a primary cause of devastating seasonal floods along rivers in South Asia.
The scientist, Anil Aggarwal, said in a report that poor economic and agricultural planning and practices in the flood plains play key roles in the annual disasters that kill thousands of people every year and destroy hundreds of millions of dollars in property.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 8, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician's successful cloning of dinosaurs for use in a theme park leads to a global emergency.
2
2
PRISONER OF MY DESIRE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 12th-century belle seeks to capture the heart of a handsome lord.
3
2
COLD FIRE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A despondent reporter finds hope and romance while she tracks the course of a good Samaritan.
4
6
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) The experiences of a couple on a trek across Europe during the ice age.
5
7
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The coming of age of women in an Irish village and in Dublin's academia.
6 *
31
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
7
1
PERCHANCE TO DREAM, by Howard Weinstein. (Pocket, $4.99.) In this "Star Trek" story, a U.S.S.
Enterprise shuttle crew is captured by an alien race.
8
6
HOCUS POCUS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Berkley, $5.99.) Life in the near future, as noted by a college professor and prison administrator.
9
2
THE RUBY KNIGHT, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The second volume in "The Elenium," a fantasy saga.
10
13
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
11
3
22 INDIGO PLACE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.50.) A millionaire wants to buy an heiress's mansion and win her heart.
12 *
4
UNIFICATION, by Jeri Taylor. (Pocket, $4.99.) A "Star Trek" novel.
13
24
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
14
15
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four tales of late-night horror.
15
5
POSSESSION, by A. S. Byatt. (Vintage, $12.) A pair of British academics pursue the relationship between two Victorian poets.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
29
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
21
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
3
107
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
4
1
IN A CHILD'S NAME, by Peter Maas. (Pocket, $5.99.) The story of a husband who murdered his wife and of the custody battle over their son.
5
422
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
6
5
A LIFE ON THE ROAD, by Charles Kuralt. (Ivy, $5.99.) The memoirs of the television newscaster.
7
22
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
8
6
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
9
37
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
10 *
1
THE NEW RUSSIANS, by Hedrick Smith. (Avon, $12.50.) A former Moscow correspondent surveys the profound changes in the Soviet Union during the past 15 years; an updated edition.
11 *
51
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
17
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
10
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
6
UNNATURAL SELECTIONS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
4
2
A SOUTHERN BELLE PRIMER, by Maryln Schwartz. (Doubleday, $10.) A guide to propriety and protocol below the Mason-Dixon line; humor.
5 *
71
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Vintage Hollywood, Hollywood's Passion
Hollywood types are better known as collectors of fine art than as collectors of artifacts of Hollywood's past.
Yet many of the most impressive holdings of movie memorabilia are owned by Hollywood's own.
Most such collections are off limits to the public.
But those who delight in ogling movie paraphernalia have several alternatives.
They can visit Planet Hollywood, the hipper-than-thou new restaurant and bar at 140 West 57th Street, which is crammed with artifacts from Hollywood.
Or they can head for Sotheby's and Christie's East to view the contents of several auctions featuring movie-related items.
The sales begin tomorrow at Christie's East and end at Sotheby's on Dec. 19.
At Sotheby's, items up for bidding include Paul Henried's mock passport in "Casablanca" and Munchkin costumes from "The Wizard of Oz." Christie's offerings range from the "Citizen Kane" script used by Orson Welles to posters of "King Kong" and "Dracula."


'A Christmas Carol,' but Not the Same Old Thing
WHEN Emily Mann took over last season as artistic director of the McCarter, a theater with a certain stuffy image, it became instantly clear that there would be some changes made.
In Ms.
Mann's staging of "The Glass Menagerie," the confines of a gauzy tenement apartment were suddenly opened up.
Then, a tough new play by David Rabe proved unsettling for many.
And Ms.
Mann's penchant for purposeful statements and multicultural diversity was reflected in a musical about a black girl's coming of age in the 1950's, a revamped play about the slaughter of Indians and buffaloes and a recent work about a prep school in South Africa.


The Eagles Are Here, and the Giants Are Endangered
The Giants' season, says Lawrence Taylor, has been a disaster.
But the Giants have a chance on Sunday to gain pride and respectability and keep their faint playoff hopes alive when they play the Philadelphia Eagles, the ultimate hard-nosed pro football team.
The problem with the Giants, said Pepper Johnson, the inside linebacker, is that the leaders are leading but the followers are not following.
Taylor, the Giants' lustrous outside linebacker, disagreed.


Smith Trial Displays the Strengths And Weaknesses of Cool Prosecutor
For the past week, as the rape trial of William K. Smith has saturated the airwaves, Moira K. Lasch has been perhaps the most widely watched, discussed, analyzed and second-guessed lawyer in America.
Yet all this attention seems to have changed her working style not one whit.
Mrs.
Lasch has not granted any interviews since the start of the case.
But on public display, thanks to the single television camera in the corner of Judge Mary E. Lupo's courtroom here, is the prosecutor whom local lawyers have come to know, with all her strengths and weaknesses.


'Messiahs,' 'Nutcrackers' And Holiday Carols
IN the Meredith Willson musical "Here's Love," Kris Kringle finds that the appearance of pine cones and holly berries makes the season feel like Christmas.
On the concert scene the "Messiah" and the "Nutcracker" are more likely heralds.
Those who follow Connecticut Ballet Theater to the State University of New York at Purchase, for instance, can catch the Tchaikovsky favorite in the company's eighth annual production, featuring original choreography by Brett Raphael and a cast of 60.
Performance times today are 1 and 5 P.M.
The company will bring the ballet to the University of Bridgeport at the same hours on Dec. 28 and 29.
The Purchase reservations number is (914) 251-6200; for University of Bridgeport tickets, call 331-8292.


Where to Find a Full Meal On Weeknights After 10
IF Cinderella had lived in Westchester, chances are her coach would have turned into a pumpkin long before midnight.
County residents who attempt to dine after 10 P.M. on weeknights often find their favorite restaurants closed or shutting their kitchens for the night.
Those accustomed to Manhattan's late-night dining opportunities can be discouraged at settling for fast-food meals or takeout from an all-night supermarket.
For those who missed the early train out of Grand Central and aren't looking forward to foraging among the forlorn contents of their refrigerators, or for those who want to socialize with colleagues from Open School Nights or community meetings, there
are
possibilities.
Here is a selected list of restaurants offering a dinner or late-night food menu past 10 o'clock.
Not all of them provide an Epicurean experience, but they do offer table service and freshly prepared meals.
Be forewarned: although managers and maitre d'hotels vouched for their hours, it's best to phone to confirm them.
One of the most reliable sources for home-style Italian food is the Pizza and Brew chain of family restaurants.
The kitchen offers the full menu until 11 P.M.
Patrons can choose from a variety of pizzas or pasta dishes starting at $6.95, with meat dishes like veal parmigiana starting at $10.45.
There is also a wide selection of desserts.
These restaurants are countywide: in Scarsdale at 851 Central Park Avenue (472-1032); in White Plains at 85 Knollwood Road (946-5211); in Rye Brook at 136 Ridge Street (937-2511); in Thornwood at 1060 Broadway (747-1505); in Bedford Hills at 747 North Bedford Road (666-9222), and in Croton-on-Hudson on South Riverside Avenue (271-6608).
Another possibility for pizza is Pizzeria Uno at 4 Martine Avenue in White Plains (948-8191).
Pizzas cost $3.95 to $10.95, depending on toppings.
Other choices include chicken fajitas, lasagna and other pasta dishes, rib and chicken plates, burgers and other sandwiches, with most items costing $3.95 to $9.95.
For Mexican food, Pancho's &amp; Gringo's at 666 Lexington Avenue (at Routes 172 and 128) in Mount Kisco (666-9173) has a dinner menu that includes fajitas, enchiladas and shrimp dishes.
Prices are mostly around $10.
For a late-night craving for tandoor-style chicken or shrimp, curries and biryani dishes, Malabar Hills, at 145 East Main Street in Elmsford (347-7890), offers a full menu through 11 o'clock.
Diners can choose from Indian breads and appetizers as well as main courses, which cost $11 to $18.
Another Indian restaurant whose kitchen remains open is Abhilash at 30 Division Street in New Rochelle (235-8390).
There is a wide variety of vegetarian and curry dishes as well as seafood, fish and tandoor-style shrimp and lobster.
Prices are $10.95 to $21.95.
Not surprisingly, many of the restaurants that offer a dinner option after 10 P.M. are casual hangouts for residents and office workers.
Oliver's at 15 South Broadway in White Plains (761-6111) features steaks, hamburgers and other sandwiches from $4.95 to $10.95.
Cobblestone, on Anderson Hill Road in Purchase (253-9678), next door to the Purchase Fire Department, offers a variety of burgers, quiches and specialty sandwiches like grilled chicken breast.
The menu also features appetizer finger foods like mozzarella sticks and chicken wings and desserts like cakes and pies.
Burgers start at $3.50, with chicken dishes starting at $8.95.
There is also Tumbledown's at 7 Pondfield Road in Bronxville (779-6699), which offers steak sandwiches, soups, buffalo wings, hamburgers and Cajun shrimp on its late-night menu.
Prices range from $3.95 to $8.95.
Those who enjoy late-night meals in a casual cozy setting can try Isabel's Cafe at 61 Main Street in Tarrytown (631-9819).
Besides hamburgers and other sandwiches, there is also a wide variety of pasta, seafood, chicken and steak entrees, as well as stuffed potatoes.
Prices are $4.95 for the burgers to $10.95 and up for the chicken and pasta.
In a similarly relaxed style, the Rockwells chain of casual restaurants is a standby for reasonable meals.
Besides the inevitable burgers, pasta and sandwiches, there is also fish, barbecued chicken and ribs and daily fish and pasta specials.
Prices begin at $5.50 for burgers and chicken-breast sandwiches, with pastas starting at $9.95 and fish dishes starting at $10.95.
There is also a selection of desserts.
These restaurants are in Tuckahoe at 16 Depot Square (961-7744); in Bedford Hills at 728 Bedford Road (666-0099); in Greenburgh at 718 Central Avenue (725-8240) and in White Plains at 1205 Mamaroneck Avenue (761-6697).
Another possibility is the Ragtime Cafe at 175 Main Street in White Plains (328-9411), but it is closed for dinner on Mondays.
There is a selection of veal, chicken, seafood and steak entrees until 11 P.M., with prices from $13.95 to $17.95.
Similarly, Craven's at 56 Pondfield Road in Bronxville (337-3940) features such dishes as steak, salmon, pork, seafood and chicken on a dinner menu that has prices ranging from $12 to $17.
Treetops at the Holiday Inn at 125 Tuckahoe Road in Yonkers (476-4446) offers a fixed-price menu of $23.50 that includes appetizer, salad, main course, dessert and coffee, as well as an a la carte choice of fish, seafood, steak, chicken and pasta.
There are also burgers and other sandwiches.
Prices are $7.50 for lighter selections, $9.50 and up for dinner entrees.
To indulge in more formal fare, there is Bayfield's at the Hudson River Inn and Conference Center at 321 North Highland Avenue in Ossining (762-5600).
It offers such dishes as rack of lamb, linguine puttanesca and salmon and appetizers like escargots, shrimp and scallops and mozzarella and tomatoes.
Prices are $12.95 to $18.95.
Because this is a conference center, there is the possibility that the restaurant might not be open if there are no meetings scheduled.
Be sure to call first.
No listing of late-night eateries would be complete without diners.
Two draw customers from around the county: Mont Parnasse at 824 Central Avenue in Scarsdale (723-1899) offers hamburgers, other sandwiches, pasta, seafood, chicken and other dishes.
Prices start at about $2.95 for burgers, rising to $8.95 for chicken marsala and $9.95 for seafood.
At the ElDorado at 55 Main Street in Elmsford (592-6197), patrons can choose anything from breakfast items like waffles, omelets and pancakes to hot sandwiches, steaks, pasta and hamburgers.
Prices start at $3.25 for waffles, with most main dishes costing $8 to $15.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
THE HYDROGEN JUKEBOX Selected Writings of Peter Schjeldahl, 1978-1990.
Edited by MaLin Wilson.
University of California, $29.95.


As Flu Makes Its Way to L.I., Doctors Fear an Epidemic
WHEN Susan Starr of Syosset crawled into bed over the Thanksgiving weekend with a fever, chills, aching muscles and an upset stomach, she knew that she had flu.
"When I called my internist, he told me it sounded like the flu and there was no medication that would help," she said.
"He said that I should just take Tylenol, drink a lot of liquids and stay in bed."


Vocal Variety


Brain Surgery For Protest Movement
My compliments on the tragic lobotomy feature "Lingering Effects of Lobotomies of 40's and 50's"  [ Nov. 3 ] .
It's a story that for too long a time has been relegated to the dustbin of history.
Especially deplorable was the use of lobotomies to tranquilize thousands of battle-fatigued emotionally broken veterans of World War II who crowded the psychiatric wards of Army hospitals.
This so-called behavior-modifying procedure finally came to an end in the early 1950's, leaving a lobotomy wasteland littered with some 50,000 human "retreads," many of whom slid into a permanent vegetable state.
But there is a sequel to the lobotomy story.
In the mid-70's it became known as psychosurgery.
It was performed through the implantation of very thin electrodes into certain sections of the brain, the amygdala region, where "bad" brain cells, targeted by electrocephalogram readings and presumed associated with violent behavior, were burned out with an electrical charge.


100th for Park In Adirondacks
The Adirondack Park, largest state park in the contiguous United States, was first established by the State Legislature in 1892 with over a million acres of public and private land.
It has grown to encompass 6 million acres -- far larger than Yosemite or Yellowstone -- and remains an unusual blend of public land set aside as protected wilderness, and private property under restrictive zoning and development constraints.
Come January, the park turns 100 years old, and a full year of special events has been planned.
Exhibits, fairs, festivals, hikes, lectures and performances will be offered in a centennial celebration that will unfold throughout 1992 in communities inside the park as well as others across the state.


Biking for the Sheer Pain of It
ON a sunny morning last March, we were skimming across the central Florida landscape at 21 miles an hour.
The 10 of us were moving along in two parallel files of five.
I was trying hard not to stare at the wheel a foot or so in front of mine.
I remembered what Mike Walden had said: Keep your eyes up and on the road ahead.
Rely on your peripheral vision to keep from running over the fellow in front of you.
I had come to the Walden School of Cycling to get a taste of bicycle racing.
Mike Walden holds his school from February into April, in weekly segments at Camp Challenge, a youngsters' summer camp in Mount Plymouth, about 20 miles north of Orlando.
There were 85 of us the week I went, ranging in age from college kids to two men in their 70's.
Most campers were in their 30's; men outnumbered women six to one.


CAMPUS LIFE: Middlebury; Seminar Strives To Give Students Economic Insights
Far off the beaten flight path linking Washington, New York and Boston, Middlebury College has never been a mecca for economists, captains of industry or Federal policy makers.
Now, however, 25 economic experts are trekking to this rural New England college to instruct 30 students in the realities of applied economics.
"We're trying to address the gap between theory and policy," said J. Dewey Daane, a former governor of the Federal Reserve Board, professor emeritus of finance at Vanderbilt University and the inaugural holder of Middlebury's Alan R. Holmes Chair in economics.


Door Closers Old and New
STORM and screen doors are usually equipped with automatic closers.
Although closers seldom break, they can be a nuisance if they cause a door to close too quickly or too slowly, and repairs are needed if their mounting brackets loosen or pull away from the door or door frame.
With hydraulic door closers, usually found on solid doors, the speed at which the door closes can be adjusted by turning a screw on the cylinder.
Pneumatic door closers, which feature a long, horizontal tube and are usually found on storm and screen doors, are adjusted by rotating the tube.


CAMPUS LIFE: Georgia; Student, 21, Enjoys New Role As Publisher
Usually, the buyout of a small Southern newspaper isn't big news.
But when James Atticus Hutchinson 3d, a sometime student at the University of Georgia in Athens, bought The Athens Observer, people paid attention.
In part, it was because of his age, 21; in part because Mr.
Hutchinson has started three papers and bought one in less than a year, and in part because he is perceived by some Athens residents as a rich kid who is destroying their weekly newspaper.


SENATORS ASK BAR TO AID TO AMMAN
The Senate Foreign Relations Committee is seeking to block $45 million in American military assistance to Jordan for suspected violations of the international trade embargo against Iraq.
Most of the more than 3,000 tons of goods flowing into Iraq daily by truck from Jordan are food, medical supplies and other humanitarian aid permitted under the United Nations guidelines, Bush Administration officials say.
These totals are just a fraction of daily consumption before the Persian Gulf war.


Echoes From the Dark Past of Soviet Ballet
Two young women who are corps dancers in the Kirov Ballet leave the renowned Soviet company in Washington during an American tour.
The troupe's artistic director says later that the women were drugged and taken to New York to be exploited by a new-found friend.
Insisting that they went voluntarily, the dancers say they became frightened when the director's wife telephoned and sent a car to return them to Washington.
Once there, they say they were kept under surveillance, occasionally in a locked apartment.
The United States State Department and Immigration officials step in after the dancers' friend stages a public confrontation, preventing the Kirov director from taking the women in a van to the Soviet Embassy.
The ballet company is scheduled to leave the next day for its home in St.
Petersburg.
The Washington police intervene.
The New Jersey Ballet then comes to the rescue by hiring the two dancers for its "Nutcracker" production while their request for asylum is pending with the Immigration and Naturalization Service.


'Meet Me in St. Louis': Nostalgia at the Shubert
THE show "Meet Me in St. Louis," which may be the theater's most superfluous musical after "Singin' in the Rain," moseys along for maybe an hour or so before acknowledging that it is indeed a musical.
The title number and "The Boy Next Door" have been dutifully dispensed in the first scene, but the identity and shape of a musical -- a fusion of melody, movement, story, cast and orchestra -- is barely hinted at until the third scene, in a pointless dance, "Skip to My Lou," and then it's hit or miss, mostly miss.


Review/Theater; Evolutionary Comedy
"I eat, I eat, I eat, I eat, I eat, and I never put on weight," announces Denise Stoklos in her exuberantly amusing new performance piece, "Basement."
A sequel to her ensemble work "Casa," which played at La Mama last season, this solo performance offers a more acute portrait of contemporary humanity bumbling through a sterile technologized environment with a Chaplinesque determination and vigor.


Stopping O'Neal Is Arizona's Goal
Louisiana State center Shaquille O'Neal is a marked man.
Certainly, his appearance tonight, when the Tigers try to end Arizona's 64-game home winning streak, the nation's longest, has been marked on local calendars since last season.


TAKING SIDES AGAINST OURSELVES
Anita Hill came forward because of moral principle.
She had the courage to face Clarence Thomas, those white male senators and, indeed, an entire nation because she was also standing before her God.
The reason she is a hero is because she has reminded the nation of its moral conscience.
CHARLOTTE KLEIN
New York, N.Y.


Asia Remembers
To the Editor:
Kazuo Ogura is candid in expressing pique and frustration at the fundamental difference between the psychic make-up of Americans and Japanese (Op-Ed, Nov. 24).
It is true that to improve the dire situation of the United States economy, the United States should shoulder the lion's share of responsibility.
But Mr.
Ogura forgets to mention the trade imbalance and protectionism, in addition to quality control, that account for the seeming invincibility of Japanese industry.


Foreman Ponders What's Ahead
In a month, George Foreman turns 43.
He says that by the time he is 44 -- that's Jan. 10, 1993 -- he will have hung up his extra-large boxing trunks and be back to preaching the gospel at his church in Houston.
If he truly means to retire by 1993, then just what lies ahead for big George as the clock ticks down?


New Dress Code For Fans of Bears
Professional football isn't known as a genteel event, but the Chicago Bears have decided to institute a dress code the team says will make games a little nicer to watch.
Starting today against Green Bay, fans wearing clothing with obscene messages or gestures will not be welcome in Soldier Field.


Streetscapes: St. Mary's Episcopal Church; A Demur on Designation, With a Decided Difference
WHEN building owners show up at Landmarks Preservation Commission hearings, those who favor designation usually say they think landmarking is great and there should be more designations.
Those who oppose it often say that they don't want their buildings included, that there are too many landmarks.
The Rev.
Robert Castle gave things an unusual twist when he testified in July regarding his church, St.
Mary's Episcopal, at 521 West 126th Street, between Old Broadway and Amsterdam Avenue.
His congregation is planning an ambitious restoration of its 1908 Carrere &amp; Hastings building.


'Meet Me in St. Louis': Nostalgia at the Shubert
THE show "Meet Me in St. Louis," which may be the theater's most superfluous musical after "Singin' in the Rain," moseys along for maybe an hour or so before acknowledging that it is indeed a musical.
The title number and "The Boy Next Door" have been dutifully dispensed in the first scene, but the identity and shape of a musical -- a fusion of melody, movement, story, cast and orchestra -- is barely hinted at until the third scene, in a pointless dance, "Skip to My Lou," and then it's hit or miss, mostly miss.
Actually, the beloved 1944 movie wasn't so much a musical as a swell story with knockout songs and stars.
Inflating it for the proscenium -- the perverse reversal of the usual process wherein a stage work is blown up for the screen -- was not so much a labor of love as a labor lost.


Maxwell Saga: Bad Accounting Aided Fraud
Just how easy is it to steal from a company subject to Britain's notoriously lax accounting rules?
First it was Polly Peck, the fruit company with the disappearing assets.
Now it is the empire of Robert Maxwell, the late press baron, from which huge sums of money were siphoned.
International investors have always known that Britain's accounting rules allowed companies, especially acquisitive ones, to conceal facts that would be disclosed in this country.
It is impossible to determine whether a British company's reported profits came from operations or from sales of assets, or to ascertain whether the assumptions used in valuing assets were reasonable.
Transactions between related companies, rightly put under the microscope under American rules, are all but ignored in Britain.


Japanese Think They Owe Apology and Are Owed One on War, Poll Shows
Fifty years after the outbreak of war, Japanese say more strongly than Americans that both sides owe each other apologies for the attacks that began and ended the conflict, according to a poll by The New York Times, CBS News and the Tokyo Broadcasting System.
The poll showed further that the two former enemies still view the lessons of war differently, and that there exists in both countries -- but especially in Japan -- some sense of enduring grievance that the hostilities were never entirely resolved.


Miss Silberstein To Wed in 1992
Dr. and Mrs.
Charles M. Silberstein of St.
James, L.I., and Lugano, Switzerland, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Leigh Silberstein, to Ari Jordan Spar, a son of Rabbi Dr.
Elliott T. Spar of St.
James and Natanya, Israel, and the late Sondra Spar.
The wedding is planned for December 1992.
Miss Silberstein, 22 years old, is studying hotel management at L'Ecole Les Roches in Crans-Montana, Switzerland.
Her father is the president of the Nadent Group in Islip, L.I., a dental and health consultant to the insurance industry.


Mutual Funds; A Cautionary Note on Bonds
The National Association of Securities Dealers has issued a cautionary memo to its members, many of whom are urging investors whose certificates of deposit have recently expired to invest the proceeds in bond mutual funds to reap higher yields.
There is nothing inherently wrong with persuading a customer to exchange one investment for another, the N.A.S.D. said, provided there is full and fair disclosure of the differences between the two products.


Ms. Schlesinger to Marry in March
Mr. and Mrs.
Harris Schlesinger of Westbury, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Eileen Carol Schlesinger to Howard Evan Cotton, the son of Janet F. Cotton of New York and the late Justice Wallace R. Cotton.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Schlesinger, 36 years old, is an editor at Pharos Books in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the State University of New York at Buffalo.
Her mother, Evelyn Schlesinger, is an English teacher at Great Neck North High School on Long Island.
Her father is a video producer and director in New York.


Handbag or Bag?
To the Editor: Women who plan to travel on Air France with carry-on luggage only should be aware that Air France counts a woman's handbag as one of the two pieces of luggage permitted aboard.
Thus, on a recent flight to Paris from Kennedy Airport, a man with two full sized carry-ons was permitted to board while I, who had one carry-on, a small tote and a normal size handbag, was stopped because in the view of Air France I had three pieces of luggage.
On another Paris flight from Newark I was again stopped for the same reason.
In both instances personnel enforcing this strict policy were both officious and unpleasant.


'You Can Get . . .'
It has been a quarter-century since Arlo Guthrie gave a generation "Alice's Restaurant" to protest the war by, and now the 44-year-old folk singer is passing the hat.
The song and the movie it inspired told of how Mr.
Guthrie was disqualified for the draft because he had been convicted of littering in Stockbridge, Mass., while helping a restaurateur friend, Alice Brock, dispose of trash in the old church that she and her husband were converting into a residence.
Alice, who today works nearby as a waitress, and the church became icons of the era.
Now Mr.
Guthrie wants to buy the church, which has had several owners since Aquarius dawned, and use it as headquarters for the Guthrie Center, a charitable organization.
But the singer, who is about to release his first album in a decade, says he can't do it alone.
He hopes to raise $300,000 with the help of people who believe the church is worth preserving as a symbol of the spirit of the 60's.
"The same spirit is still moving people around the world," he said.


Miss Mannix Has Wedding
Kathryn Marie Mannix, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Mannix Jr. of Virginia Beach, Va., was married there yesterday to Gregory Scott Altznauer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Altznauer of Old Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Scott Griffin officiated at the First Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Altznauer, 28 years old, is the assistant to the director of Babcock Galleries in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her parents own Mannix Associates, a real-estate investment company in Virginia Beach and Washington.


World Markets; New Questions About Monetary Union
The 12 members of the European Community will meet this week in Maastricht, the Netherlands, for their crucial session on monetary, economic and political union.
The task of the delegates will not be made easier by the fact that stock markets in Europe have been falling and the European Monetary System has been under stress because of the weakening American dollar, the rallying German mark and Germany's persistently high interest rates.
The pain in the stock markets, many of which have fallen by 4 to 9 percent recently, and the high interest rates throughout the monetary system are samples of the rough side of monetary and economic union.


In the Nation; Made By the Media
David Duke, a Louisiana State Representative, announced the other day that he will be a Presidential candidate.
This effrontery caused The Washington Post to give him a two-column headline on page 1, with a photo inside.
The New York Times ran his picture on the front page and again within the paper.
Thus, this con man who exists only to run for office continues to be a made-by-media star.
He has been, and will be again, prominent on national television, gets ample space in news magazines, and can get a headline anytime by repeating one of the racist and/or reactionary slogans to which the press responds like a mule eating briars.


Gillian Panczyk Is to Marry in April
Raymond K. Panczyk of Bethesda, Md., and Audrey Maurer of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Gillian Leigh Panczyk to Robert James Van Schaick, the son of Dorcas S. Van Schaick of Center Valley, Pa., and the last Robert I. Van Schaick.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Panczyk, 29 years old, is an account executive in the global securities services division of the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown Univeristy and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is the director of program support for the Peace Corps in Washington.
Her mother is a foreign language teacher at Hunter College High School in New York.


Jamie Klein and Robert Kapel Wed
Jamie Joy Klein, an assistant district attorney in Brooklyn, and Dr.
Robert Chaprack Kapel, a resident in internal medicine, were married last evening.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Kapel, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Rochester and Boston University School of Law.
She is a daughter of Suzanne Klein of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Irwin Klein of New York.
Her father, a lawyer, is the president of Harfay Management Corporation, a New York real-estate company.
Her mother is an actress in television commercials.


Wilkins Outlines Plan For Let's Make a Deal
If Gerald Wilkins needed extra incentive this season, the Knicks have given it to him.
Wilkins, who is in the final year of a $725,000 contract, is looking for a new, multiyear deal from the Knicks.


Heather Hild Weds
Heather Elizabeth Hild, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Hild of Rye, N.Y., was married yesterday to Nathaniel Bartlett Atwater Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathaniel B. Atwater of Little Compton, R.I.
The Rev.
David Uhl officiated at Rye Presbyterian Church.
A graduate of Skidmore College, Mrs.
Atwater, 25 years old, is the marketing manager for Hild Sails on City Island, the Bronx, a sail manufacturer headed by her father.
Mr.
Atwater, 29, graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis.
He is a sales representative for the MCI Communications Corporation in Rye Brook, N.Y.
His father is a retired professor of English at Southeastern Massachusetts University in North Dartmouth.


INSIDE
Union's Fiscal Shift
A major municipal labor leader said it is time to consider letting the Financial Control Board oversee New York City's finances.
Page 44.
In Prisons, Double-Bunks
Out of space and awash in inmates, New York State is installing 3,000 emergency bunks.
Page 52.
The Stone-Faced Prosecutor
Many who know her describe Moira K. Lasch, the prosecutor in the Smith rape case, as brilliant, methodical and unemotional in court.
Page 36.


WESTCHESTER BOOKCASE
Paris Bistro Cooking By Linda Dannenberg Clarkson Potter. 160 pages. $30.


Tech Notes; Lasers for the Dentist
Much medical surgery these days begins not with the decisive slice of a scalpel but with the deft application of a strand of light -- a continuous-beam laser that incises with less bleeding and less post-surgery discomfort.
But such lasers work essentially by burning and thus are inappropriate in some applications -- routine dentistry, for one.
But Sunrise Technologies Inc., a four-year-old medical laser company in Fremont, Calif., has made the heat problem moot by turning the continuous beam into a series of pulses that occur too quickly to burn.
The company's neodymium yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser, called the dLASE 300, pulses for one six-thousandth of a second at different speeds along a quartz optical fiber one-third of a millimeter in diameter through a handpiece and out the tip. (Quartz can accommodate the bursts of light without damage.)


A Newcomer Meets the Hit-Making Machine
There are household names.
Then there is Russ Irwin, a 23-year-old singer-songwriter from Dix Hills, L.I., whose ballad "My Heart Belongs to You" recently slogged its way up and down the charts.
To promote the song and his debut album, "Russ Irwin," he has thus far played on the "Tonight" show, appeared briefly on ABC's "In Concert," taped two videos, endured a round of interviews with teen-age fan magazines and made personal appearances at a numbing litany of radio stations.
"Wichita Falls? In Texas? I was there," Mr.
Irwin says over lunch in a midtown Manhattan resturaunt, a dusting of makeup from a magazine photo shoot clinging to his face.
He is recounting a recent two-week promotional odyssey to radio stations.
"I've been to Seattle, L.A., Chicago, Atlanta, Nashville, Chattanooga, Dallas, Abilene, Waco, Rockford."


Managing; Don't Forget the White Males
NANCY GHEEN, the director of human resources at the Monsanto Company, is sure that white men at the company are never denied promotions in favor of less-qualified women or minorities.
But she's having a hard time getting white men to believe that.
"They don't notice when six white guys get promoted," she said.
"They notice the one black, or the woman, and they say, 'These are the only folks getting ahead.' Sometimes I have to physically drag them to the bulletin board to prove it's not so."


OLD MONEY, NEW NEEDS
I am sure that instances abound where Brooke Astor's personal participation has made a critical difference; those who enjoyed Judith Miller's article "Old Money, New Needs" (Nov. 17) may find a recent one of particular interest.
While visiting one of the apartments she helped to provide for homeless families, Mrs.
Astor was struck by the absence of furniture necessary to establish a decent home; the families had been living in welfare hotels and, of course, owned very little.
In short order, she pulled together public and private funding to establish our "Furnish a Future" effort, which is now helping to furnish 1,200 apartments annually, mostly though donations of good, used furniture (we pick up for free).


California Wineries to Stop Using Lead Caps
California, by far the nation's largest wine-producing state, has dropped legal action against the industry in exchange for an agreement by most wineries here to abandon the virtually universal practice of capping wine bottles with lead foil.
The settlement, which was announced at a news conference on Friday by Attorney General Dan Lungren, also requires the California wine industry to spend $900,000 in penalties and on a consumer education campaign.


Giddyap Get-Ups
SUIT UP IN WESTERN GEAR and you'll be right at home on the new fashion range.
For next spring, designers in Milan, Paris and New York have delved into the lore of America's Wild West.
Cowboy gear and Indian dress have inspired a trove of showy accessories, as well as whole outfits meant to be worn on city and suburban streets by day or at lively nightspots after hours.


July Wedding For Hetty Smith
Dr. and Mrs.
Hugo Dunlap Smith of Wyndmoor, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Helen Evans Smith to Richard Cormack Nerod, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Nerod of Rockport, Tex., and Miami.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Smith, who is known as Hetty, is studying for an M.B.A. at Cornell University.
She graduated from Yale University.
Her father is a pediatrician on the staff of the Albert Einstein Medical Center and her mother, Helen Smith, is an assistant director of admissions at the Germantown Friends School, both in Philadelphia.


Science Fiction vs. the Mainstream
To the Editor:
Richard Bernstein's insightful essay brings well-deserved attention to the work of Philip K. Dick ("The Electric Dreams of Philip K. Dick," Nov. 3).
But I am puzzled by Mr.
Bernstein's dismissal of science fiction.
He refers to it as "sci-fi," a term of derision, and suggests that the term "science fiction" is an oxymoron.
Yet he argues that Dick is a fine writer whose visions of the modern condition were prescient.
If that is so, what does it say of the science fiction community, which published, supported and honored Philip K. Dick when the "mainstream" rejected or ignored him?
Those of us who read science fiction rather than mock it had the pleasure of discovering Dick's dark visions and wonderful prose 20 years ago.
THOMAS DIETZ Grand Isle, Vt.


Are You Penny-Wise? Sports-Foolish? Hark!
People who are active in sports can always use new gear.
But in these recessionary times, it is difficult for many people to justify having -- or asking for -- more than the bare essentials.
Fear not, your holiday gift-giving need not be limited.
Here are some ideas for presents that go beyond the basics of a putter for golf or a racquet for tennis.
And, they will allow you to give more than a pair of sweat socks to the weekend athlete(s) in your life.
These items are not required for their sports, but they can add to the enjoyment.
GOLF No Stone Unturned: Great Holes Surveyed


OLD MONEY, NEW NEEDS
As a great admirer of Brooke Astor's for some years, I am aware of her many philanthropic endeavors.
However, I was a bit disturbed by a statement Mrs.
Astor made in response to the suggestion that her 90th birthday be held at Grand Central Terminal: "Though the proceeds would be spent on renovating this magnificent structure, I just can't imagine celebrating . . . in a place that recently ejected the homeless."


Political Prisoner's Novel Reaches Kenya's Shelves
Five years ago, Wahome Mutahi was writing his Sunday column in the newsroom of The Nation newspaper when the secret police stopped him in midsentence and hauled him around to the local precinct.
Mr.
Mutahi, whose easygoing, common man touch had long made him Kenya's most popular newspaper columnist, spent 30 days in prison without being charged before being forced to plead guilty to subversion.
A fictional account of life as a political prisoner, written by Mr.
Mutahi before his arrest and revised afterward, appeared in the bookshops here two months ago.
"Three Days on the Cross" became an instant best seller.
It is unusual for a Kenyan book to sell 4,000 copies in a year; Mr.
Mutahi's book sold that number in six weeks.
The publisher, Heinemann Kenya, is now rushing out a second printing.


Christine Shields, Lawyer, to Wed
Christine Patricia Shields, a lawyer, and Timothy Gage Corrigan, an accountant, are engaged to be married in June.
Miss Shields, 25 years old, is an associate at the Morristown, N.J., law firm of Shanley &amp; Fisher.
She is a summa cum laude graduate of Manhattan College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is a daughter of Patricia L. Shields of West Brighton, S.I., and the late Martin T. Shields, a senior vice president of Staten Island University Hospital.
Her mother is a registered nurse at the hospital.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The vanity tops in my bathrooms are badly stained.
It looks as if the marks were caused by cigarette burns and hairpins that rusted on the surface.
Can you recommend anything to remove these marks and stains without damaging the vanity tops?
A.
You do not say what the tops are made of, but I assume that they are covered with plastic laminate.
Rust stains can be sometimes removed with a chemical rust remover.
If that does not get all the stains off, try a scouring powder or rubbing with an abrasive pad like the kind sold for Teflon pots.
Burn marks are probably not removable, unless they are very shallow.
You can try rubbing off the scorched material with the same type of abrasive pad, but if the burn has penetrated all the way through the surface pattern, it will still leave an off-color stain.


Rochester Schools Ban Military Recruiters
Students in city schools will no longer get a pitch to join the Army on their way to the cafeteria.
The city school district board last week voted to ban military recruiters from its schools because of the Department of Defense's policy against enlisting gay and lesbian recruits.


Factional Fighting in Somalia Terrorizes and Ruins Capital
Over the last three weeks this seaside eastern African capital has descended into a frenzy of violence, foreign medical and relief workers say.
Rival tribal factions are killing and maiming men, women and children indiscriminately in a civil war that has brought the country to a state of virtual anarchy since the ouster of the country's long-ruling President in January.
At least 4,000 people have been killed and more than 9,000 have been wounded, the workers said today, adding that more than 90 percent of the victims were noncombatants.
The violence is at a level rare even for this country long troubled by civil strife, the workers and diplomats say.


The Mysterious Scent of White Truffles
LATE November is the time that white truffles arrive from Italy.
Eaten raw, shaved over pasta or risotto, they are one of the great treats of the holiday season.
My introduction to white truffles took place in Venice several years ago.
A friend who was not an adventurous eater but actually a rather cantankerous companion at the dinner table, had ordered fettuccine as a first course.
When the waiter, who spoke no English, proceeded to grate something that looked like wood shavings on his plate, he tried to wave him aside, but to no avail.
After the waiter had gone, my friend methodically pushed the pieces aside, lining them up with his fork around the rim of his plate.


Lobotomy as Ancestor Of Psychosurgery
I am writing to express my outrage at "Lingering Effects of Lobotomies of 40's and 50's"  [ Nov. 3 ] .
The article gives the impression that lobotomies were not performed in this country after the advent of neuroleptic drugs.
This is not true.
They were just given different names under the umbrella term "psychosurgery," stereotaxis and cingulotomies among them, which use electrode needles to destroy the nerve connections in the brain's frontal lobes.
Cingulotomies, used primarily for so-called obsessive-compulsive disorders, can be read about in The Harvard Medical School Health Letter from April 1990.
As late as 1982, in the December issue of The American Journal of Psychiatry, the authors offer tribute to Moniz -- the winner of the 1949 Nobel Prize in medicine for his contributions in lobotomies -- citing psychosurgery as a "safe and effective treatment for obsessional neurosis." Dr.
Peter Breggin covers these procedures in his newest book, "Toxic Psychiatry."


'Never Give Up'
Her memories of a feisty grandmother inspired Pat York, a British-born photographer and magazine writer, to produce GOING STRONG (Arcade/Little, Brown, $35), an album of photographs and interviews with 70 men and women, all of them going strong after passing their 75th birthdays.
Ms.
York's work will amuse those who have reached that golden age and inspire those who aspire to achieve it.
Two-thirds of her subjects are Americans; the rest are British.
The majority are household names: George Abbott (the oldest at 104), Barbara Cartland, Julia Child, John Kenneth Galbraith, Sir John Gielgud, Gene Kelly, Burgess Meredith and Ronald Reagan, to name a few.
Equally fascinating in their own ways are John Robert (Rabbit) Close, a Yorkshire trader who will buy and sell anything in which there's a profit; Mabel James, a cloakroom attendant in a London nightclub; Lees Meadowcraft, the senior guide at an English castle; C. A. Scott, one of the owners of an Atlanta daily newspaper, and Sidney Smith, an English gardener.
Ms.
York's camera is more uniformly successful than her tape recorder; the photographs, rendered in full color, are all striking.
A life of endless rounds of golf, bridge playing and television watching is not these oldsters' cup of tea.
Work in behalf of worthy causes, second careers, continuing in their old professions are their choices.
As Lord Lew Grade, the 84-year-old British film producer, puts it: "The word
retirement
should be removed from the dictionary.
Keep on working, remain active, in whatever field you choose.
Never give up.
It's important to do something you love."


For San Francisco, a Scrub Turns Into a Bonus Named Bono
All of a sudden, his mailbox is full of fan letters, his phone won't stop ringing, his wife thinks she's watching Joe Montana and his quiet moments in the locker room are gone.
But Steve Bono kind of likes it.


English Import


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
WISDOM OF THE 90s By George Burns with Hal Goldman. Putnam, $12.95.


An Ailing Alzado Misses Court Date
Lyle Alzado, the former defensive lineman who is suffering from cancer, was too sick to make a court appearance today on an allegation that he assaulted a deputy marshal, his lawyer said.
"He has good days and bad days, but he's not out of the woods," Shapiro said.


Perspectives: A Converter Looks Back; Recasting Rental Apartments as Co-ops
PEOPLE have the wrong notion of Francis Greenburger if they think of him as a co-op converter.
He says he hasn't been in that business for five years.
Being in
that
business means being a buyer of rental property for conversion into co-ops.
The downturn in the market for New York City co-ops, a series of New York State regulatory steps, and tax policies, not to mention the Tax Reform Act of 1986, soured Mr.
Greenburger's taste for acquisitions.
He hasn't bought a building for conversion since 1986.


Smith Trial Displays the Strengths And Weaknesses of Cool Prosecutor
For the past week, as the rape trial of William K. Smith has saturated the airwaves, Moira K. Lasch has been perhaps the most widely watched, discussed, analyzed and second-guessed lawyer in America.
Yet all this attention seems to have changed her working style not one whit.
Mrs.
Lasch has not granted any interviews since the start of the case.
But on public display, thanks to the single television camera in the corner of Judge Mary E. Lupo's courtroom here, is the prosecutor whom local lawyers have come to know, with all her strengths and weaknesses.


Giants Activate Howard
Erik Howard, the Giants' Pro Bowl nose tackle, was activated today from injured reserve after he had missed 10 games with a back injury that required surgery.
To make room, the Giants placed John Washington, who had been starting for Howard, on injured reserve.
The back spasms that struck Howard in training camp came from a herniated disk pressing on a sciatic nerve.
He underwent surgery on Sept. 27 to remove part of the disk and returned to practice on Wednesday.


Red Wings Win in Overtime
The Red Wing's Bob Probert trying to maneuver puck with his skateas the Rangers' Randy Moller moved in on him Friday in the first period.
The Red Wings won, 6-5. (Associated Press)


Why Should    We    Pull Them Up?
To the Editor:
Women and blacks who object to being stereotyped may well take issue with the blanket assertion of Arthur A. Fletcher, chairman of the United States Commission on Civil Rights, that "successful blacks and women should spend more time pulling up those on the margin." ("Hanging On to Diversity in the 90's," Managing, Nov. 24.) I do not claim special privileges on account of being a woman in the workplace nor do I accept special responsibilities on this basis.
To whatever extent I count as "successful," I intend to continue using purely professional criteria, rather than gender, in deciding which people "on the margin" to try to "pull up." FELICIA ACKERMAN  Providence, R.I., Nov. 24  The author is a professor of philosophy at Brown University.


New Yorkers, etc.
Most people are convinced that for some unknown reason or unrecognized sin, fate has targeted them.
They know with certainty that if there is only one bore at a party, that bore will inevitably end up with them.
They look at the smiling, seemingly happy faces all around them, they imagine the sparkling conversation and clever quips there, and then their gaze comes back to rest on the dud they're stuck with.
And in a silent refrain, they think: "Why me, what did I do to deserve this?"
The answer is probably nothing, and it's small consolation to know that their bore is very likely not the only one in the room, that others are enduring similar torture.
And it's no consolation to realize that, with holiday parties and social events revving up, the bore-quotient will undoubtedly reach new highs.


In Honor Of Human Spirit
WHISPERING Ronald is at my ear, his voice a wind rushing through an open car window.
I don't understand a word he says.
Who does?
Ed barrels over, insists on demonstrating his hidden-ball trick, which is tucking the basketball under his jersey.
In Ed's league, the trick often works.
And Michael Rice, who, at 6 feet 4 inches and 44 years old, considers himself the physical and spiritual Kareem of this Special Olympics basketball team, reminds Joey Asaro, who tonight will become a national movie star, why they have never lost a game.
"We cheat," Michael said proudly.


Former Hostage Has Seizure After Return to U.S.
The former hostage Alann Steen apparently suffered a seizure shortly after greeting well-wishers at Detroit's airport tonight.
Wayne County Sheriff's Lieut.
Robert McGraw said the 52-year-old Mr.
Steen suffered a seizure immediately after leaving the airport, and was taken to Annapolis Hospital in Wayne, the Associated Press reported.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CHRISTMAS BALL
The Vintage Dance Society of Bloomfield will hold a Victorian Christmas Ball and Military Cotillion on Saturday evening from 8:30 to midnight at Keeney Memorial Hall in Wethersfield.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 24 about political pressures to strengthen the United States economy referred incorrectly to Paul S. Sarbanes, Democrat of Maryland.
He is a Senator, not a Representative.


Alternative Hostels, Where the Price is Right
NOT all hostels in this country are linked to the American Youth Hostel organization.
There is an increasing number of dormitory-like quarters run by owners or leaseholders who get their guests without being listed in directories of the A.Y.H. or the International Youth Hostel Federation.
Foreigners apparently have little difficulty finding alternative hostels, either through word-of-mouth or leaflets picked up at welcome centers near international arrivals buildings.
These hostels may be much like A.Y.H. facilities -- some of them formerly were -- or they may be radically different.
They tend to be in the downtown areas of larger cities rather than on hiking or biking routes.
The core difference is the rules: A.Y.H. visitors usually have chores to do, stay in rooms segregated by sex, observe a curfew and may not take alcoholic drinks onto the premises.
The A.Y.H. pays particular attention to groups traveling together, not so the alternative hostels, which tend to have more foreigners than Americans.
Germans, Australians, Japanese and British were cited by the operators as frequent guests.


Those Undiscovered Forgeries
Readers of Michael Malone's rollicking novel "Foolscap" may not be surprised to hear that he is the head writer for the television soap opera "One Life to Live." "I couldn't resist it," he said in a telephone interview from an ABC studio in Manhattan.
"I think Dickens would have done it. I make up characters and there they are in the flesh. I have my own Shakespeare company!"
Until last spring, Mr.
Malone, who is 49 years old, taught fiction writing at the University of Pennsylvania, where his wife, Maureen Quilligan, a Renaissance scholar, is a professor of English.
Of his seven novels, he says, the setting for "Foolscap" most closely resembles the world he inhabits.
"I've spent my life with academic zanies and they fell together on a canvas," he explained.
"It's a fascinating dramatic time in academia. I wanted to write about a university that was obsessed with political correctness and fame."


Anderson Struggle: 'Desperate to Keep My Brain Alive'
Terry Anderson desperately feared the blindfolds, chains and dark cells of captivity would kill the one thing he had left: his mind.
Tedium and isolation compelled the former hostage to bully and badger both cell mates and captors into turning their bleak surroundings into an eerie oasis of imagination.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 6 about the resignation of Robert J. Koenig as director of the Montclair Art Museum referred incorrectly to the makeup of the museum's board.
Women have served on the board in the past and now make up half its membership.
The error was pointed out in a reader's letter, received at The Times in mid-November; this correction was delayed by the writer's vacation and the need for checking.


Review/Music; Romping In Joplin Folk Opera
Scott Joplin's "Treemonisha," which re-emerged in a semistaged performance at Town Hall on Thursday night, speaks to so many issues that a few bear sorting out.
On its most obvious level, Joplin's 1911 folk opera preserves an image of black culture and its aspirations at the turn of the century.
It is a historical standard against which the progress and regressions of the past 80 years can be measured.


Keeping the Electronic Lifeblood Flowing
While New York City officials announced last month with great fanfare the creation of the first telephone disaster-recovery plan in the nation and quite possibly the world, the plan's authors acknowledged quietly that it was merely a first step and much work remained.
Had it been in place, the plan, developed by Mayor David N. Dinkins's Task Force on Telecommunications and Network Reliability, would have dealt in only a limited way with the four major phone disruptions that rocked the East Coast in the last two years.


Changes in Decision Making
To the Editor:
Thanks for the article "Women Deflate Some Adland Images" (Nov. 17).
The most telling thing is that business decisions are now being made in the ladies' room.
FRANKIE CADWELL  New York, Nov. 20  The author is president of Cadwell Davis Partners, an advertising agency.


Western Civilization
"I'M NOT SURE SOMEBODY FROM LOS ANGELES WOULD have renovated a house in this way," says Henry Smith-Miller, a bicoastal architect who worked for three years with his partner, Laurie Hawkinson, remodeling a 1956 house in the foothills of the Santa Monica Mountains.
"People who are originally from Los Angeles think of escaping from the city. But to our clients, who divide their time between here and New York, this is their paradise."
The breathtaking views -- on a clear day the Hollywood sign seems to sit in the backyard -- and the blooming wildflowers, the sliding glass doors and skylights that open and close like shutters, the commodious decks and pool would indeed make any new arrivals think they'd landed in paradise.
For the architects, however, creating this picture-perfect environment wasn't easy.


Sunday Drinks In Myrtle Beach
Tourists can now get a drink on Sundays in Myrtle Beach, S.C.
A measure permitting Sunday liquor sales in bars and restaurants was approved by voters on Election Day.
Elsewhere in South Carolina, alcohol sales are prohibited from midnight Saturday until 6 A.M.
Monday, unless a county or municipality agrees to allow the purchase of a special $150-a-week license.


Noted With Pleasure
Our Lost Forest Home
A walk in a grove of redwoods leads Jack Weatherford to reflect on the way in which our fascination with forests has shaped our sacred architecture in this excerpt from "Native Roots: How the Indians Enriched America" (Crown).


In Hard Times, Helping Hands for New York's Neediest Cases; Love Story: An Invalid, An 'Angel'
This is a love story about a frail 81-year-old lady and the robust, 26-year-old woman who looks after her.
Dora Goldfarb was living alone in her apartment on the Upper West Side when she fell two years ago and broke her hip.
Afterwards, she could no longer walk.
Sharon Gibson moved in, with her plants and calypso music, to work for the shrunken woman with the wispy gray hair and wasted legs.


Smith Defense Witness Tells of a Meeting the Accuser Didn't Recall
The prosecution rested its case in the William K. Smith rape trial today after calling its 23d witness, and the defense got underway with the testimony of a bartender who says he met with Mr.
Smith's accuser only a few hours before she says the rape occurred.
Judge Mary E. Lupo barred the prosecution from calling an authority on rape trauma syndrome as its final witness.
The Judge ruled that prosecutors had waited too long to declare their intention to call him, and that allowing him to testify would throw off the trial schedule because the defense would need a recess of several days to prepare.
She has promised the jury the case will conclude by Dec. 20.


Soviets Say They Interrogated U.S. P.O.W.'s
Current and former officials of the K.G.B. have said in interviews for an Australian television program that Soviet agents interrogated American servicemen captured in Indochina during the Vietnam War.
The report said some of the interrogations took place after the war ended in 1975 and after Hanoi said all American prisoners had been returned.
Some of the Americans may have been taken to the Soviet Union on regular supply flights from Vietnam, said the Soviet agents interviewed by "Australian 60 Minutes," which is modeled after the CBS News program.
The Australian program was broadcast on Oct. 27, but its assertions were not publicized in the United States until The San Diego Union printed an article about the documentary last Sunday.


TAKING SIDES AGAINST OURSELVES
Bray's article speaks to the heart of the conflict of identity for African-American women, highlighted by Anita Hill's confrontation with Clarence Thomas.
I found her analogy of Hill's situation to Harriet Jacobs's interesting.
However, I do not see, as Bray and Carol Gilligan do, Hill's continuing to work with Thomas as being motivated by an "ethic" of "trying to resolve conflict without breaking connection." Hill's continued connection to Thomas sounds less like a positive ethic than the negative nonchoice of someone who feels overwhelmed by a sense of violation, made worse by the fact that this man was supposed to be -- by virtue of his race and position as her mentor -- on her side.


Some Gifts That Help In Reading The Road
MOST arguments are stupid, but some are dumber than others.
And one of the dumbest involved a red Chevrolet and me and a truly infuriating man in a brown uniform.
This was sometime back, on a pier on Manhattan's West Side.
The Chevy had been towed, and the pier is a sort of elephant's graveyard for all the vehicles that the city's tow trucks carelessly wound and then haul away to languish, if not to die.


QUOTATION OF THE DAY
"World War II is over. It is history. We won. We crushed totalitarianism, and when that was done we helped our enemies give birth to democracies." -- PRESIDENT BUSH  [ 1.5 ]


Sarah Miller To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Miller of New York have announced the engagement of his daughter Sarah Rogers Miller to John Hodges Hart, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. K. Hart of Cedarhurst, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Miller, 27 years old, is also a daughter of the late Nancy McClain Harris Miller.
The future bride graduated from Mary Baldwin College and is an interior decorator at Anne Mullin Interiors in Greenwich, Conn.
Her father is the president of the William B. May Management Corporation, a New York real-estate company.


Style Makers; Nancy Haber, Children's Dress Designer
When a classical harpist moves from Manhattan to Akron, Ohio, where she knows no one except her husband and daughter, what is she to do?
If she's Nancy Haber, she starts designing extravagant silk or velvet dresses for little girls, and hires refugee women from Laos and Vietnam to help her sew.


Gold Tee to Irwin
HALE IRWIN, the three-time United States Open champion and a member of the victorious United States Ryder Cup team, will receive the Gold Tee award at the 1992 dinner of the Metropolitan Golf Writers Association.
The dinner will be held June 24 in Tarrytown, N.Y.


'Veronique': In Poetry Lies Its Key
If "The Double Life of Veronique" seems ambiguous now, think about what the director wanted it to be.
Krzysztof Kieslowski's original idea was to create several slightly different versions of the film, to play in different theaters.
If a viewer saw "Veronique" twice at different places, the story might change like a favorite bedtime story in which a phrase is altered or a scene added or dropped with each telling.
There would be no "right" way to see the film.
The idea was too impractical and expensive to be more than a thought, but the notion suggests the best way to approach the enigmatic story of a Polish woman named Veronika and a French woman named Veronique (both played by Irene Jacob).
The two young women look identical, were born at the same time, never meet, yet share some not-quite-conscious affinity.
They are and are not the same.
Don't even attempt to resolve that paradox, and "The Double Life of Veronique" will work on its own poetic terms.
Try to piece the film together like a jigsaw puzzle, try to make it yield some neat message about identity, and nothing will result except frustration.


This Week: More Cleanup
Take cuttings of deciduous trees and shrubs like privet, rose of Sharon, rose, viburnum, vitex, weigela, forsythia, honeysuckle, hydrangea, mock orange and flowering currant.
Cut shoots from this year's growth into 9-inch lengths, tie them into bundles, label them and then bury them in about six inches of sand outdoors or in a cold frame.
In the spring, take them out, separate them and plant them in nursery rows to grow new plants.
Finish your fall cleanup.
After a killing frost, pull up annuals and cut back perennials to about three inches, putting all debris that is not diseased on the compost pile.
Continue to rake leaves, and add them to the pile.


Jennifer Palter To Wed in June
Jennifer Thorn Palter and Christian Bruce Allan are engaged to be married in June.
Miss Palter, 35 years old, is the staff writer for the university relations office at University of the Pacific in Stockton, Calif.
She is a graduate of Texas A &amp; M University.
She is the daughter of Toni Inman Palter of New York and Dr.
Robert M. Palter of New Britain, Conn.
Her father retired as the Charles Dana Professor of History of Science at Trinity College in Hartford.
Her mother is an associate at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.


The Photographer As Illusionist
To the Editor:
Vicki Goldberg's essay "Fiddling With History in a Cause That Seemed Just"  [ Nov. 17 ]  on the exhibit of Edward Curtis photographs perpetuates stereotypes that have long shaped non-Indian views of Native Americans.
Ms.
Goldberg asserts that Curtis's photographs are "respectful images" and that "no Indian had anything to fear from Curtis." She is incorrect.
And although she acknowledges that Curtis has been "accused of looking at an entire people as a collection of exotica, the primitive remnants left over as curiosities after the frontier was closed," she dismisses this consequence as unimportant.


In Hard Times, Helping Hands
In this recession-dimmed holiday season, most people around the New York region have their own share of troubles.
And many have become numbed to the suffering that has been so pervasive for so long.
Alleviating it seems too daunting.
But those who suffer - and the help they receive from The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund - are no abstractions.
Their stories are as simple as the bond between an elderly woman and her home-care worker, as complicated as the assistance a woman with AIDS needs in preparing her daughter for her death, as stark as the slap of a child's face.
Articles, page 87.


Data Update
BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
Oct. 91
Sept. 91
Oct. 90
New York
3,005
2,491
2,448
New Jersey
2,061
1,364
1,415
Connecticut
1,120
609
782
*2*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*2*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.92
8.86
10.16
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.47
6.51
8.15
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.80
8.75
9.95
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.36
6.40
7.92
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.80
8.72
10.00
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.38
6.44
8.05
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.06
8.99
10.33
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.03
7.03
8.34
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.74
4.82
7.30
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.78
8.78
9.67
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


Acknowledging Sonia Orwell
To the Editor:
Samuel Hynes's review of Michael Shelden's book "Orwell: The Authorized Biography" (Nov. 3) inaccurately states that Bernard Crick's 1980 biography, "George Orwell: A Life," makes no mention of Sonia Orwell, the writer's widow, among the acknowledgments.
In fact, Mr.
Crick's acknowledgments section begins: "Firstly I must thank the late Mrs. Sonia Orwell who in 1972 granted me unrestricted access to all of George Orwell's papers."  CHARLES E. TREVICK Montreal


Heather Saxton Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
David O. Saxton of York, Me., have announced the engagement of their daughter Heather Saxton to John Kadin Silver, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Silver of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Saxton, 27 years old, graduated from the University of Colorado and is a candidate for a master's degree from the Bank Street College of Education.
She is a teacher at the Town School in New York.
Her father is a retired financial consultant.


Walker Directs Seton Hall Victory
Jerry Walker topped his career scoring high for the third straight game by scoring 23 points this afternoon as Seton Hall defeated Iona, 88-72.
Seton Hall (3-1) didn't look good until the second half against Iona (1-3) at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, but its performance was far better than the one it gave Wednesday in an 83-54 loss to North Carolina, its worst home defeat since 1974.


Stop Mooning About and Start Planting
To the Editor:
In "Autumn Investment" (Topics of The Times, Nov. 25), you state that gardeners have little else to spend time on now, other than planting bulbs, and "nothing much to cash in on except the chrysanthemums they put in last April."


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Rye, N.Y. 477,500
40 Franklin Avenue
5-bedroom, 3-bath, 5-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, deck, fireplace, Jacuzzi, patio, taxes $9,788.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 315,000
45 Gainsborough Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 54-year-old colonial; fireplace, dining room, new country kitchen, circular staircase; taxes $4,100.
South Salem, N.Y. 348,000
4 Hastings Court
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; family room, fireplace, deck, formal dining room, Jacuzzi, 3.1 acres; taxes $6,532.
Deep River, Conn. 140,000
197 Westbrook Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 3-year-old cape cod; ceiling fans, wood stove, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $1,861.
East Hartford, Conn. 117,000
38 Laraia Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 63-year-old colonial; sun room, formal dining room, 1-car detached garage; taxes $1,439.
Essex, Conn. 150,000
15 Maple Avenue  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 51-year-old cape cod; living room with fireplace, screened porch, walk to shopping, 0.5 acre; taxes $1,234.
OTHER AREAS Baldwin, L.I. 160,000
627 Baldwin Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $5,200.
Edison, N.J. 195,000
12 Dale Drive
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 26-year-old ranch; new furnace, eat-in -kitchen, finished basement; taxes $4,137.
Hillsdale, N.J. 175,000
303 Piermont Avenue
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 25-year-old ranch; fireplace, greenhouse; taxes $4,267.


Donna Silveri Is Wed on L.I.
Donna Marie Silveri, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Angelo J. Silveri of Upper Brookville, L.I., was married yesterday to Richard John Bodkin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edmund C. Bodkin of Stony Brook, L.I.
The Rev.
Mario Costa officiated at St.
Dominic's Roman Catholic Church in Oyster Bay, L.I.
Mrs.
Bodkin, 30 years old, is a fashion designer of women's accessories for Liz Claiborne in New York.
She graduated from the Rhode Island School of Design.
Her father is the president and chief executive officer of the Silverite Construction Company in Hicksville, L.I.


Kathryn Gayner Weds James Cross
Kathryn McCampbell Gayner, an actress, and James Dunbar Cross, an associate at the law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, both in New York, were married yesterday at Faith Chapel in Jekyll Island, Ga.
The Rev.
Arthur Cody performed the Episcopal ceremony.
The bride, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Princeton University, as did her husband.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Gayner 3d.
Her father was a lawyer and her mother, Dorothy Nowell Gayner, a real-estate broker, both in Brunswick, Ga.


POSTINGS: 263 Apartments; Rebuilding in the Bronx
When work started in 1989 to rebuild Anderson Houses, a six-building complex in the Highbridge Section of the Bronx, they were so badly battered and decayed that trees had sprouted in their interiors.
On Tuesday, the rebirth of the houses will be celebrated at a rededication ceremony by city officials, the new owner, Suna/ Levine Builders of Long Island City, Queens, and some of the 200 new families who started moving in in October.
The 263-unit complex at Anderson and Shakespeare Avenues was rescued through the vacant buildings program of the Department of Housing Preservation and Development.
Under the program, the city sells abandoned buildings to private developers who turn them back into moderate-income housing like Anderson Houses, where rents are $509 to $709 a month.


Biking for the Sheer Pain of It
ON a sunny morning last March, we were skimming across the central Florida landscape at 21 miles an hour.
The 10 of us were moving along in two parallel files of five.
I was trying hard not to stare at the wheel a foot or so in front of mine.
I remembered what Mike Walden had said: Keep your eyes up and on the road ahead.
Rely on your peripheral vision to keep from running over the fellow in front of you.
I had come to the Walden School of Cycling to get a taste of bicycle racing.
Mike Walden holds his school from February into April, in weekly segments at Camp Challenge, a youngsters' summer camp in Mount Plymouth, about 20 miles north of Orlando.
There were 85 of us the week I went, ranging in age from college kids to two men in their 70's.
Most campers were in their 30's; men outnumbered women six to one.


Q.&amp; A.: Barbara J. Sabol; Life at the Top Of New York's Welfare Bureaucracy
BARBARA J. SABOL
runs programs aimed at some of the most intractable urban problems -- foster care, welfare and homeless shelters.
In her year and a half as head of the Human Resources Administration she has carried out far-reaching changes, redirecting the child welfare system and welfare reform.
She recently talked with Celia W. Dugger of The New York Times about her work at the agency, which has 32,000 employees and a $6 billion budget.


Jennifer Levine To Wed in July
Jennifer Susan Levine and Eric William Hartz, management consultants in Atlanta, are to be married in July.
Miss Levine, 23 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of the University of Pennsylvania.
She is an associate management consultant with Towers Perrin in New York.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Raphael Levine of Atlanta, where her father is a cardiologist.
Her mother, Ellen Levine, teaches prekindergarten children at the Epstein School in Atlanta.


Soviet B &amp; B
To the Editor: Allen R. Myerson, in "Life Without Intourist" (Travel, Oct. 6) told us of a way to visit the Soviet Union more cheaply than by Intourist, whose off-season minimum of $1,375 for 10 days does seem a bit high.
That's more than the average Russian's salary for eight years at the present tourist exchange rate.
Unfortunately, he discovered that the Central Council alternative at roughly half the price was appalling: a hotel five miles from downtown St.
Petersburg, rude guides, food that was characterized as "never unpalatable."
There is a new alternative that is not only cheaper but also far more interesting and pleasant than anything offered by Intourist: staying with a family.
The Host Families Association of St.
Petersburg charges anything from $20 a day for bed-and-breakfast for one to $50 a day for a couple to have three good home-cooked meals, a bedroom in a central location, and local tours by car.
Most of the hosts are faculty at local universities; all speak good English.
Accommodations are surprisingly comfortable and roomy.
Visitors can stay in Moscow or St.
Petersburg and possibly other cities.


A la Carte: New Image for Former Sweetshop
CAFE JOELLE, at 25 Main Street in Sayville, is a former sweetshop and luncheonette.
Now there are French Impressionist prints, green plants and a display of gourmet coffee beans, but the soda fountain and old-fashioned pressed-tin ceiling are still there.
This casual cafe serves freshly brewed coffees and excellent homemade ice cream, and attracts many local residents who stop in just for dessert.
An amalgam of its past and present, Cafe Joelle's attractive flower-patterned tablecloths are covered with glass and topped with artificial flowers and ketchup bottles.


Technology; Two Men, Two Visions of One Computer World, Indivisible
With computer technology advancing at a lightning pace, it's hard to imagine that anyone could work on the same project for more than 30 years -- and still not finish it.
But that is the case with two legendary figures of computerdom: Theodor Holm Nelson and Douglas C. Engelbart.
The two men are very different.


Soviets Optimistic on Joint Teams in Olympics
The collapse of the Soviet state sport committee should not stop the Soviet Union from sending joint teams to the 1992 Winter and Summer Games, Olympic officials said today.
Juan Antonio Samaranch, president of the International Olympic Committee, and Vitaly Smirnov, chief of the Soviet Olympic Committee, expressed confidence that Soviet athletes would compete as planned at Albertville, France, in the Winter Games and in Barcelona, Spain, in the Summer Games.


Pearl Harbor's Smoke, Hiroshima's Fallout
THE torrent of retrospectives on Pearl Harbor in the last few weeks shows how history continues to cloud the way the world's two most important economic powers see and treat each other.
For all the ways the United States and Japan have drawn closer together -- in political cooperation, economic interdependence, the exchange of rock 'n' roll and sushi -- there remains a troubling symmetry between the emotions surrounding Pearl Harbor and today.


Violent Crime in Dublin Shakes the City's Serenity
A recent spate of iolent crime in the Dublin area has shaken the city's sense of security and its reputation as one of Europe's more peaceful capitals.
The crime rate here is hardly comparable with the rates of larger European or American cities.
There is not a proportionately large drug problem here, and there is no widespread mayhem in the streets, even in the tougher parts of the capital area, where about a third of the country's 3.5 million people live.


Quilts Meant for a Wall On Exhibit in Purchase
FIVE distinctive directions in contemporary quilts are enlivening the walls of the Brownson Art Gallery at Manhattanville College here.
Amid dynamic patterns and vibrant color fields, such unexpected images as disintegrating buildings and hand grenades challenge the quilt's associations with domestic comfort.
Organized and interpreted in a catalogue by Robin Schwalb of Brooklyn, one of the exhibitors, "Essences and Presences" calls attention to the "Art Quilt" as one of the most energetic areas in the field of contemporary craft.
And with several of the 12 pieces here 7 or more feet high, the show overpowers the space.


Report Links German Companies and Scud Parts
A secret report by a German member of the United Nations special commission investigating Iraq's weapons of mass destruction has determined that German companies provided many pieces of equipment to Iraq's Scud missile program.
The report draws no conclusions about whether parts labeled in German and found at Iraqi missile sites had been specially designed for military use and sent to Iraq specifically for that purpose.
The report states that this would depend on further analysis by German Government agencies.


Making a Difference; Down With Milspecs
The Pentagon and Nancy Reagan used to have at least one thing in common: neither bought off the rack.
But times change.
The new, downsizing Pentagon is looking for ways to trim costs, and one of the places it's looking hardest at is expensive customized equipment designed to military specifications, or "milspecs." The nascent movement to buy commercial got a major lift from the performance of off-the-shelf electronics equipment during the conflict in the Persian Gulf.
Last month Compuadd Inc., which sent desktop computers to the gulf, got an order for more machines that may eventually be worth as much as $1 billion.
Gregory E. Saunders, a Pentagon manufacturing and modernization specialist, and something of a caped crusader for the virtues of buying commercial, regards the desktop contract as an epiphany.
For the last five years he has worked to move a military accustomed to layers of bureaucracy and going by the book toward more flexibility on procurement.
The Air Force, which granted the Compuadd contract, "did some neat, innovative things," Mr.
Saunders said, adding: "It took some nerve to do it. Somebody took a risk."


Ms. Consolino Has Wedding
Sarah Woodman Consolino and William Harlow Murphy were married yesterday at St.
Mark's Episcopal Church in New Canaan, Conn., by the Rev.
Roland Jones.
Mrs.
Murphy, 24 years old, graduated from Sweet Briar College and is studying for a master's degree in teaching at Manhattanville College.
She is a teaching intern at Greenwich (Conn.) Academy.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Joseph T. Consolino of New Canaan and the late Mr.
Consolino, who was a vice president of Random House.
Mr.
Murphy, 26, graduated from Hobart College and is a customer-account representative for MCI Telecommunications in Rye Brook, N.Y.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Richard Murphy.
His father is the vice president of human resources for Lexmark International in Greenwich, Conn., a manufacturer of computer printers and typewriters.


This Year's Knicks Model Comes With Rally Stripes
The Knicks' 137-128 victory in Atlanta on Saturday night left little doubt that they are a different team this season.
Huge deficits no longer demoralize them.
And they are more confident in pressure situations.
Some of it is maturity.
Some of it is improved defense.
And some of it is undoubtedly the influence of Coach Pat Riley.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-11 SOVIET UNION IS DECLARED DEAD
The leaders of Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia declared that the Soviet Union had ceased to exist and proclaimed a new "Commonwealth of Independent States" open to all states of the former union.
A1


Last Day For Dallas Times Herald
The Dallas Times Herald, the city's oldest daily newspaper, ceases publication today after slowly losing ground in advertising and circulation for more than a decade against its archrival, The Dallas Morning News.
The A. H. Belo Corporation, the Dallas-based company that owns The Morning News, announced yesterday that it had bought most of The Times Herald's assets, including presses and circulation lists, for $55 million.


An Open Door to Disaster
They are the episodes that send chills through parents everywhere and make the heart hammer.
There was the time Barbara and Casey McKee returned late from a party to their Connecticut home and awoke the next morning to find that the nanny had stolen off in the night.
"I saw her house keys sitting on the counter," Ms.
McKee said.
"I thought, 'My God, she's taken the baby with her.' It turned out she had just left."


As the Empire Was Crumbling -- A Special Report.; Frantic Moves Came to Light In Days Before Maxwell Died
At the time of his mysterious death on Nov. 5, Robert Maxwell almost certainly knew he was about to be caught.
He had drained hundreds of millions of dollars from his two flagship public companies and from employee pension funds in a frantic attempt to keep his heavily indebted publishing empire afloat.


And Now Batting For the Mets . . .
With EDDIE MURRAY and BOBBY BONILLA in the fold, the Mets have a tentative opening-day lineup that features six switch-hitters, the most in club history.
"It's nice because of the versatility it gives you," says the new manager, JEFF TORBORG.
"If the opposing manager wants to change relief pitchers, it gives him something else to worry about. Plus, all the guys we have, they're good from both sides of the plate."


With Lottery Prizes, the Bigger the Better
To the Editor:
M.
R.
Katurbus (letter, Nov. 22) argues that awarding 350 prizes of $100,000, instead of a single prize of $35 million, would make the New York State Lottery more attractive to would-be players, but does not take into consideration that New York State pays out its large prizes over a period of 20 years.


Winston Resources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Passing Fancy in Brooklyn


Wellington Leisure Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Shiites Step Up Attacks in South Lebanon
Fundamentalist Shiite Muslims led by the pro-Iranian Party of God stepped up their attacks against Israel's buffer zone in southern Lebanon today, firing rockets into the Christian town of Marjioun for the fourth day in a row.
Two Soviet-built Katyusha rockets struck Marjioun, damaging property but causing no casualties, the radio station Voice of the South reported.
The station is run by the South Lebanon Army, a militia that helps the Israeli Army patrol the border strip that Israel has designated as its security zone in Lebanon.


Kaufel Group reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Smith Trial's First Verdict: Future Bright for Court TV
IN television, one big moment can often establish a new name, or even a new channel.
For the Courtroom Television Network, the new 24-hour all-trial cable channel, the William Kennedy Smith trial may be that defining moment.
"What that war did for CNN, this trial can do for Court TV," said Larry Gerbrandt, senior vice president of Paul Kagan Associates, the leading analyst of the cable industry, referring to the Persian Gulf war.


First High School Test: Getting In
The scene beforehand was a little stern, a little comic, a little impressive, a little silly -- an atmosphere befitting the occasion that one 13-year-old from Queens described, through the braces on his teeth, as "very important to the outcome of your life."
Yesterday morning, hundreds of eighth graders from New York City gathered around the East 15th Street entrance to Stuyvesant High School, where they were about to take the New York City Specialized High Schools admissions examination.


The 'Ray Must Go' Chant . . . Amen
MOMENTS earlier, Matt Bahr's 32-yard field-goal attempt had swerved to the left, leaving the Giants trailing the Eagles, 16-14, with a little more than 7 minutes remaining.
When the Eagles lined up for their first play after the missed kick, the Giants suddenly realized they had only 10 players on defense.
Timeout.
And that, Giants historians duly noted, was when the chant was heard.
"Ray must go," many in the assembly of 76,099 were yelling. "Ray must go."


CHRONICLE
DEREK HUMPHRY, the author of "Final Exit," the best-selling book that advises people how to commit suicide, is to speak tonight at a fund-raiser for a telephone counseling service that tries to do the opposite.


Lacking Sets, Ex-Bolshoi Star Cancels
Vladimir Vasiliev, the former Bolshoi Ballet star whose touring company was scheduled to appear Saturday night at the Lehman Center for the Performing Arts, canceled the performance at curtain time.
Mr.
Vasiliev told the full house that his sets had not arrived from Mexico City and that he could not compromise his artistic standards by going on without them.
The performance at the center, which is on the campus of Lehman College in the Bronx, was the only New York City appearance by the group, which is billed as Yekaterina Maksimova and Vladimir Vasiliev, Stars of the Bolshoi Ballet and Company.


2 Fires Disrupt Subway Service On Four Lines
Two suspicious fires in a Manhattan subway tunnel disrupted service for almost eight and a half hours on four subway lines yesterday and are expected to cause rush-hour delays today along the B, D and Q lines.
The fires broke out about 11:30 A.M. in signal cables between the Broadway-Lafayette and Grand Street subway stations, which serve the B and D lines on the weekends and the Q line on weekdays, a spokesman for the Transit Authority said.


Disney Now a Network TV Power
After a troubled start as a television production company, the Walt Disney Studios has abruptly turned into a big force in network television with several hit comedies, contracts with some of the most powerful writers and a potentially innovative way of financing high-priced programs.
Television production had been a virtual stepchild of the Walt Disney Company, which has focused on motion pictures and theme parks in recent years.
But in 1988, the company decided to spend at least $100 million over five years on television, hire big-name writers and producers and then, essentially, leave them alone.


NHK of Japan Ends Plan for Global News Service
Japan's semiofficial broadcasting giant, NHK, is abandoning its plans to start a worldwide 24-hour news service to compete with the Cable News Network and the British Broadcasting Corporation.
NHK's proposal for a Global News Network had promised to become Japan's first journalistic voice around the world, an Asian counterpoint to Western-dominated broadcasts.
While industry analysts were skeptical whether the broadcaster could assemble the journalistic talent for such an undertaking, few of them had doubted that NHK, formally known as Nippon Hoso Kyokai, could find the money to take on its American and European rivals.


Communities That Care Can Work for Good Homeless Shelters
To the Editor:
I live in NoHo -- north of Houston Street, adjacent to the Bowery -- and my backyard is full.
It's time the rest of you New Yorkers accepted your fair share of homeless shelters and stopped screaming, "Not in my backyard!" Instead of fighting the city on the facility sites, fight for a model shelter program and a binding contract with the city.


Zaire's Premier Sees Economic Ruin
The newest Prime Minister of this Central African country said today that the Zairian economy faced imminent bankruptcy and that the situation was not likely to improve until President Mobutu Sese Seko was removed from office.
On the eve of a visit to the United States and several European capitals, the Prime Minister, Nguza Karl-i-Bond, who was appointed Prime Minister by General Mobutu two weeks ago, also said he would ask Western donors, including the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, to virtually take over the management of Zaire's central bank.


Hilarie Cohen, Lawyer, Weds
Hilarie Anne Cohen and Bruce Leigh Perlin, both lawyers, were married yesterday by Rabbi Mark Winer at the Jewish Community Center in White Plains.
The bride, 28 years old, is an associate at the Chicago law firm of Vedder, Price, Kaufman &amp; Kammholz.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis and cum laude from the Boston University School of Law.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harvey J. Cohen of White Plains, where her father is a dermatologist.
Her mother, Jane N. Cohen, is an associate professor and the coordinator of transfer planning services at Rockland Community College in Suffern, N.Y.


Leaders Hearken to History, Ambition and Voters Back Home
John Major Prime Minister of Britain
John Major has reversed some of Margaret Thatcher's favorite policies, but her shadow still hangs over him a year after he succeeded her as Britain's Prime Minister.
Her refusal to accept a single European currency was one of the reasons for her ouster as Prime Minister by the Conservative Party.
Mr.
Major would like to see agreement on monetary union at Maastricht.
But he knows that it has to be an agreement that he can defend to Mrs.
Thatcher and other like-minded Conservatives if he is to have any hope of leading a united party into general elections in April or May.


American Jews Grow More Hawkish on Israel
To the Editor:
Seldom have I read in The Times as misleading an article as your Nov. 21 report that Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel would, on his visit to the United States, find American Jews dovish.
I question the facile conclusions to which you jump from a telephone survey of 205 leaders of the Council of Jewish Federations.


Trimedyne Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Automobile Protection Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Vermont Research reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Donors Save Day; Hockey Reunion; Snow (Not White)
Gifts totaling $5,000, and free hotel rooms, helped save Christmas for the basketball teams of Thomas Jefferson and John Jay high schools.
The Brooklyn teams are, after all, going to the Modie Riser tournament in Charleston, S.C.
The host high school in Charleston was no longer able to help the visiting teams with transportation and housing costs, but an anonymous caller to Jefferson has pledged $2,500, and Bear Stearns, the stockbrokers, also pledged that amount.
The New York/New Jersey Knights of the World League of American Football will pay for the cost of some hotel rooms. . . .
For fans who miss DENIS POTVIN riding ROD GILBERT into the boards -- or trying to -- an event Friday night will bring back Ranger-Islander memories.
Former players will skate to benefit Long Island youth hockey at the Long Beach Arena on Long Island.
For information, call PETE STEMKOWSKI at (516) 431-6500. . . .
Forty years ago today, the face of winter sports changed.
It was the first time a snow-making machine was used, according to Catskill Mountain historians.
The inventors, JOSEPH TROPEANO and PHILIP TROPEANO, called their original contraption the "fog nozzle," and also demonstrated a sense of humor.
They soon started using colored water and produced multicolored snow.
A plaque has been placed on the site at the Concord Hotel in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y.


Oshman's Sporting Goods reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Total Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bills Find New Way To Frustrate Raiders
It was not another 51-3 loss for the Los Angeles Raiders to the Buffalo Bills, but it was just as embarrassing, and equally lousy.
A 27-14 Raiders lead today late in the fourth quarter against the Bills, who dismantled them, 51-3, last January in the American Football Conference championship game, evaporated to a 27-27 tie by the end of regulation.
And when Scott Norwood booted a 42-yard field goal 2 minutes 34 seconds into overtime to lift Buffalo to a 30-27 victory, all the Raiders could do was leave the field with their heads down and their hearts pierced, wondering just what it takes to win against these quick-scoring, no-huddle attacking Bills.


Cheryl Appelbaum Marries Dr. Jeffrey A. Klein
Cheryl Appelbaum, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray Appelbaum of Monsey, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jeffrey Alan Klein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Klein of Cedarhurst, N.Y.
Rabbi David Spiegel performed the ceremony at Loews Glenpointe Hotel in Teaneck, N.J.


Washington Memo; In New Social Era, Moynihan Sees 'New' Social Ills
Professor Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a United States Senator with a history of flashy ideas, has a new one.
Or sort of a new one.


Virginia Celebrates Once (Sorry) and Then for Real
Virginia's soccer players and coaches celebrated twice -- an hour or so apart -- today in the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division 1 men's soccer championship game against Santa Clara, but it counted only the second time.
The first celebration came after the Cavaliers thought they had scored a goal with time running out in regulation, but officials disallowed the goal after a long deliberation, saying time had expired.


Leaders Hearken to History, Ambition and Voters Back Home
Ruud Lubbers  Prime Minister of the Netherlands
The host of the Maastricht summit meeting, Ruud Lubbers, is the longest-serving and perhaps most popular leader of the Netherlands in this century.


CHRONICLE
PAUL O'DWYER, New York City's commissioner for the United Nations and Consular Corps, said yesterday that he would resign his post today so that he could more openly criticize the United Nations' role in some world trouble spots.
The 84-year-old Mr.
O'Dwyer, a fiery liberal politician who once served as New York City Council president, said he was charged as commissioner with smoothing relations between the city and its cadre of visiting diplomats.
But in deference to his role as conciliator, Mr.
O'Dwyer said, he repeatedly quashed his strong opinions on world issues that he holds dear.


After 4 Years, Intifada Still Smolders
Like clockwork, shutters rattled down on the shops at 1 P.M., as they do just about every day along Jenin's gray streets.
Palestinian youths threw stones at patrolling Israeli soldiers, as they do just about every day, and soldiers chased the youngsters down alleyways, as they do just about every day.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Merchandise Trade . . . 3d Qtr.
Wednesday Wholesale Sales . . .
Oct.
Thursday  Retail Sales . . .
Nov.
Producer Price Index . . .
Nov.
Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Consumer Price Index . . .
Nov.
Business Inventories . . .
Oct. 10-Day Auto Sales . . .
Early Dec.


Bonuses Cut At Salomon
Salomon Brothers completed its payout of bonuses on Friday, and the amount paid to top executives was slightly less than in previous years, people at the firm said.
They said the bonuses were handled much more selectively than in recent years, with executives who did not bring in much revenue seeing their bonuses drop the most.
In terms of categories, they said, the managing directors, who hold the top positions at the firm, saw their bonuses drop the most, with the employees just below managing director seeing their income the least affected.


Lawyer and Witness Spar Over Sand Grains in Clothes
The materials found in the underwear of the woman who has accused William K. Smith of rape probably came from the beach rather than the lawn at the rear of the Kennedy compound, a forensics expert called by the defense testified today.
But the prosecutor in the case, Moira K. Lasch, immediately challenged the usefulness of the finding.
Her vigorous cross-examination was one more reminder that despite the tens of thousands of dollars that the defense has spent on expert evidence, the case will probably end up just as it began: as Mr.
Smith's word against his accuser's.
The defendant is expected to testify sometime later this week.


Biomedical Waste Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


World Economies


NCH Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


LDI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


The Union Is Buried: What's Being Born?
Ever since the August coup d'etat, the Soviet Union has been dying a lingering death, its final agony stretched over months of crisis and negotiations while it was kept alive largely by the frantic faith of one man, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet President.
Today, the union died -- if future historians will accept a death warrant signed by the patient itself as proof, which is how the leaders of Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia intended their statement, signed in the Byelorussian border town of Brest, to be read.
The Brest statement does not reckon with Mr.
Gorbachev; it simply ignores him, which only made his appearance tonight on Soviet television all the more poignant as he once again pleaded, cajoled and banged his fists, making the case that without a union the country will fall apart.
But for some time now, Mr.
Gorbachev's warnings have had a hollow ring, since for most people, the collapse he keeps warning about has already happened.
This is a fact they can confirm with their daily lives, as they go to factories that have run out of materials, to office jobs where they have stopped getting salaries or to shops where there are no goods.
A Fresh Start?
By sweeping the old structures out of the way, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine and the Byelorussian leader, Stanislav Shushkevich, have cleared the way for something new -- assuming, of course, that the military or other conservative forces mount no effort to restore the center.
What exactly the new shape of things will be was not totally clear from today's statement, nor could it be, given the absence of some major players, most notably representatives of Kazakhstan and the Central Asian republics.
But the absence of Mr.
Gorbachev seemed to make no difference one way or the other.
Once the Houdini of Soviet politics, the man who could turn setbacks to his advantage, the master of the surprise move, the Soviet President had become a Johnny-one-note whose insistence on renovating old structures -- the word perestroika means reconstruction -- in the end got in the way of more radical but in the view of others more constructive approaches.
By bypassing him publicly, the leaders of the three republics only underscored their need to get on with business.
The Soviet crisis had already swept away the center; the republics themselves could be next if some action were not taken quickly.
The vote for independence in Ukraine last weekend -- while evidently dooming Mr.
Gorbachev's chances of patching together a new union -- actually paved the way for real negotiations with Russia, defining the most critical relationship of all.
Until the referendum, Mr.
Kravchuk could not be seen as compromising Urkainian sovereignty.
After the vote, with Ukrainian independence gaining international recognition, he has more room to bring his newborn country's political fate in line with its economic interests.
It may be that when all the details are worked out, the commonwealth conceived in Brest will not look all that different from Mr.
Gorbachev's proposed confederated union -- except that the commonwealth's headquarters will be in Minsk.
The vagueness of the terms being talked about here only points to the fact that the ability to agree was a matter of political will, not of constitutional detail.
The participation of the Central Asian states remains a major issue, one that the three Slavic leaders may have made worse by not consulting with their Muslim counterparts.
Of these republics, the most critical is Kazakhstan, a vast expanse of steppe, rich in natural resources, home to a Russian majority, and holder of a share of the Soviet nuclear arsenal.
How Kazakhstan fits into the new picture is expecteds to become clear Monday, after the Kazakh President, Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, joins Mr.
Gorbachev for talks with the three Slavic leaders.
Historic Concerns
Although the other Muslim republics have declared indpendence, they have for the most part supported Mr.
Gorbachev's efforts to save the union, since they believe their economic survival depends on it.
Russia, for its part, was clearly uneasy about entering any democratic union in which the balance of votes would tilt in favor of the Muslim republics -- a political concern with deep historical and cultural roots.
This reluctance, while never explicitly stated, is the main reason Mr.
Yeltsin has worked so hard at coming up with an arrangement that would keep Ukraine in the fold.
This week, the pieces began to fall in place for Mr.
Yeltsin to make his move.
Last weekend, the Soviet Government effectively went bankrupt.
Coming to the rescue, Mr.
Yeltsin effectively took over the Soviet Government, proving what he would publicly deny but what many have already come to realize -- which is that in most matters Russia is the Soviet Union.
Avoiding a Stalemate
For months, Mr.
Yeltsin has been Mr.
Gorbachev's ally in pushing for a new union.
On Sunday in Minsk, he walked away from a stalemate, laying out his reasoning in simple terms.
There is no point in continuing negotiations over a new union treaty, he told the Byelorussian Parliament, because soon there will not be anyone left to negotiate.
Mr.
Yeltsin had little time to waste.
He is already embarked on a plan to kick the struts out from under Russia's heavily subsidized economy, which carries considerable risk for the republic's hard-pressed citizens, and for his own political career.
His reforms had also become a bargaining chip, as other republics took stock of the effect Russia's high prices and free foreign trade could have on their own economies.
Protectionist Problems
Although Mr.
Gorbachev has been the one pounding hardest on the need for a new union, the republics are no less aware of their economic interdependence.
In some areas, they are already feeling the pain of spontaneous protectionism, as Ukraine withholds shipments of agricultural products while Russia plays politics with its oil deliveries.
Seven republics have already agreed to keep a price lid on some certain goods -- another sign that republic leaders, while bent on sovereignty, are not ready to commit economic suicide.
Playing the role of Cassandra to the hilt, Mr.
Gorbachev this week has continued to warn of a coming cataclysm; he told the Soviet television one night that Moscow is about to run out food, and French television today that the civil war in Yugoslavia is a "simple joke" compared to what awaits a disintegrating union.
No doubt, Mr.
Yeltsin, Mr.
Kravchuk and Mr.
Shushkevich have similar fears.
In the current economic chaos, with nationalism running high across the map, worst-case scenarios can not be excluded.
The Brest agreement cannot cover some of the most troublesome hot spots, for instance the continuing ethnic warfare in the Caucasus or the separatist demands of the Russian population in the Moldavian Republic.
But this weekend, three of the Soviet Union's republics have proved that unlike the republics of Yugoslavia, they are willing and able to meet and negotiate over the common future, without the benefit of the center's guiding hand.


Navistar International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Smith Lawyer Exhibits A Taste for Tough Cases
Sixteen years ago, when Roy E. Black was a 30-year-old public defender of the down-and-out, The Miami Herald named him one of the 10 best criminal defense lawyers in the city.
It was a reminder that one cannot always judge the success of particular lawyers by the money they make or the toniness of their clients.
But often, one can.
In the intervening years, Mr.
Black's clientele has evolved from petty thieves to police officers, politicians, businessmen, and drug barons.
That William K. Smith hired him in June for $250,000 further confirms what most of Mr.
Black's colleagues have long acknowledged: he is at the very top of the Southern Florida defense bar, no mean feat in a crime-ridden community where legal business is brisk, clients can pay handsomely and, perforce, many of the nation's top trial lawyers have congregated.


Datamark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Leaders Hearken to History, Ambition and Voters Back Home
Jacques Delors  President of the European Commission
As President of the European Commission, Jacques Delors is perhaps the nearest that Europe has to a Prime Minister today.
While his executive powers are limited by the European Community governments that first picked him in 1985, the 66-year-old Frenchman has used his position as head of the community's administrative machine to drive its members toward greater unity.
His first achievement was the Single European Act of 1987, which committed community nations to establish a single market beginning on on Jan. 1, 1993.
He followed up by preparing the framework for creation of a single currency and a regional central bank by the end of the century.


Village Super Market reports earnings for 12wks to Oct 19


'Today' Producer, 26, Hopes Youth Equals Success
Jeff Zucker, 26 years old, five years out of Harvard, slight of build, inquisitively intense behind wire-frame glasses, recognizes that he does not fit some people's expectations of what the executive producer of NBC's "Today" show should look like.
"To a degree I've always had to deal with the age factor," Mr.
Zucker said in an interview in his office at "Today," a few days after being appointed to the top production job on one of the oldest shows on television.
"But really, I don't think I look all that young." For proof he pointed to the (extremely) premature bald spot on the crown of his head.


Abroad at Home; Mr. Maxwell's Lesson
How could he get away with it for so long?
That is the question posed by the collapse of Robert Maxwell's empire so quickly after his death.
For years he ran what amounted to an international confidence game, borrowing more and more, covering up his accounts.
An official British inquiry in 1971 found him unfit to be in charge of a public company.
Yet politicians honored him; and newspapers printed his boasts, hollow though most of them turned out to be.


Vulcan International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


William F. Horvath, Manufacturer, 76
William F. Horvath, a Hungarian immigrant who founded two manufacturing companies, died on Friday at his home in Hampton Bays, L.I.
He was 76 years old and died of heart and renal failure, his family said.


International Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Market Place; The Race to Sell A Nicotine Patch
FOUR companies are racing to introduce a nicotine patch that would help smokers kick the habit by delivering a steady trickle of the drug through the skin.
Analysts estimate the potential United States market at $400 million by 1995, but they caution that picking a winner, or an investment strategy, is difficult.
The Alza Corporation of Palo Alto, Calif., a pioneer in skin patches, gained the first Food and Drug Administration approval of a nicotine patch, on Nov. 10.


Yugoslavs Reach Pact On Ending a Blockade
The major warring parties in Yugoslavia agreed today on a plan for ending Croatia's blockade of Yugoslav Army barracks, Cyrus R. Vance, the special United Nations envoy, said.
"It is of substantial importance," said Mr.
Vance, the former United States Secretary of State.
"But this does not mean that we're over the hump."


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Acclaim Entertainment Inc., four million shares. Volpe Welty.
Allied Healthcare Products, two million shares. Montgomery Securites.
Ambar Inc., 1.1 million shares. Morgan Keegan &amp; Co.
American Strategic Income Portfolio Inc., four million shares, Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood Inc.
American Superconductor Corp., 1.67 million shares. Invemed Associates.
Benton Oil and Gas, three million shares. Paine Webber Inc.
Biomira Inc., four million shares. Scotiamcleod Inc.
Boston Edison Co., 2.6 million shares. Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Chemed Corp., 1.3 million shares. First Boston.
DEP Corp., 1.95 million shares. Salomon Brothers.
Electromedics Inc., two million shares. Dain Bosworth.
Epigen Inc., 833,334 units, each comprising two shares and three warrants.
D.
H.
Blair..
Farrel Corp., two million shares. Paine Webber.
Fisher Scientific International Inc., 14.5 million shares. First Boston.
General Kinetics, 1.25 million shares. Prudential Securities.
Healthtrust Inc., 40 million shares. Merrill Lynch.
Inforum Inc., two million shares. Volpe Welty.
Intertape Polymer Group Inc., 2.8 million shares. Dean Witter Reynolds.
IWC Resources Corp., 900,000 shares. Goldman, Sachs.
Korea Growth Fund Inc., five million shares. First Boston.
Lakehead Pipeline Partners, 15.25 million units.  Lehman Brothers.
Magainin Pharmaceuticals Inc., two million shares. Smith Barney, Harris Upham.
Marsh Supermarkets Inc., 3.9 million class B shares. Goldman, Sachs.
McDermott International Inc., six million shares.  Goldman, Sachs.
Medimmune Inc., 2.5 million shares. Morgan Stanley &amp; Co..
Medysys Inc., 1.7 million shares. Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood Inc.
Midwest Resources Inc., 2.5 million shares, Merrill Lynch.
News Corp. Ltd., 16.1 million American depository receipts. Allen &amp; Co.
Olympic Financial Ltd., 1.45 million shares. Kennedy Mathews.
Owens-Illinois Inc., 60 million shares. Morgan Stanley.
Perfumania Inc. 1.5 million shares. Josepthal &amp; Co.
Pharmaceutical Marketing Services Inc., 3.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Qualcomm Inc., 3.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
Reebok International Ltd., 11.75 million shares.
S.
G.
Warburg &amp; Co.Warburg (S. G.) Group
Repossession Auction Inc., one million units (one share and one redeemable warrant).
Stratton Oakmont.
Retix, 3.4 million shares. Morgan Stanley.
Seacoast Banking Corp., 600,000 class A shares.  Chicago Corp.
Southern Electronics Corp., 1.4 million shares. Bear, Stearns.
Synergen Inc., three million shares. Alex. Brown &amp; Sons Inc.
Systemed Inc., 2.5 million shares. Sutro &amp; Co.
TSS Ltd., 2.5 million units (one share and one warrant). Paulson Investment Co.
Tuesday Morning Corp., 1.7 million shares. Montgomery Securities.
Value City Department Stores Inc., 1.8 million shares. SalomonBrothers.
Vertex Pharmaceuticals, two million shares. Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Vitesse Semiconductor Corp., 3.2 million shares. Robertson, Stephens.
Viewlogic Systems Inc., three million shares.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette. (Source: MCM Corporate Watch.)


Sanderson Farms Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Yanks' Trade Philosophy Is Undergoing a Change
The Yankees, forced to keep trying to define what is possible, entered baseball's annual winter meetings today and immediately labeled the acquisition of Barry Bonds all but impossible given their current operating fashion and glut of outfielders.
But as if to reconfirm that the team does have avenues open to it in the coming week, General Manager Gene Michael said that other clubs were showing interest in Steve Sax.
A trade involving the second baseman, once apparently improbable, is now viewed as plausible because the market has caught up to the four-year, $12.4 million salary extension Sax signed last December.


Tektronix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 16


Daxor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Joule Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Environmentalists Assess Corporate Pollution Records
The Mobil Corporation may be responsible for cleaning up wastes at 47 sites under the Federal Superfund program, a fact not disclosed in the company's annual report.
A subsidiary of the Amoco Corporation tried to install hazardous-waste incinerators on Indian lands, ostensibly to avoid state and Federal emissions regulations.


Ex-Hostage Casts Doubt On Report of Execution
A former hostage in Lebanon said yesterday that William Buckley, a fellow captive who was the Central Intelligence Agency's Beirut station chief, was not executed in retaliation for an Israeli air raid, as claimed by an Islamic fundamentalist group.
He said he believed that Mr.
Buckley died of illness and neglect by his captors.
The former hostage, David P. Jacobsen, said Mr.
Buckley died in June 1985, four months before his captors claimed.
He said he believed that the fundamentalist group, Islamic Holy War, fabricated the account of an execution to save face in the Islamic world, where the mistreatment of captives is contrary to religious duty.


And a Partridge in a Penalty Box
After writing 65 hockey books, and scrutinizing games for SportsChannel, STAN FISCHLER knows a hockey toughie when he sees one.
His two latest books are "Bad Boys" (McGraw-Hill/Ryerson of Canada) and the "Great Book of Hockey" (Publications International, Chicago).


Neutrogena Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


For Ancient City, One More Claim on History
The Dutch city of Maastricht, which has an opportunity to be associated with the next stage of European history, has already witnessed more than 2,000 years of it.
The old fortifications have seen besiegers and liberators from a dozen countries, including most of the 12 members of the European Community.
Among the visitors over the centuries, as pilgrims or conquerors, have been Charlemagne, Louis XIV, Peter the Great and Napoleon.
The city of 120,000, on the west bank of the Meuse, is the oldest in the Netherlands.
Its buildings are made of stone rather than the brick of the north, and its famous Lenten carnival further distinguishes the Roman Catholic region from the Protestant influence of the rest of the Netherlands.


Biomechanics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


King of the Jumble? Perhaps It's the Lions
The Detroit Lions haven't gone to the playoffs since 1983.
They hadn't won 10 regular-season games since 1970.
They hadn't gone undefeated at home since 1962, when they were 7-0 in a 14-game season.
And they haven't won a playoff game since 1957, when they went all the way to the National Football League championship game and beat Cleveland, 59-14.
So you might think that after closing out their home schedule undefeated at 8-0, moving to 10-4 over all and staying in a first-place tie with the Chicago Bears in the National Football Conference's Central Division they could relax.
Think again.
Their 34-20 victory over the Jets leaves them with a good leg up but doesn't guarantee anything.


Leslie Fleishman and Brian Levy Wed
Leslie Fleishman, the daughter of Lenore Fleishman of North Woodmere, L.I., and the late Dr.
Morris Fleishman, was married yesterday to Brian Levy, a son of Mimi L. Elfenbein of Pomona, N.Y., and the late Kurt Levy.
Rabbi Stuart Geller officiated at Temple Emanuel in Great Neck, L.I.
Mrs.
Levy, 32 years old, is a product manager at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton and received an M.B.A. degree from Baruch College.


Vincent L. Pitaro, 78, Ex-New York Official
Vincent L. Pitaro, a lawyer and former New York State official, died on Tuesday at his home in Flushing, Queens.
He was 78 years old.
Mr. Pitaro died of pancreatic cancer, his family said.


Pulaski Furniture Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Turkish Leader Warns Iraq
Turkey's new Prime Minister said today that his country would not stand for another crackdown on Kurds in northern Iraq.
The remarks by Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel underscored Turkey's commitment to the Western allies' effort against Iraq.
"We have to say to Iraq, 'Now, look buddy, if you commit savagery, you will find us in front of you,' " Mr.
Demirel said, according to a report by the Anatolian news agency.


Critic's Notebook; A New Movie House Revives Memories Of the Good Old Days
Before the multi-plexes of the 1970's and 1980's, before the advent of art theaters in the 1950's, moviegoing in Manhattan was something else.
Walking into the lobby of the old Roxy Theater, which stood at the corner of Seventh Avenue and 50th Street, was like entering the reverie of the manicurist played on the Roxy screen by Alice Faye.
Here was Sleeping Beauty's castle, the pilasters of its towering keep molded in plaster, its trysting alcoves equipped with drinking fountains, staffed by ushers who looked as if they had been shanghaied from the chorus of "The Student Prince."


Dance in Review
Ilya Gaft Dance Theater
Queens Theater in the Park Flushing Meadows-Corona Park
Aleksandr Lunev, a ballet dancer of immense purity, was the chief draw of a program by the new Ilya Gaft Dance Theater, which performed on Saturday night in a New York debut season.
But Mr.
Lunev was not the only reason to enjoy the intelligently planned evening.
Mr.
Gaft, who now lives and teaches in New York City, learned his craft in the years he spent as principal dancer with the Novosibirsk and Leningrad Opera and Ballet Theaters and as director of the Leningrad Musical Theater and State Musical Theater of the Keral Republic.


Senate Democrats Promote 11th-Hour Tax Repeal
Barely 18 months after the Democratic-controlled Legislature approved a $2.8 billion tax package, the largest in New Jersey history, a State Senate committee is to begin a hearing on Monday on lame-duck legislation that would repeal the entire package.
Like the legislation that raised taxes, the tax-repeal effort, which is also being led by the Democrats, has caused public rancor and united Republican legislators in opposition.


Last Freed Hostage Gets In a Little Exercise


West Europeans Gather to Seek A Tighter Union
In an atmosphere of great expectation tinged with no small apprehension, European Community leaders gathered here tonight for a crucial two-day summit meeting that should determine the region's place in the world well into the 21st century.
Their aim is to prepare the 12-nation community to compete with regional economic groups led by the United States and Japan and to exercise greater political influence in international affairs.
To achieve this, they hope to speed up Europe's 34-year-old march toward political and economic integration.
They will therefore be taking up proposals to establish a single currency and a regional central bank, to move toward common foreign and security policies, to give more power to the European Parliament and to harmonize their approaches to social and environmental questions.
Nowhere Near Full Union
The measures fall far short of creating anything resembling a United States of Europe.
While some politicians like to evoke the centuries-old dream of full union, it is at least decades away.
Yet if approved, the changes will significantly bolster the community's existing plan to form a single regional market of 340 million consumers on Jan. 1, 1993, eventually turning what is already the world's largest trading bloc into the world's dominant financial power.
Adoption of the Maastricht agenda is far from assured.
Britain, long the community's most resistant member, fears an excessive loss of sovereignty.
Changes to the 1957 Treaty of Rome, which created the community, require the unanimous assent of its members, and a plan acceptable to Britain has still to be thrashed out.
Specifically, Britain remains at loggerheads with the others over how the community should manage its common foreign and security policy, over whether the 12 should move toward building an independent military capability and over when the community can dictate domestic policies.
Everything hangs on four negotiating sessions over the next two days, with the fate of the summit meeting probably unknown until late Tuesday or, as one European official put it, "the last five minutes." The meeting may even be extended to Wednesday if an accord seems within reach. 'Train Is About to Leave'
"The train to European union is standing at the platform," Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of Germany wrote this weekend, seemingly addressing Britain.
"It is about to leave. Anyone who does not climb on board will not stop it from going. They will be left standing alone."
Yet, despite the real risk of an 11-to-1 deadlock, the mood was fairly upbeat as community leaders arrived in this ancient Dutch city tonight, with optimism bolstered by progress made in several disputed areas during a flurry of ministerial talks last week.
For instance, the 12 informally agreed to accommodate Britain's refusal to commit itself to a single currency by 1999.
An annex to the planned treaty on monetary union should allow Britain to "opt out" if the British Parliament later blocks disappearance of the pound sterling.
Britain has also strongly objected to a passage in the draft treaty to be voted on this week that the community has a "federal" vocation, but that should no longer be an obstacle to agreement.
Other governments now seem willing to change the wording to an endorsement of "ever closer union" -- if Britain makes concessions in other areas.
Britain to 'Give and Take'
While wrestling with an anti-Europe group in his Conservative Party, Britain's Prime Minister, John Major, insists that he is ready to "give and take" to reach an "acceptable" agreement.
President Francois Mitterrand of France and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, who have been the driving force behind this new stage of integration, have signaled that they too will show flexibility.
"Britain is complicating the game," a senior French official said, "but we have never wanted Britain's exclusion."
Certainly, the two sides were much further apart when separate inter-governmental conferences on economic and monetary union and on political union began last December.
Then, many governments were focusing more on the goal of union than how to achieve it.
Now, under British pressure, a step-by-step approach has been adopted.
For instance, on monetary union, rather than rushing toward a single currency, community countries now accept the need for gradual "convergence" of their economies through a leveling of inflation rates and budget deficits.
Similarly, before a regional central bank comes into existence, a less formal body to be known as the European Monetary Institute will be charged with coordinating the region's monetary policies.
Events outside Western Europe have underlined the community's limited ability to speak with a single, forceful voice.
During the Persian Gulf war, while Britain and France sent troops to the front, the community as such lacked authority to act.
More recently, the 12 have been embarrassed by their failure to settle the Yugoslav conflict.
Britain Wants a Veto
Nonetheless, on the eve of the Maastricht meeting, major obstacles still stand in the way of broad agreement on foreign policy and security matters, most of them reflecting British reluctance.
While agreeing that the community must act as a bloc if it is to have real power on foreign-policy questions, Britain is insisting that community positions be adopted unanimously, thus enabling it to retain a veto and avoid the risk of being outvoted.
On the sensitive question of regional defense, Britain favors strengthening a nine-nation military pact known as the Western European Union, but argues that French and German demands that it be integrated into the community could undermine the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Britain is most prickly about not allowing the community to "interfere" in its domestic affairs -- specifically on police, immigration and judicial matters as well as on a broad array of social and environmental questions.
Here again, it objects to community rulings through majority vote.
While Mr.
Mitterrand and Mr.
Kohl have much to gain politically from an agreement, both have warned that they will only go so far to appease Mr.
Major.
The French leader likes to remind London that he too has a veto right.
Mr.
Kohl in turn believes that a stronger Europe must be a more democratic Europe, and to this end, he is demanding that new powers of "co-decision" be given to the 518-member European Parliament, which at present can discuss -- but cannot propose or block -- community laws.
Mitterrand Backs Kohl
Mr.
Mitterrand, who used to say the community's political authority should be exercised by governments rather than legislators or bureaucrats, has now agreed to back Mr.
Kohl.
Mr.
Major may also accept the principle of "co-decision" with Parliament, but only in limited areas.
If the British, French and German leaders can work out their differences, most other problems will fade into insignificance.
Jacques Delors, who as President of the European Commission will be the 13th person at the summit table, has complained loudly that his executive body will acquire little additional power, but he has neither vote nor veto.
Working in favor of an accord is fear of the consequences of failure.
Any country considered responsible for a breakdown will inevitably face isolation and recrimination.
Confidence in European currencies may slump.
And the community as a whole could suffer a crisis of identity with long-term negative effects.
Born as a six-nation common market in 1957, the community has known many ups and downs over the years, including squabbles over British entry in the 1960's and economic stagnation in the 1970's.
But since 1985, when it agreed to build a single market by the end of 1992, new momentum toward economic integration has also given it a stronger political voice.
The collapse of Communism and, above all, the unification of Germany abruptly changed the European scene in 1989 and 1990, but France was able to persuade its partners -- including Germany -- that the moment required the community to establish even more ambitious goals of unity.
Economic Union More Likely
Many experts believe that the community will continue to advance more quickly toward economic union than political integration.
Goods, services, capital and people should move freely in the region after 1992, while the prospect of a single currency and regional central bank before the end of the century will accelerate harmonization of economic policies.
With the United States, Canada and Mexico talking about a North American free trade area and Japan working hard to strengthen its trade ties in the Far East, European businessmen are strong advocates of economic union, convinced that otherwise they will be unable to compete.
Already, many European companies are engaged in their own "union" through mergers.
Politically, though, community governments seem to have less of a mandate.
Polls show that outside Britain, most Europeans have no clear understanding of what is at stake in Maastricht.
They also suggest that ordinary citizens are far less enthusiastic than their leaders about ceding sovereignty to "foreigners."
Nonetheless, governments and businessmen agree that Europe's immediate future will be charted at Maastricht.
It may be that no one emerges fully satisfied with the result -- going too far for some, not far enough for others.
But, as one French official put it, "this is a process, and what isn't done now can be done later." In any event, the 12 plan to review any Maastricht treaty in 1996.


Noting Soviet Eclipse, Baker Sees Arms Risks
Sounding a new note of the Bush Administration's alarm over the security of Soviet nuclear forces, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said this morning that the Soviet Union, in the form long known by American policy makers, was no more.
He expressed worry that in a bitterly divided country, there was a possibility that nuclear weapons might be used.
Mr.
Baker's remarks were made an hour before the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, called President Bush to tell him that Russia, Byelorussia and Ukraine had signed a pact creating a new commonwealth in a move that represented the further unraveling of the Soviet Union.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Smith Trial's First Verdict: Future Bright for Court TV
IN television, one big moment can often establish a new name, or even a new channel.
For the Courtroom Television Network, the new 24-hour all-trial cable channel, the William Kennedy Smith trial may be that defining moment.
"What that war did for CNN, this trial can do for Court TV," said Larry Gerbrandt, senior vice president of Paul Kagan Associates, the leading analyst of the cable industry, referring to the Persian Gulf war.


Lake Placid Is Promoting Counter Olympics
Corporate types are not flocking to France for the Olympic Winter Games.
According to NED HARKNESS, who runs the Olympic training center in Lake Placid, N.Y., the reason is comfort.
"I hear the facilities in Albertville are not very good," he said.
"They're spread out all over the place."


Mets Deny Quest for Appier
Kevin Appier's name has come up so often in connection with the Mets, it seemed that he already had the opening-day pitching assignment for them next April.
But Al Harazin, the Mets' general manager, said today that he has never discussed Appier with the Kansas City Royals.
"The reports that we are interested in the pitcher are incorrect," Harazin said.
"We have never sought to secure his services from that club. There may come a time when we do, but we have not."


Kulicke &amp; Soffa Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Astro-Med Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Wellco Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


An Apartment Complex Decides It's About More Than Mortar:
IF Penn South conjures up images of a vacation development in the Poconos and Norc sounds like that unfortunate acronym for the military junta in Myanmar, neither could be further from the truth.
Penn South
is
a Norc.
It's a non-profit middle-income cooperative in Manhattan, just southwest of Pennsylvania Station.
Norc is an acronym that only a sociologist's mother could love.
It stands for "naturally occurring retirement community."


NBC News Lays Off 18 Workers
Eighteen NBC News employees were laid off on Friday, and an official of their union said a grievance would be filed this week accusing the network of violating the union contract.
The union may also charge NBC with sex and age discrimination, said John Clark, the president of Local 11 of the National Association of Broadcast Engineers and Technicians.


Residents in Queens Continue to Protest the Closing of Firehouse


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SOCIAL, HUMANITARIAN AND CULTURAL COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


As the Empire Was Crumbling -- A Special Report.; Frantic Moves Came to Light In Days Before Maxwell Died
At the time of his mysterious death on Nov. 5, Robert Maxwell almost certainly knew he was about to be caught.
He had drained hundreds of millions of dollars from his two flagship public companies and from employee pension funds in a frantic attempt to keep his heavily indebted publishing empire afloat.


First Cash reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Pesticides Coming In, Starting With Wine
To the Editor:
"Organic Wines Enter the Mainstream" (Business Day, Nov. 19), discusses the wine industry's problems when residues of the pesticide procymidone were found in wines imported from Europe.
You do not specify the details of the procymidone case, which should be of interest to all consumers, whether or not they consider themselves wine connoisseurs.


Falconbridge Gold reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quanex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Whitman Medical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Getting Some Motherly Advice Before Taking the Test of His Life, So Far


Disney Now a Network TV Power
After a troubled start as a television production company, the Walt Disney Studios has abruptly turned into a big force in network television with several hit comedies, contracts with some of the most powerful writers and a potentially innovative way of financing high-priced programs.
Television production had been a virtual stepchild of the Walt Disney Company, which has focused on motion pictures and theme parks in recent years.
But in 1988, the company decided to spend at least $100 million over five years on television, hire big-name writers and producers and then, essentially, leave them alone.


Del Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 3


Jillian's Entertainment Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wisconsin Southern Gas reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings this week includes only the regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By late Friday the bid-ask range for the outstanding three-month bill was 4.22 to 4.44 percent, and for the outstanding six-month bill, 4.21 to 4.23 percent.


Disney Now a Network TV Power
After a troubled start as a television production company, the Walt Disney Studios has abruptly turned into a big force in network television with several hit comedies, contracts with some of the most powerful writers and a potentially innovative way of financing high-priced programs.
Television production had been a virtual stepchild of the Walt Disney Company, which has focused on motion pictures and theme parks in recent years.
But in 1988, the company decided to spend at least $100 million over five years on television, hire big-name writers and producers and then, essentially, leave them alone.


DEP Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Hart Perry, Retired Executive, 73; Helped Create a Foreign Aid Unit
Hart Perry, a retired international corporate executive and government official who helped create an important foreign aid agency for developing countries, died on Thursday at his farm home near Germantown, N.Y.
He was 73 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bowater Inc., Darien, Conn., has filed for a total of $400 million of securities, comprising $200 million in 10-year notes and $200 million in 30-year debentures.
The newsprint and paper company will make the offer through First Boston Corp.


SIHANOUK TOURING THE COUNTRYSIDE
Prince Norodom Sihanouk traveled into the countryside today to begin what may be his most important struggle in restoring peace to Cambodia: to introduce himself to millions of people who have never before seen him and barely know his name.
Dodging pigs and cows and packs of mangy dogs along roads ravaged by the long civil war, the beaming Prince and his royal entourage set off by motorcade on a three-day visit to central Cambodia, on his first extended trip into the countryside since returning home after nearly two decades in exile.


Delta's Pan Am Dealings a Puzzle to Many
Throngs of spectators jammed into a Manhattan courtroom last Tuesday, fully expecting the bankruptcy judge to bring down the gavel on Delta Air Lines Inc.'s deal to save the fallen Pan American World Airways from extinction.
Instead, an apologetic Delta lawyer told the judge that after a "weekend of agony" his client had decided not to pump any more money into Pan Am, even if it meant the 64-year-old airline would shut down.
"The world has changed," Lawrence M. Handelsman said three times during the hearing, as if he could not stress those words enough.


George N. Cavalero, Publisher, 98
George N. Cavalero, who co-founded a publishing company of Roman Catholic books and worked there for almost eight decades, on died Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 98 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of stomach cancer, his relatives said.


Dairy Mart Convenience Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Leaders Hearken to History, Ambition and Voters Back Home
Francois Mitterrand President of France
Francois Mitterrand, who at the age of 75 is now in his 11th year in office, has long been a strong advocate of greater European integration.
He argues that it will be good for Europe but also, perhaps more importantly, for France.
He believes that by belonging to a strong economic bloc, France can withstand competition from the United States and Japan and keep the power of a united Germany in check.
As a Socialist, he was an ardent anti-Gaullist, and when he became President in 1981 he immediately set about applying Socialist policies, including the nationalization of banks and other strategic industries.
But when his program proved disastrous, he began applying orthodox monetarist policies that revived economic growth.


Houston Elects Developer Mayor as Coalition Ends
In a vote that scrambled a longstanding racial coalition, Bob Lanier was elected mayor on Saturday, defeating State Representative Sylvester Turner, who sought to become the city's first black mayor.
Mr.
Lanier, a developer who won 54 percent of the vote in the nonpartisan runoff election, to Mr.
Turner's 46 percent, said today that he would try to reunify the city.


Dance in Review
"Omadele and Guiseppe"  Danspace Project St. Mark's Church
Interracial marriages have become more generally accepted in American society.
But Blondell Cummings's absorbing new "Omadele and Guiseppe," presented by the Danspace Project on Thursday night, suggests that such relationships are still not easy, even when informed by a great deal of love, intelligence and sensitivity.


It Isn't Cold War II
The cold war is dead, but the cold war mentality is not.
As America observed the 50th anniversary of Pearl Harbor, we heard familiar arguments in debates about U.S.-Japan relations.
These cold war arguments, which demonize Japan, have arisen as economic tensions between both countries have also regenerated a World War II mindset: once again, Americans say the Japanese have motivations and aspirations that differ fundamentally from ours.


American Jews Grow More Hawkish on Israel; Didn't Seek Loan Delay
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 21 report that Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir would find American Jews dovish refers to "upstart liberal lobbyists," who "fought to persuade Congress and the Bush Administration to delay $10 billion in United States-backed housing loan guarantees for Israel." You create the impression that Americans for Peace Now is one of those groups.


Vari-Care Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Computer Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Returning Ex-Captive Has Seizure
The former hostage Alann Steen suffered a seizure shortly after greeting well-wishers at Detroit's airport Saturday night and was taken to a nearby hospital, where he spent the night.
Mr.
Steen was released from Annapolis Hospital in Wayne this afternoon and went to Clarklake, Mich., where his wife, Virginia, had spent the past three years waiting for his release from captors in Lebanon.


Tax Status Of Hospitals Is at Risk
The Internal Revenue Service has ruled that some nonprofit hospitals could lose their tax-exempt status because they have established joint ventures with doctors that benefited those doctors more than the local community.
Some tax lawyers and hospital industry spokesmen said the new ruling, which reverses previous ones, would force many institutions to change or scrap deals in which hospitals transferred revenues from units like outpatient surgery and diagnostic imaging centers to members of their medical staffs who had bought into the ventures.
The ultimate penalty for noncompliance could be loss of a hospital's tax-exempt status, which could also mean revoking the tax-exempt status of its bonds, the lawyers said.


Ultra Pac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Countrywide Credit Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Guillevin International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Lawyer and Witness Spar Over Sand Grains in Clothes
The materials found in the underwear of the woman who has accused William K.  Smith of rape probably came from the beach rather than the lawn at the rear of the Kennedy compound, a forensics expert called by the defense testified today.
But the prosecutor in the case, Moira K. Lasch, immediately challenged the usefulness of the finding.
Her vigorous cross-examination was one more reminder that despite the tens of thousands of dollars that the defense has spent on expert evidence, the case will probably end up just as it began: as Mr.
Smith's word against his accuser's.
The defendant is expected to testify sometime later this week.


Trimel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cucos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 20


H&amp;H Oil Tool Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
ANATOLY KARPOV will teach LIONEL HAMPTON to play chess at the 21 Club today, and in return, Mr.
Hampton will teach Mr.
Karpov to play the vibes.
The swap of skills will take place at a benefit luncheon of the new United States Committee for Chernobyl Help, which aids residents of the area that was contaminated by a nuclear accident in 1986.


Effort Seen To Lower Prime Rate
Many analysts expect the Federal Reserve Board to follow its move last Friday easing monetary policy with additional moves in a few weeks to bring down the prime rate, now at 7.5 percent.
That would put more downward pressure on long-term interest rates, including home mortgages.
But after 30 months of watching the Fed push down short-term rates, investors and economists are becoming more convinced that lower rates alone cannot quickly put the economy on track.


Heather Miller Marries Mark Spiro
Heather Cherise Miller, a daughter of Diana Reed and Eli Miller, both of Los Angeles, was married yesterday to Rabbi Mark Daniel Spiro, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald H. Spiro of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Noah Weinberg officiated at Moshav Ora, a wedding reception center in Jerusalem.


XTRA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rykoff-Sexton Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Designatronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Wasatch Education Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Smith Lawyer Exhibits A Taste for Tough Cases
Sixteen years ago, when Roy E. Black was a 30-year-old public defender of the down-and-out, The Miami Herald named him one of the 10 best criminal defense lawyers in the city.
It was a reminder that one cannot always judge the success of particular lawyers by the money they make or the toniness of their clients.
But often, one can.
In the intervening years, Mr.
Black's clientele has evolved from petty thieves to police officers, politicians, businessmen, and drug barons.
That William K. Smith hired him in June for $250,000 further confirms what most of Mr.
Black's colleagues have long acknowledged: he is at the very top of the Southern Florida defense bar, no mean feat in a crime-ridden community where legal business is brisk, clients can pay handsomely and, perforce, many of the nation's top trial lawyers have congregated.


Long No. 3, U.S. News Is Gaining on Its Rivals
This fall, for the first time, U.S.
News &amp; World Report has consistently run more advertising pages than Newsweek.
Indeed, U.S.
News, a perennial third in a field of three, is poised to end the year in second place in terms of ad pages, behind Time.
Time and Newsweek have both posted sharp advertising declines this year.
Through their issues dated Dec. 2, Time showed a 21 percent decline in ad pages from a year earlier, while Newsweek was down 15 percent.
In contrast, U.S.
News was off only two-tenths of 1 percent.


Correction
A sports article on Saturday about reaction to the shutdown of the Soviet Union's Olympic effort misidentified the president of the Goodwill Games.
He is Jack Kelly, not Tom Kelly.


VS Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Recession Surprise: New York Hotels Are Packed
Never mind the recession: in New York City this holiday season the bright lights at hotels are likely to read 'No Vacancy.'
For Robin Breakiron and Vicki Malik, friends from Uniontown, Pa., who arrived on Saturday, finding a room was something like a relay race.
The adrenalin flowed.
Their credit cards were at the ready.


Graves Without Names for the Forgotten Mentally Retarded
Amid heaps of burned tires and rusting car wrecks on a rutted stretch of the Long Path hiking trail in this Rockland County hamlet is a strange, peaceful and desolate sight: a two-acre glade overgrown with brown grass and hundreds of T-shaped iron markers.
It takes a minute to realize this is a graveyard.
The markers, about a foot high, bear only numbers.
Only a few marble headstones, scattered among them, bear names and dates.


Seton Hall-Rutgers Is Heating Up
It won't be the game of the year nationally, but in the state of New Jersey, Wednesday's matchup between Rutgers and Seton Hall has taken on a meaning that few would have anticipated at the start of the season.
On Saturday night, Rutgers (3-0) upset Nevada-Las Vegas, 91-85, in overtime at Piscataway, N.J., for one of the Scarlet Knights' biggest victories in years.
Seton Hall (3-1) and ranked No. 6 last week by The Associated Press, struggled for a while Saturday afternoon but ended up beating Iona (1-3), 88-72.
Last Wednesday, Seton Hall was smothered by North Carolina.


Wallace Computer Services reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


METRO DIGEST
WHO IS CARING FOR THE CHILDREN?
The darker side of the nanny business was starkly illuminated with the arrest in Thornwood, N.Y. of a 20-year-old au pair from Switzerland, who was charged in the death of a 3-month-old girl in her care.
Thousands of parents entrust the care of young lives to nannies.
And yet there is precious little families know about the people they hire.
Page B1.
NEW YORK CITY BYSTANDER DIES IN MOB WAR SHOOTING
The broadening civil war for control of the Colombo organized crime family claimed the life of an innocent victim, an 18-year old boy working in a Brooklyn bagel shop who was shot to death when he was mistaken for someone else, the police said.
In a possibly linked incident, the son of a reputed Colombo soldier was dropped off at Coney Island Hospital just 20 minutes earlier with a gunshot wound to his chest.
B1.
A QUIET DEFENDANT IN THE KAHANE TRIAL
In the Manhattan courtroom where the main question is who killed Rabbi Meir Kahane, no one appears as serene as the defendant.
Amid the bustle of an emotional trial, El Sayyid A. Nosair, an engineer who came from Egypt a decade ago in search of a better life but who kept cyanide in his locker at work, sits at the defense table, expressionless.
Reporter's notebook.
B3.
A SIGN DESPITE THE TIMES: NO VACANCY
Never mind the recession: In New York City this holiday season, there is no room at the inn -- or the hotel or motel.
Almost every hotel reservation in Manhattan was used this weekend, offering a small glimmer of reassurance to an economically beleaguered city.
B3.
MULTIPLE CHOICE NIGHTMARE FOR STUDENTS
Hundreds of eighth graders nervously took the New York City Specialized High Schools admission examination, the sole determining factor for getting into the city's three specialized high schools for gifted students.
The competition was fierce, and the competitors, along with their parents, were more than a little apprehensive B3.
A ROUGH DAY FOR SUBWAY COMMUTERS
Suspicious fires in a Manhattan subway tunnel disrupted service on four subway lines yesterday and are expected to cause rush-hour delays today along the B, D and Q lines.
B3 Social responsibility taken seriously at a retirement village.
Metro Matters.B5.
REGION THE MOVE HOME TO LOVE CANAL
One by one, about 25 families have moved back into the neat but abandoned houses of Love Canal, the Niagra Falls neighborhood sitting atop 21,800 tons of buried toxic chemicals.
Outsiders can't understand their decision, but the families say they are taking a measured risk that lets them live in a pleasant and convenient subdivision.
"Of course there's no guarantee that it's safe, but I feel there's danger riding the subway in New York City," one resident said.
B1 VOTE LOOMS ON CONNECTICUT INCOME TAX
A vote to repeal Connecticut's three-month-old income tax could come Monday, but legislators who gathered at the Capitol yesterday to put the final touches on the plan said its details were still not finished and might not be until hours before the vote.
B6.
NEW JERSEY LOOKS TO KILL TAX PACKAGE
Barely 18 months after the Democratic-controlled Legislature approved a $2.8 billion tax package, the largest in state history, a State Senate committee is to begin a hearing on Monday on lame-duck legislation that would repeal the entire package.
Like the legislation that raised taxes, the repeal effort, which is also being led by the Democrats, has caused public rancor and united Republican legislators in opposition.
B6 A GRAVEYARD FOR THOSE FORGOTTEN IN LIFE
Amid heaps of burned tires and rusting car wrecks on a hiking trail in Theills, N.Y. is a strange, peaceful and desolate sight: a two-acre graveyard overgrown with hundreds of T-shaped iron markers.
Few people ever visit these graves.
Those buried there were forgotten before they died: residents of New York State's vast institution for the mentally retarded at Letchworth Village.
Thiells Journal.
B6.
Mountain lions escape from cages in Paramus park.
B6.
The Traffic Map B2 Neediest Cases B2


Coleman Is Glowing Overseas
The Coleman Company began exporting its portable lanterns in 1916, and they proved so popular that it opened a sales office in Toronto four years later -- at a time when only the most visionary companies were looking beyond America's borders.
But only recently has Coleman's investment in global operations begun to pay handsome dividends.
"In the last four years, our foreign growth has been in excess of 30 percent a year," said Lawrence M. Jones, the chairman and chief executive of the company, which has its headquarters here and also manufactures stoves, coolers, tents, sleeping bags, canoes and fishing boats.


With Appeal to Past, Ex-Police Chief Puts San Francisco Mayor on the Run
Mining the frustrations of voters who yearn for simpler times, a former police chief is an even bet to unseat the Mayor of San Francisco on Tuesday.
Frank Jordan, a career police officer who is a populist hero in the city's white, middle-class and heterosexual neighborhoods, finished a stunning first in a crowded general election here in November and on Tuesday faces the incumbent Mayor, Art Agnos, in a runoff that poll takers say is too close to call.


Asiamerica Equities reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Labatt (John) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Herzog, Angry Over Bonilla, Acquires Hayes
Whitey Herzog, who at baseball's winter meetings in 1980 made four trades involving 22 players, made the first trade of the 1991 meetings today as the California Angels acquired outfielder Von Hayes from the Philadelphia Phillies.
But more significant, Herzog took an unusually public and pointed stand against Bobby Bonilla's agent for the way he conducted the negotiations that resulted in the player joining the Mets.
"I will not make an offer to any of Dennis Gilbert's players," Herzog, the Angels' general manager, said.
Herzog is angry because Gilbert, in his view, misled him and used the Angels in the negotiations that led Bonilla to New York for a record $29 million.


CUC International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Skinner Faces Task of Injecting Oil Into Rusty Domestic Policy Machine
As Samuel K. Skinner takes charge of the White House staff, he inherits a domestic policy apparatus that has atrophied from disuse.
An Administration's proposals to solve domestic problems, like the recession, unemployment, homelessness and the soaring cost of health care, do not come out of thin air.
An organizational structure is needed to encourage the development, refinement and discussion of proposals before they can be translated into action, current and former officials say.


MGM-Pathe Communications Co. reports earnings for Qtr to June 29


People
*
Alice Greenberg, former director of Ogilvy &amp; Mather's national television buying and programming, has formed the Greenberg Partnership, a national television buying service in New York.
Other principals are Sharon McGavin, a former Ogilvy colleague, and members of Ephron, Papazian &amp; Ephron, a consulting firm. *
David Wachtel has been named publisher of Institutional Investor magazine in New York, succeeding Arnold Obler, who will retire.
Mr.
Wachtel had previously been associate publisher-international, overseeing international advertising services.


Assix International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Adam Emmerich Weds Miss Nadler
Pamela Anne Nadler, an associate in New York with the Cleveland law firm of Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue, was married yesterday to Adam Oliver Emmerich, a partner-elect in the New York law firm of Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz.
Rabbi Allan Nadler, a brother of the bride, officiated at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Emmerich, 34 years old, graduated from McGill University and received law degrees from the University of Toronto and Columbia University.
Her parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Y. Nadler of Montreal, where her father is the president of an insurance brokerage and consulting concern he founded.


Bridge
Bitter criticism in the post-mortem can have a special edge when a husband-and-wife partnership is involved.
The reader can judge whether East, the husband, was entitled to scream at West, the wife, on the diagramed deal.
It was played in a duplicate game in Oklahoma, and reported by Robert Owen of Tulsa, Okla., who played with great skill as South.
Six spades is tough to reach, but it is an excellent contract that rates to succeed whenever the trumps split evenly, or when they split 3-1 and a trump is not led.
With the actual distribution South seems doomed, but West understandably doubled and gave the declarer a vital clue.


Some Holiday Traditions Fall Victim to the Recession
AS the advertising industry's recession continues, its traditional holiday-time largesse toward employees has noticeably diminished.
A growing number of shops across the country, particularly in the Northeast, are reducing or even eliminating holiday bonuses, parties and other special seasonal rewards for employees.
Some, though, are trying to make up for that, by offering alternative compensation.
And some, hoping to turn thoughts to those less fortunate, are encouraging agency-wide charitable activities.


Creative Computer Appliances reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Media Business
At the time of his death, Robert Maxwell almost surely knew he was about to be caught, with auditors about to notice that he had drained hundreds of millions of dollars from his public companies and employee pension funds to keep his family empire afloat.
The audit team also found evidence that some of the diverted money went to The Daily News in New York to cover its losses.
That raises more doubts about the future of the newspaper, which Mr.
Maxwell acquired in March 1991.  [ Page A1. ]


Lawyer and Witness Spar Over Sand Grains in Clothes
The materials found in the underwear of the woman who has accused William K.  Smith of rape probably came from the beach rather than the lawn at the rear of the Kennedy compound, a forensics expert called by the defense testified today.
But the prosecutor in the case, Moira K. Lasch, immediately challenged the usefulness of the finding.
Her vigorous cross-examination was one more reminder that despite the tens of thousands of dollars that the defense has spent on expert evidence, the case will probably end up just as it began: as Mr.
Smith's word against his accuser's.
The defendant is expected to testify sometime later this week.


Miscellany
*
The North American operations of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Direct, New York, will remain separate from the direct-marketing shop of Kobs &amp; Draft Worldwide, Chicago, Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C. said, correcting an announcement it recently made.
Saatchi Direct will continue to serve the direct-marketing needs of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, New York, while Kobs &amp; Draft will work in conjunction with Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, another Saatchi unit.
Deborah Newkerk remains president of Saatchi Direct.


Robin Trachtenberg Is Married to Fred Brendel
Robin Ann Trachtenberg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira M. Trachtenberg of East Rockaway, L.I., and Bridgehampton, L.I., was married yesterday to Fred Gerard Brendel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Fred C. Brendel of North Babylon, L.I.
Cantor David Benedict officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Frank Nelson, a Roman Catholic priest, at the Crest Hollow Country Club in Woodbury, L.I.
Mrs.
Brendel, 31 years old, is the manager of private ambulatory services at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. degree in health-care administration in a joint program of Baruch College and the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.


The Ghost of McCarran-Walter
For nearly 40 years, the McCarran-Walter Immigration Act allowed the United States Government to exclude and even deport aliens because of their political beliefs.
Last year, Congress finally repealed the most odious provisions of the law.
Why, then, is the Government keeping the ghost of McCarran-Walter alive in a five-year effort to deport two Palestinian immigrants?


Proler International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Robert Goldworm, 65; A Fashion Executive
Robert Goldworm, a retired fashion designer and an executive who was a leader in developing women's knitwear, died on Tuesday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 65 years old and lived in Manhattan and Pacific Palisades, Calif.
He had pancreatic cancer and died of an embolism, friends said.


Offering a Civil Celebration Of American Liberties
In case you haven't noticed, this is freedom week, and WNYC television and radio and the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism are doing their best to bring it to New Yorkers' attention by joining in a week of programming in celebration of the 200th anniversary of the Bill of Rights.
Channel 31 is offering a daily portion of programs, mostly repeats, on issues touched on by one of the first 10 amendments to the Constitution.
Tonight at 8, for example, "Eye on Dance," the station's weekly series, deals with freedom of the arts.
It will be followed at 9 by a documentary about Palestinians in the United States who say they are being harassed for their political views by immigration authorities.


Leaders Hearken to History, Ambition and Voters Back Home
Helmut Kohl Chancellor of Germany
Helmut Kohl has been enthusiastically preaching the benefits of European unity.
He would like to see European nations surrender much of their national sovereignty and accept a powerful European Parliament, an independent central bank and a single currency, and in this he has the support of virtually all German politicians.


Pic 'N' Save reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Allan Schneider, 54, L.I. Real-Estate Broker
Allan M. Schneider, a real-estate broker on eastern Long Island, died on Friday at a friend's house in East Hampton.
He was 54 years old and lived in East Hampton.
He died of a heart attack, a business associate, Barbara Richey, said.


Battle Mountain Gold Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Texts of Declarations by 3 Republic Leaders
Following are excerpts of a preamble and two declarations issued today by the leaders of Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia, as transmitted by the Soviet press agency Tass.
The preamble
was translated from the Russian by Reuters and the declarations were translated by The Associated Press:


Review/Television; The Duke Ellington Behind Closed Doors
"Duke Ellington: Reminiscing in Tempo," a 90-minute documentary to be presented at 8 tonight on Channel 13 as part of the "American Experience" series, tries to get beyond the music to the private man and then make the connections.
It's not easy; the very public performer was extremely reticent about his private life.
But the producer and director Robert S. Levi, who also wrote the script with Geoffrey C. Ward, the principal writer of "The Civil War," impressively succeeds in marshaling the available facts and avoiding pointless speculation.
This biography, something of a musical suite itself, runs until 10 P.M., with pledge-week breaks.
Unlike many other jazz greats of this century, Edward Kennedy Ellington, born in Washington on April 29, 1899, did not grow up impoverished.
His father was a coachman and butler who sometimes worked at the White House.
His mother, Daisy, considered her son blessed.
From the moment he was born, the narrator Julian Bond tells us, Edward was told he could do anything he put his mind to.
Standing on his stoop, the story goes, the boy would shout, "I am Edward the noble duke, and people will come running to me!" They certainly would.


U.S. Communists' Meeting Has Its Own Fractionalism
The Communist Party of the United States of America, its meeting hall decked with mementoes of its glory days in the 1930's, its leadership surrounded by guards and its membership bitterly divided, ended its quadrennial convention in Cleveland Dec. 8 after repudiating the policies of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Boris N. Yeltsin and other former comrades.
There was no indication, however, that the former General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union or the current President of the Russian Republic noticed or cared.


Killing Is Tied To Mafia War In Brooklyn
The broadening civil war for control of the Colombo organized-crime family yesterday claimed the life of an innocent victim, an 18-year-old youth working in a Brooklyn bagel shop who the police said was shot to death when he was mistaken for someone else.
About 20 minutes earlier, the 21-year-old son of a reputed Colombo soldier was dropped off at Coney Island Hospital with a gunshot wound to his chest.
The police were looking into the possibility the two incidents were linked.


Review/Music; Mozart, the Forest and the Trees
In theory it seemed like an extraordinary collaboration planned for Carnegie Hall.
Take a German orchestra, the Deutsche Kammerphilharmonie, founded in 1980 as an autonomous, conductorless, democratically run ensemble devoted to contemporary music, to expert chamber playing and to musical seriousness.
Add the violinist Gidon Kremer, who has the technique to do just about anything he likes with his instrument, who has made a reputation for brilliant and idiosyncratic performances and who has already worked with the Kammerphilharmonie at his imaginative summer festival in the Austrian village of Lockenhaus.
Then turn these temperaments loose in programs that include the violin concertos of Mozart, played in two consecutive evenings at Carnegie Hall.
Something unusual was unavoidable.
Something unusual was in fact the result on Friday night, but it did not shed the best light on the participants.


Dance in Review
Claire Porter
Dance Theater Workshop Bessie Schonberg Theater
Actors dread forgetting their lines onstage.
A reviewer's nightmare is of feeling totally unmoved when the rest of the audience is delirious with pleasure.
The theater was packed with guffawing, cheering audience members, including a good many dancers and choreographers, when Claire Porter performed on Friday night.
But it was hard to fathom why observations like "the baby breath could just about take your breath away" struck so many as so funny.


Review/Theater; Bostwick and Gleason in 'Nick and Nora'
Leaving the Marquis Theater after "Nick and Nora," I kept hearing the same jaded comment from other members of the audience beside me on the escalator: "Well, it's not nearly as bad as they said it would be."
True, this comment is hard to evaluate if you have no way of knowing which "they" these people are referring to.
After all, nearly 100,000 customers paid full price to see "Nick and Nora" during its nine weeks of previews before its official "opening" last night, and that's a lot of suspects, each, no doubt, bad-mouthing the show to a different degree.
Even so, I bet the theatergoers I overheard on the Marquis escalator are right.
"Nick and Nora," in its finished form, is
not
as bad as they said, whoever the "they" might be.


Disney Now a Network TV Power
After a troubled start as a television production company, the Walt Disney Studios has abruptly turned into a big force in network television with several hit comedies, contracts with some of the most powerful writers and a potentially innovative way of financing high-priced programs.
Television production had been a virtual stepchild of the Walt Disney Company, which has focused on motion pictures and theme parks in recent years.
But in 1988, the company decided to spend at least $100 million over five years on television, hire big-name writers and producers and then, essentially, leave them alone.


Kahane Trial Sets Off Squabbles by Lawyers
In the Manhattan courtroom where the main question is who killed Rabbi Meir Kahane, a high-walled room where sunlight seldom seeps in and the fake leather on the armchairs has peeled under the weight of many backs over many years, no one appears as serene as the defendant.
The lawyers fight over the admissibility of evidence, the judge calls the Police Commissioner when police witnesses fail to show up, witnesses cry and jurors raise alarm about witnesses who take cues for their answers from courtroom spectators.


Dividend Meetings


Foreman Fires Away As Ellis Sees Fireworks
There's no recession in the George Foreman market.
Foreman, who will be 43 years old next month, made $5 million on Saturday night for taking batting practice against a jut-jawed target disguised as Jimmy Ellis.
That was how easy it was for the 257-pound Foreman at the Reno-Sparks Convention Center, where he stopped Ellis at 1:36 of the third round of a scheduled 10-round bout.


Japan's Socialists Reproach Rulers for Refusal to Apologize for War
In a rebuke to the Government of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, the Socialist opposition in Japan said today that the nation had "turned its back on the historical truth" by refusing to "sincerely apologize" for its aggressive behavior in World War II.
"Words of apology, however genuine they may be, cannot erase the past curses of the victims," said Makoto Tanabe, the Socialist Party chairman, in a speech intended as a rebuttal to recent Government statements.
"But failure to apologize will erase the bright future courses of the former aggressor."


RSI Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Repeal Vote On New Tax Coming Soon In Hartford
A vote to repeal Connecticut's three-month-old income tax could come Monday, but legislators who gathered at the Capitol today to put the final touches on the plan said its details were still not finished and might not be until hours before the vote.
Some of the details are small -- like whether the sales tax rate should rise to 8 percent or 8.25 percent from 6 percent.
Others are big -- like whether to allow cities to raise money through video slot-machine gambling, the final shape of $200 million to $300 million in state spending cuts and, finally, how to close a gap in the plan that has been estimated at $300 million to $500 million.


World Cup '94: Genie Is Out of the Bottle
In less than one hour yesterday at the Paramount Theater in Madison Square Garden, 141 national soccer teams were efficiently matched with their alibis, with their worst nightmares, and with their impossible paths to glory.
When the 1994 World Cup qualifying draw was done and the hostess, Barbara Eden, the actress, had mispronounced the name of her last soccer celebrity, delegates from six regions of the world wondered aloud if they would ever reach the shores of the United States in 31 months' time for the greatest sports spectacle of them all.


U.S. Seeks to Trim 'Friendly Fire' Toll
Alarmed by the number of American soldiers killed and wounded by "friendly fire" in the Persian Gulf war, the military has begun top-to-bottom changes to decrease the frequency of such incidents in future conflicts.
The changes in training, equipment and procedures will affect tens of thousands of soldiers, the Army said, and are the most significant shifts so far in American military practices resulting from lessons learned in the gulf war.


Wic Western reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Williams-Sonoma Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Kimberly Bergalis Is Dead at 23; Symbol of Debate Over AIDS Tests
Kimberly Bergalis, who stirred a national debate over AIDS testing when she became the first known case of a patient contracting the virus from a health care worker, died yesterday at her home in Fort Pierce, Fla.
She was 23 years old.
Her lawyer, Robert Montgomery, announced her death from the disease.
He quoted her father as saying, "Kimberly is not going to suffer anymore."


Fischer Imaging Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


DECLARING DEATH OF SOVIET UNION, RUSSIA AND 2 REPUBLICS FORM NEW COMMONWEALTH
The leaders of Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia declared today that the Soviet Union had ceased to exist and proclaimed a new "Commonwealth of Independent States" open to all members of the former union.
In a series of statements issued after a two-day meeting at a Byelorussian government retreat, the leaders of the three Slavic republics declared void all efforts to create a new union on the ruins of the old one.
But they called for the creation of new "coordinating bodies" for defense, foreign affairs and the economy that would have their seat in Minsk, the capital of Byelorussia, and decided to maintain the ruble as the common currency.


Home to Some Is Still Love Canal to Others
Diane Alexis used to look out her window here and see black smoke belching from the nearby chemical plant.
The bittersweet smell of pollutants seemed to cover her neighborhood like a wet blanket.
She says she had trouble breathing; trees turned brown and died.
So six months ago she and her husband, Gary, sold their home and moved crosstown with their minature poodle, Bo, into a ranchhouse in a neighborhood -- infamous as an internationally feared symbol of the toxic timebombs buried across the industrial landscape -- Love Canal.


Foote, Cone Plans $36 Million Write-Off
Problems with a Los Angeles unit and New York real estate will force Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications Inc. to take a fourth-quarter write-off of about $36 million, or $3.40 a share, resulting in a net loss for the full year.
Terry Ashwill, chief financial officer of the Chicago-based agency, said about $27 million of the write-off stemmed from the restructuring of Krupp Taylor, a direct-marketing subsidiary in Los Angeles acquired in 1987; the revamping was undertaken because of disappointing revenue.
Over six months, he added, about 85 employees were laid off, reducing employment to about 200.


Crown Books Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Unitrode Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Mitchell Energy &amp; Development Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


8.2% Staff Cut Seen at Y.&amp;R.
Young &amp; Rubicam New York has announced one of the largest single layoffs since the advertising industry's slump began two years ago.
The agency said on Friday that it would reduce its staff by at least 90 people -- about 8.2 percent -- in the next six weeks.
Since last month, the agency had been denying that it planned layoffs this year among its 1,200-person New York staff.
Meanwhile, trade publications reported that layoffs of up to 400 people were imminent.


For Giants, The Ride Is Over
Almost 40 years ago, when Charlie Dressen managed the Brooklyn Dodgers, he uttered memorable words about his crosstown baseball rivals.
"The Giants," he said, "is dead."
The same words apply now to the football Giants.
Today, the team that won Super Bowl XXV in January lost its final chance to make this season's National Football League playoffs.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices fell in Tokyo today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues finished down 92.18 points, or slightly more than four-tenths of a percent, to 22,352.88.
Volume was about 130 million shares, which traders said was the lowest this year.
At midday, the index was down 143.72 points.
On Friday, the Nikkei lost 14.11 points.


Microwave Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Essay; Middleman's Mistake
If President Bush can get the Arab states to negotiate directly with Israel, the talks will make progress.
If he lets Secretary Baker become the middleman carrying messages and finally recommending the settlement -- the "peace process," a phrase coined by Henry Kissinger nearly two decades ago, will fail.
So far, despite the great debt of survival owed to America by the Arab states, Secretary Baker has not been able to arrange talks other than "through" the U.S.
That's because Arab leaders believe the Americans can pressure the Israelis to give up the West Bank, the Golan Heights, and in the end part of Jerusalem.


Voting for New Romanian Constitution Is Marked by Apathy


C.I.A. Ties Compromise Rochester Institute
To the Editor:
As the senior fact finder retained by the Rochester Institute of Technology to investigate its relations with the Central Intelligence Agency, I would like to clarify the limited disagreement within the review panel (news article, Nov. 24).


A Team Plays On in a Search for Normalcy
Dexter Wooten's eyes grew wide and bright as he watched Antonio Carrasquillo score layup after layup against Midwood High School's undersized and helpless defenders under the basket.
"I could get me a lot of assists playing with Antonio," Wooten said at the game early last week, a smile breaking out from under the brim of his black-and-red Chicago Bulls cap.


Provigo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Hector Orezzoli, 38, a Producer; Won Tonys for 'Black and Blue'
Hector Orezzoli, who created "Black and Blue" and other Broadway revues with his partner, Claudio Segovia, died Thursday night at his home in Manhattan.
He was 38 years old.
Mr. Orezzoli died of cardiopulmonary arrest, Mr. Segovia said.


Community Vests Power In 4 Different Branches
Here are profiles of the principal executive and deliberative bodies of the European Community: European Commission
The commission is for most purposes the executive branch of the European Community.
It is responsible for initiating policy, insuring that community laws are observed and carrying out legislation that it approves along with the community's other institutions.


Accounts
*
British Airways P.L.C., London, to Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising , New York, from Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, for the print portion of its United States advertising account, with estimated billings of $9 million.
The move consolidates the airline's American advertising at Saatchi. *
Kendall Refining Co., Bradford, Pa., to Wyse Advertising, Cleveland, for advertising, sales promotion and public relations for Kendall Oil.
Billings are estimated at $6 million.
The other finalists in a review were Ketchum Advertising, Pittsburgh, and Eric Mower &amp; Associates Inc., Syracuse.


Teri Friedman Has Wedding
Dr.
Teri Ann Friedman, a psychologist at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, was married yesterday to Stephen Mark Gaines, an assistant New York State attorney general in Manhattan.
Rabbi Mark Winer officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Dr.
Friedman, who is keeping her name, graduated from Oberlin College.
She received a master's degree from the New School for Social Research and a doctorate in counseling psychology from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Friedman of Clifton, N.J.


Environmental Safety Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quotation of the Day
"There are people who spend more time picking out fabric for a custom-made sofa than they do picking out who is going to care for their children." -- CHRISTINE THORNTON WIENER, owner of Nannies Midwest in Chicago  [ B4.2 ]


Eagle Defense Adjusts And Giants Just Wilt
The Eagles were so tired after their battle with the Oilers last Monday night that they hadn't practiced with pads, and when the Eagles' defensive coordinator, Bud Carson, took the field for today's warmups, he had a chilling feeling that the Giants were ready to win.
So much for feelings, or logic.


Xylogics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Wet Seal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Wiley (John) &amp; Sons Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Waste Recovery reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Phoenix Advanced Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; A Sportswriter's Novel About Writing Sports
You Gotta Play Hurt  By Dan Jenkins 353 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.
Jim Tom Pinch, the cynical, foul-talking protagonist of Dan Jenkins's latest funny novel, "You Gotta Play Hurt," is a magazine journalist who covers the international sports scene for SM, or The Sports Magazine, a rival weekly to Sports Illustrated, where Dan Jenkins was a senior writer for more than 20 years.


Invention Design Engineering reports earnings for Year to July 31


Wyle Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Grilli Property reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Etac Sales reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


A Multiethnic Festival in Brooklyn


Editorial Notebook; Buy Down the Red Army
Are the U.S. and its allies willing to spend $1 billion to get rid of the Soviet threat?
That's not a pitch for some exotic new weapon.
It's for severance pay to induce Soviet officers to retire.


Neediest Cases Fund Aids Ex-Addict
Robert R. moved to New York from Boston two years ago "on a suicide mission."
"I'd lost my job and my girl and decided if I'm going to be a drug addict, I'm going to go where the real addicts are," the 29-year-old said in a faded voice.


Harnischfeger Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Kennedy Center Awards Presented to 7
President Bush paid tribute at the White House tonight to the seven recipients of this year's Kennedy Center honors, saying that their work "represents the carnival creative diversity that makes America a nation like no other."
Mr.
Bush spoke at an East Room ceremony shortly before joining the award winners at a gala at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts here.
The first recipient honored by the President was also the oldest: Roy Acuff, the 88-year-old country songwriter and singer, who, Mr.
Bush said, has "the biblical genius for speaking straight into the heart." All the other recipients are in their 70's.
Musicals and Dance
Of the next recipients, Betty Comden and Adolph Green, Mr.
Bush said, "They helped bring the American musical to full flower in the 40's and their work is still flourishing in the 90's."


Rangers' Aggressiveness Pays Some Big Dividends
The Rangers finally conserved a lead last night with the proper mix of backchecking and forward thinking
A two-goal lead at the end of the first period was still a two-goal lead at the end of the second period, and eventually became a 4-0 victory over Boston after 60 minutes of two-way hockey at Madison Square Garden.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Smith Trial's First Verdict: Future Bright for Court TV
IN television, one big moment can often establish a new name, or even a new channel.
For the Courtroom Television Network, the new 24-hour all-trial cable channel, the William Kennedy Smith trial may be that defining moment.
"What that war did for CNN, this trial can do for Court TV," said Larry Gerbrandt, senior vice president of Paul Kagan Associates, the leading analyst of the cable industry, referring to the Persian Gulf war.


American Jews Grow More Hawkish on Israel; What Aipac Does
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 21 article about the views of leading American Jews misnames and misrepresents the positions of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, the organized Jewish community's lobby.
A correction published a day later further misrepresents Aipac's mandate.


Milan Journal; Italy Bares Its Soul, and More, at La Scala Opening
There were the King of Sweden and the President of Italy, authors and artists and critics under the chandeliers.
There were glitter and diamonds, mink and paparazzi, and somewhere between them all, the music.
And on the opening night of La Scala, Italy's premier opera, Sandra, Monica and Elena came too, sprinkled pamphlets, bared their breasts and shouted, "Better nude than wearing furs!"
Thus with all its various rituals -- some old, some new and none too far removed from Milan's preoccupation with money and show -- did the opera season begin on Saturday night in this northern city that sets an artistic standard for the world's opera lovers.
And at $850 a seat for opening night, it takes the measure of just who is who on the city's social register.


Vital Signs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DELICATE POSITION FOR JAPAN'S ENVOY
Probably no one in Hawaii followed Saturday's 50th anniversary events at Pearl Harbor more closely than Kensaku Hogen, and he was not even there.
He is the new Consul General of Japan in Honolulu, a job that has put the 50-year-old diplomat, born four months before the surprise attack on the American fleet here, in a particularly delicate position.


Carl Karcher reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 4


Verit Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BCI Management reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Versar Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lions Get a Quick Stroll in the Park
The weather was mild and the mesh roof of the cage was torn, so for the Bergen County police, it was Sunday in the park with lions when the officers were called today to help coax two mountain lions back behind their bars at Van Sun Park in Paramus.
The lions broke out of their cage through a tear in the top of the wire enclosure, said Sgt.
John Marchick of the county police.
The park was cleared of about 25 visitors for just less than an hour while handlers tempted the animals into a holding cage.


Sports of The Times; What to Do Until the World Cup Comes Around?
WITH a great deal of envy, I turned on the television set yesterday to watch a soccer game.
It was the best way to prepare for the World Cup draw, which would be held later in the day in New York.
Watch soccer from Italy first, then go to the Paramount to eat my heart out because we have no national league, we have no big-time soccer and we must wait three more years for the temporary glory of the World Cup.
Misty afternoon in Turin.
Through the graciousness of WNYC-TV, the greatest soccer league in the world was in my den.
There was Lothar Matthaus, kicking missiles for Internazionale of Milan.
There was Roberto Baggio with his neat little ponytail, esthetically plunking a penalty kick for Juventus of Turin.


Royal Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Dividend Meetings


Jets Show Very Little In a Meaningless Loss
In a game where three players were ejected for unsavory behavior, another player was injured on a questionable cut block, and a fan was injured when he tumbled out of the stands and into the back of the end zone, the fact that the Jets lost control of another game seemed to pale by comparison.
There was nothing new in the way the Jets lost.
The defense gave up big plays in the first half, and their offense misfired and malfunctioned in the second half as they lost, 34-20, to the Lions before 69,304 fans at the Silverdome.
Detroit (10-4) went 8-0 at the Silverdome this year and finished their first undefeated season at home since 1962.
The loss took on a "so what?" air for New York, after it was determined that the Jets, amazingly, still control their playoff destiny.


ATC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Results Plus
GOLF Langer Wins Challenge  Bernhard Langer shot a par 72 and held off Mark Calcavecchia's late charge yesterday to win the $1 Million Challenge at Sun City, South Africa.
Langer's 16-under-par 272 was five strokes better than Calcavecchia's score and broke the tournament record of 274 on the 7,729-yard course. (AP) TENNIS Becker Withdraws  Boris Becker, suffering from a stomach virus and dizziness, withdrew from the final of the exhibition European Community championship yesterday, allowing Aaron Krickstein of the United States to win $250,000 and the title in Antwerp, Belgium.
Becker won $160,000. (AP) SKIING  Girardelli Triumphs  Four-time World Cup ski champion, Marc Girardelli, won yesterday's super-G race at Val d'Isere, France, for his 36th career victory.
Girardelli, an Austrian who competes for Luxembourg, finished an 8,087-foot course in 1 minute 26.31 seconds.
A.J.
Kitt of the United States, winner of Saturday's downhill, was 45th in 1:29.61. (AP)


Judith Kamien, Writer, Marries
Judith Mari Kamien, the daughter of David Kamien of Stapleton Heights, S.I., and Evelyn Bridges Kamien of St.
George, S.I., was married yesterday to Ronald Eric Sander, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Sander of Manhasset, L.I.
Rabbi Lee Friedlander officiated, assisted by Rabbi Joy Levitt, at Yale University in New Haven.
Mrs.
Sander, 28 years old, graduated from Yale and is a freelance writer in New York.
Her father is a classical music composer and conductor.
Her mother is the assistant to the vice president for business development at the Sugar Foods Corporation in New York.


BACKING FOR CUBA IN SOUTH AFRICA
The South African Communist Party concluded its first legal congress in four decades today with a spirited pledge of support for Cuba to offset the Soviet Union's desertion.
The party promised to mount a protest campaign "to expose the intrigues of U.S. imperialism against Cuba" and to raise funds for the Cuban people.


INSIDE
Oiling the Machinery
The challenge for the President's new chief of staff will be to revitalize a domestic policy apparatus that rusted while John Sununu and Richard Darman held sway.
Page A12.
Another View in Japan
Japan's Socialists said the nation had "turned its back on the historical truth" by refusing to "sincerely apologize" for wartime conduct.
Page A7.
Who Knows Who Nanny Is?
Parents often know little about the people caring for their children, a fact highlighted by an au pair's arrest in a girl's arson death.
Page B1.
Dallas Times Herald Shuts
The city's oldest daily newspaper ceases publication today, after selling its presses and subscription lists to its rival, The Morning News.
Page D1.
Focus Of AIDS Debate Dies
Kimberly Bergalis, who stirred a national debate over AIDS testing of doctors and other health workers, died of AIDS at the age of 23.
Page D9.


U.S. Striving to Prevent 'Friendly Fire'
Alarmed by the number of Americans killed and wounded by American fire in the Persian Gulf war, the military is making top-to-bottom changes in its training procedures and building technical devices to try to prevent such accidental attacks in future battles.
In the gulf war, 35 of 148 Americans killed in combat, or nearly a quarter, died under United States military fire.
And of the 467 Americans wounded, 72 of them, or 15 percent, were injured by their own forces.


Transcisco Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Smith Lawyer Exhibits A Taste for Tough Cases
Sixteen years ago, when Roy E. Black was a 30-year-old public defender of the down-and-out, The Miami Herald named him one of the 10 best criminal defense lawyers in the city.
It was a reminder that one cannot always judge the success of particular lawyers by the money they make or the toniness of their clients.
But often, one can.
In the intervening years, Mr.
Black's clientele has evolved from petty thieves to police officers, politicians, businessmen, and drug barons.
That William K. Smith hired him in June for $250,000 further confirms what most of Mr.
Black's colleagues have long acknowledged: he is at the very top of the Southern Florida defense bar, no mean feat in a crime-ridden community where legal business is brisk, clients can pay handsomely and, perforce, many of the nation's top trial lawyers have congregated.


Guest Supply Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviews/Television; Jessica Tandy vs. Network Nasties
"The Story Lady," tonight's television movie on NBC at 9, stars Jessica Tandy.
That's reason enough for staying tuned, although the relentlessly flat production can be decidedly off-putting.
Grace McQueen (Miss Tandy) has grown old and, going to live in New Jersey with her daughter and son-in-law (Tandy Cronyn and Richard Masur), she is expected to participate in the assorted inanities provided by local senior centers.
Not for Grace, thank you.
Desperately looking for something useful to do, she discovers a public-access channel on cable television and decides to simply sit in front of a camera in a dingy studio and read the stories of Hans Christian Andersen.
In no time at all, children all over the New York metropolitan area are enchanted by this composed, dignified, fantasy grandmother.


Flights of Non-fancy
Damnably, because of the Pan American collapse, he had to shift to a more expensive and inconvenient flight.
After waiting in long lines to buy a ticket and clear security, he barely made the plane.
Then he sat in a jam-packed cabin waiting for takeoff, 20 minutes late.
Then, insult added to injury, he learned the passenger next to him had bought his ticket months in advance and paid hundreds of dollars less.
That's a stylized example but it could well be a real one, reflecting widespread disdain for airline deregulation.
Ten years ago, proponents of deregulation were promising something better, not waves of bankruptcies, congested terminals and fares of dizzying complexity.
Has the grand experiment backfired?


The Meaning of It All, Electronically
"GARBAGE in, gospel out. Variation of 'garbage in, garbage out.' Some people put too much faith in computer output!"
That is one of more than 5,000 definitions of computer terms and phrases in the Electronic Computer Glossary, a dictionary-encyclopedia on a disk that has earned a permanent place in the portable machine I generally write on.
Not everyone writes about computers, but many people use, must learn or are assaulted by the industry's terminology.


Review/Music; Tracing the Power And the Influence Of a Viennese Cantor
When Robert Schumann was in Vienna, he made it a point to attend the main synagogue to hear the cantor, Salomon Sulzer.
Sulzer (1804-1890) was also admired by Schubert, who wrote a Hebrew setting of Psalm 92 for him.
And Sulzer gave one concert accompanied by Franz Liszt.
The pianist wrote that Sulzer sounded as if he had personally heard David's harp or had participated in the building of the pyramids.
So influential was his cantorial singing that at the turn of this century, one writer complained of the creeping "Sulzerism" of bad imitators, of the "wild roaring" that converts the "altar into a stage."
But were Sulzer just an exceptional cantor with a taste for the great Romantics, he would not have been the focus of a concert given on Sunday night at the Stephen Wise Free Synagogue, 30 West 68th Street, as part of a three-day conference in honor of the centennial of his death.
The conference, ending today at the Jewish Theological Seminary, was sponsored by the seminary, Hebrew Union College, the Leo Baeck Institute and the Austrian Cultural Institute.
Related events have taken place in London and Boston and are to be held in


Optical Radiation Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Oshkosh Truck Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Even to the 5 Families, the Fighting Colombos Have Been Black Sheep
Even within the violent councils of America's Mafia, authorities say, the Colombo crime family has long been feared as an erratic, troublesome gang.
The latest battle for internal control has claimed five lives and led the Brooklyn District Attorney to announce yesterday that a grand jury would investigate the dispute and that members of the family were being subpoenaed.


Q&amp;A
Earth's Hot Core
Q.
Why hasn't the core of the earth cooled off?


Alexander's Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 19


Corrections
A picture caption on the Media Business page yesterday with an article about television shows produced by the Walt Disney Company misidentified the star of the television show "Home Improvement." He is Tim Allen.


Israeli View of Talks With the Arabs From a Lonely Hill on the West Bank
What passes for the budding settlement of Rachelim is nothing more than three battered trailers and a few portable latrines, plunked down willy-nilly on a wind-raked hill two miles south of this town.
Most people looking at it probably would not find much there worth fighting about.


Lawyer Says He'll Call Smith if Talk of Past Accusations Is Barred
The chief defense lawyer for William K. Smith said he planned to call the defendant to the stand Tuesday, but only if he got additional assurances from the court that prosecutors could not introduce accusations of previous sexual misconduct made against Mr.
Smith.
The lawyer, Roy E. Black, argued that if Mr.
Smith took the stand, his credibility would be at issue but not his character.
Thus, he said, while evidence of his general reputation for truthfulness would be admissible as evidence, accusations about specific previous acts of misconduct would not be.


Citing AIDS, Judge Backs Service Ban on Gays
A Federal District judge ruled today that the military's ban on homosexuals in the armed forces was justified to prevent the spread of AIDS.
Other Federal courts have upheld the Pentagon's ban, but the 35-page ruling issued today by Judge Oliver Gasch of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia is unusual for its reasoning.


Soviet Military Goes Same Way as Union
The Soviet military, with its huge industrial base, is breaking up along the lines of the fragmenting Soviet political union.
Specialists said the commonwealth agreement announced Sunday has accelerated a largely unplanned dissolution of the Soviet military apparatus with no successor in place and no clear authority atop the chain of command.


People
*
Steven L. Bretschneider has been named executive vice president and client service director at Lintas New York, in charge of international advertising for Diet Coke.
He had previously been chairman of Hakuhodo Lintas, Tokyo.


JHM Mortgage Securities reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Priest Robbed of Collection
A Bridgeport priest and a church trustee were robbed at gunpoint of $6,200 in cash and checks as they deposited church collections after a Sunday Mass, the police said.
The Rev.
James Smyka, associate pastor of St.
Michael's Church, and Edward Tulinski, a church trustee, told the police that they were depositing three bank bags at the Connecticut National Bank when the incident occurred about 11 A.M.
Sunday.
Father Smyka told the police that three masked youths approached the two men from behind, and one showed a gun and demanded the last bank bag.


Lawyer Convicted of Theft From Clients
Shortly after he disappeared in 1990 with $7 million of his clients' funds, Steven J. Romer, a Manhattan lawyer, wrote to clients and friends that he was dying of a brain tumor and had given the money away.
When he went on trial last fall, he acted as his own attorney and argued that he was the victim of a conspiracy by the "X Corporation," which wanted to suppress his plans for an electric car.


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the memorial ceremonies at Pearl Harbor referred incorrectly to the new United States cruiser that sailed past the Arizona Memorial at 7:55 A.M. on Saturday, precisely 50 years after the Japanese attack.
She is the Chosin.


Critical Condition
A jockey remained hospitalized yesterday after he was flung from his horse when it tripped on another horse's legs at Charles Town Races, officials said.
DENNIS KELLY, 53 years old, was in critical condition with a broken back and collapsed lung at Washington Hospital Center in Washington, spokeswoman SANDRA GREGG said.


Hudson's Bay Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Domino Founder Seizes Command
Thomas Monaghan has returned to the pizza business.
Religious faith played the major role in Mr.
Monaghan's decision late last week to return to the helm of Domino's Pizza Inc., a spokesman for the privately owned company said today.


I.B.M. Argues Its Case, But Wall St. Is Bearish
Calling 1991 a "disappointment" and an "aberration," John F. Akers, I.B.M.'s chairman, argued the company's case before Wall Street analysts yesterday at an unusual briefing in which the company's top five executives detailed plans for decentralizing the world's largest computer maker.
But in Wall Street's eyes, yesterday's presentation fell short.


Dinkins Moves to Shore Up Plans To Scatter City Homeless Shelters
Mayor David N. Dinkins says that he will seek to build a broader consensus on how his administration should handle the problems of the homeless before he begins scattering homeless shelters in neighborhoods across the city.
The Mayor said his approach would be to find the "common ground and build from there" on an issue that has left his administration besieged with criticism from communities and their elected officials.


EXECUTIVES
*
Chrysler Corp., Detroit, named Dennis K. Pawley executive vice president, overseeing the auto maker's manufacturing operations. *
Halliburton Co., Dallas, an energy services and engineering company, named W. D. M. Smith president of the Halliburton Logging Services Inc. unit.
He succeeds J. A. Dunlop, who is retiring.


Peru's Rebels Driving Church Underground
On a nameless street in a shantytown here, a tiny kitchen had a cozy, snug feeling, and little touches of Americana -- a Betty Crocker cookbook in the bookcase and a yellowing photograph of the occupant's parents when they ran a New York delicatessen.
But as the white-haired American priest rested in his easy chair, conversation in the kitchen revolved around topics that were far from settling: alarm whistles, escape ladders, canceled Masses, closed-door weddings, death threats, and priests executed after "people's trials."


Belden &amp; Blake Energy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Atrix International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quotation of the Day
"The fate of our multinational country cannot be decided by the will of three republican leaders." -- PRESIDENT MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV.  [ A1:6. ]


Apple Chief Expects Gains
John Sculley, the chairman and chief executive of Apple Computer Inc., said today that he expected Apple to keep growing strongly in 1992 despite continued sluggish growth for the personal computer industry as a whole.
Speaking at the Technologic Partners personal computer conference, Mr.
Sculley said he expected Apple's unit sales of computers to grow percentagewise by "strong double-digit numbers." That level would be lower than the 60 percent unit growth Apple recorded in its 1991 fiscal year on the strength of new low-priced computers, but it would be far greater than the 5 percent unit growth Mr.
Sculley said he expected for the personal computer industry as a whole.


Brown Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A. Celtics Maul Nuggets
Reggie Lewis broke out of a minishooting slump with 31 points as the Celtics rolled to a 132-94 victory over the Denver Nuggets in Boston last night.
With their eighth consecutive home victory and eighth in the last nine starts, Boston improved its record to 13-6 and bolstered its hold on the Atlantic Division lead over idle New York.
Lewis, who hit on just 9 of 35 field-goal attempts in three games, scored 16 points in the first half, 10 in the third period and then retired after scoring 5 points in the fourth quarter. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Freshmen Shine
All five of Michigan's heralded freshmen, led by Jalen Rose's 19 points, reached double figures last night as the Wolverines buried Chicago State, 112-62, in Ann Arbor.
Chris Webber had 16 points and 11 rebounds for Michigan (3-0).
Juwan Howard added 12 points, and Jimmy King and Ray Jackson 11 each. (AP)
Georgetown 93, Delaware State 76: Alonzo Mourning's 22 points and 9 blocked shots enabled Georgetown to overcome first-half lapses and pull away to victory. (AP).
N.H.L.
Canadiens Beat Leafs
Shane Corson had a goal and an assist as the Montreal Canadiens beat the Maple Leafs, 4-1, in Toronto last night and moved into first place in the overall standing.
Brent Gilchrist, Mike McPhee and Stephan Lebeau also scored for Montreal. (AP)


Lawyer Says He'll Call Smith if Talk of Past Accusations Is Barred
The chief defense lawyer for William K. Smith said he planned to call the defendant to the stand Tuesday, but only if he got additional assurances from the court that prosecutors could not introduce accusations of previous sexual misconduct made against Mr.
Smith.
The lawyer, Roy E. Black, argued that if Mr.
Smith took the stand, his credibility would be at issue but not his character.
Thus, he said, while evidence of his general reputation for truthfulness would be admissible as evidence, accusations about specific previous acts of misconduct would not be.


Thon Is Honored
DICKIE THON was named the winner of the Tony Conigliaro Award yesterday, presented to a major league player who has overcome adversity.
The award was established in 1990 by the Boston Red Sox in memory of Conigliaro, the outfielder whose career was shortened after he was hit in the face by a pitch by California's JACK HAMILTON during a game at Fenway Park on Aug. 16, 1967.


Washington at Work; Poet Laureate on Mission to Supermarket's Masses
Small and balding, wisps of light hair straggling across his scalp, Joseph Brodsky hunkered down on a balcony step outside the poetry office in the attic of the Library of Congress.
Absent-mindedly he gazed through his cigarette's smoke and the balcony's balustrade at the Capitol where a group of gay activists were protesting.
"Look," he recently commanded a visitor, standing up and peering south at the horizon.
"Too late. There was a plane, the sun shining on it like a rocket."


Handley Regrets Not Erasing Parcells's Imprint
Coach Ray Handley made a startling admission today in analyzing his role in the collapse of the Giants.
He said that in taking over from Bill Parcells, he had considered himself to be a "caretaker."
"In the future any team coached by Ray Handley will be a Ray Handley team," he asserted.
The Handley-coached Giants were eliminated from the playoffs Sunday, barely 10 months after Parcells's team won Super Bowl XXV.


Mackovic May Get Post
JOHN MACKOVIC, the head coach at Illinois, appears to be the leading candidate to succeed DAVID McWILLIAMS as the next University of Texas coach and could be interviewed for the job as early as today.
The Austin American-Statesman said Texas athletic director DeLOSS DODDS was expected to be in New York for the College Football Hall of Fame awards dinner tonight and might interview Mackovic. (AP)


Chess
Is the acme of chess-playing com-puters, I.B.M.'s Deep Thought II, falling into middle-age syndrome?
The upgraded version of Deep Thought won the Association of Computing Machinery Chess Championship, in Albuquerque, N.M., Nov. 17 to 20, more easily than ever before by adopting strictly conservative methods.
Its chief programmers, Feng-hsiung Hsu and Murray Campbell of the T. J. Watson Research Center of I.B.M., in addition to increasing its processors from 2 to 24, had installed the corpus of Anatoly Karpov's opening choices and these apparently became the springboard for D. T. II's conservatism.
Its preference was for grinding down opponents positionally in lengthy endgames.


Wariness May Make Asset Sales Tough
The sale of the Maxwell Communication Corporation's American assets, of which Macmillan Inc. is the largest, may prove particularly difficult because buyers are highly skeptical of the company's financial data.
For example, "Nobody knows what assets have been pledged," one knowlegeable executive said yesterday.
"Anything in Macmillan could have been pledged to others as collateral. They have to find out where the stock and assets are."


Yella Pessl, 85, Dies; Concert Keyboardist
Gabriella Pessl Sobotka, a harpsichordist, pianist and organist who performed as Yella Pessl, died on Sunday at her home in Northampton, Mass.
She was 85 years old.
She died of a heart attack, said her sister, Margit Cartwright of Northampton.


Revlon Shifting Cosmetic Lines
Revlon North America said yesterday that it planned to shift the production of some cosmetic lines from a factory in Edison, N.J., to a company plant in Phoenix.
The move would most likely result in the loss of several hundred jobs at Revlon's Edison plant.
The Edison plant employs 2,400 workers.
Revlon said it could not yet predict the impact on employment at Edison, but a person familiar with the plan said the transfer was likely to mean the loss of 200 to 300 jobs.
Some employees will be offered jobs in Phoenix, the person said.


Judge Rules H.I.V. Bias At Shelters
The Partnership for the Homeless has for more than two years discriminated against homeless people who have the AIDS virus but no symptoms of the disease, a preliminary finding by an administrative law judge for the New York City Commission on Human Rights says.
With 150 shelters in churches and synagogues housing about 6,000 people a year, the nonprofit Partnership runs the nation's largest network of private shelters and the only one of its kind in New York City.
The agency also runs a 12-bed residence for homeless people with AIDS and has strongly advocated more housing for those affected by the virus.


Ad on Duke Intended No Offense to Latins
To the Editor:
South American countries have taken exception to the headline in a Nov. 20 Anti-Defamation League advertisement on David Duke, "Not All Nazis Are Living in South America."


Quayle Aides Defend Director Of Competitiveness Council
Aides to Vice President Dan Quayle today came to the defense of the staff director of the White House Council on Competitiveness, a panel headed by Mr.
Quayle that has been the object of Congressional criticism in recent weeks.
Nonetheless the aides said the staff director, Allan B. Hubbard, was considering putting all his financial holdings in a blind trust.


New Studies Map the Mind of the Rapist
THE mind of the rapist, one of the darkest realms of human sexuality, is being mapped with a new precision as scientists focus their research on the psychological forces that drive sexual violence.
In years past rape was seen as the expression of an overwhelming sexual urge, one that women could invite by provocative dress or behavior; more recently, it has been widely described as simple violence against women, expressed through sex.
Now new findings suggest that there are many kinds of rapists and that violence and eroticism hold sway to differing degrees in each.


Short-Term Rates Move Lower
Short-term interest rates continued to fall yesterday, as traders and investors bought Treasury bills and notes on the expectation that the Federal Reserve Board would lower key rates again soon.
That expectation helped increase demand at the Treasury's weekly auction of three-month and six-month bills; rates on those securities fell to their lowest levels in more than 19 years.


Gorbachev Struggles to Put a Saving Face on His Once and Former Union
Brushed aside by the leaders of three Slavic republics who agreed on the future of the Soviet Union without him, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev did his best today to play down any notion that the union had died and that he was out of a job.
In a statement read tonight on the main television news program, Mr.
Gorbachev took a lofty approach to the accord on a new commonwealth signed on Sunday by Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia.


Critic's Notebook; From Jury Box and TV, Rape Trial Is Seen on Very Different Channels
In any courtroom drama, the journey of the defendant from defense table to witness chair -- much more common in fiction than in the courtroom -- naturally excites expectations in an audience whose reasonable or unreasonable doubts have been formed in part by television itself.
The second week of the rape trial of William K. Smith in West Palm Beach, Fla., began with the strong prospect that the co-star, who has so far not uttered a word audible to television viewers inside the chamber, would take the stand.
And, in accord with the rules of such dramas, through his words or his demeanor, the truth about what happened that night would finally out.
At the close of yesterday's session it looked as though Mr.
Smith would take the stand this morning.


Byelorussian Leader Seeking Stability in Economic Union
Stanislav S. Shushkevich, the chairman of the Byelorussian Parliament who joined this week with Presidents Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine to create a commonwealth of independent states, apparently believes firmly in cultural independence but seeks stability through economic unity.
In a speech before his election as chairman on Sept. 18, Dr.
Shushkevich said he was afraid of disunion and would prefer a confederation of three or four republics.
"It is precisely within the framework of that union that we should be able to revive our culture, our language and our Byelorussianness," he said.
"Otherwise, we shall have a hard time."


Critic's Notebook; From Jury Box and TV, Rape Trial Is Seen on Very Different Channels
In any courtroom drama, the journey of the defendant from defense table to witness chair -- much more common in fiction than in the courtroom -- naturally excites expectations in an audience whose reasonable or unreasonable doubts have been formed in part by television itself.
The second week of the rape trial of William K. Smith in West Palm Beach, Fla., began with the strong prospect that the co-star, who has so far not uttered a word audible to television viewers inside the chamber, would take the stand.
And, in accord with the rules of such dramas, through his words or his demeanor, the truth about what happened that night would finally out.
At the close of yesterday's session it looked as though Mr.
Smith would take the stand this morning.


21-Year-Old Stands Trial Under Drug Kingpin Law
The Federal Government today began its attempt to convict and execute one of New Jersey's youngest and, law enforcement officials say, most violent drug bosses.
The young man, Bilal Pretlow, now 21 years old and serving a 20-year sentence in state prison for drug violations, began moving to control cocaine traffic in his hometown, Elizabeth, while he was still in high school, the authorities say.


Magna International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Decisions, Decisions, Decisions . . .
The director and the producer are the Masters of the Video Universe during a game, giving orders to those who provide the live pictures, the replays and the audio.
From their cramped perch in a production truck, they determine our view of a game: using the correct angle on a crucial play at home plate, flashing an appropriate graphic onto the screen or calling for the perfect replay of a pass ruled out of bounds by officials.
Just how many decisions emanate from the production truck during a televised game?
A few hundred?
A few thousand?
First, let's define the decisions: they include camera angles, replays, graphics, going to the studio for updates (which is often more of a studio decision, but we'll include them) and breaking for commercials.


Ark Restaurants reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Columbia President Warns Of Need for More Cutbacks
The president of Columbia University told 300 faculty members yesterday that the university's projected budget deficit was worse than expected and could reach $87 million by the 1993-1994 academic year unless strong steps were taken to control spending.
During a two-and-a-half hour meeting with members of the faculty of Arts and Sciences, including many of the 26 department heads who last month threatened to resign as chairmen rather than cooperate with any additional budget cutting, the president, Michael I. Sovern, laid out a three-year plan in which Columbia would undergo an intense self-examination.
Such examinations have become standard for large research universities that have grown too large to support themselves.


Electronics Technology Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Museum By Venturi Opens In Seattle
With the opening last week of the $62 million Seattle Art Museum, a prosperous city on the Pacific Rim has decided to have some fun with a jazzy new home for its long-hidden art.
The museum, a landmark that civic leaders hope will take its place with Mount Rainier and the Space Needle, was designed by Robert Venturi, the Philadelphia architect who has pulled off something of a hat trick this year.
In addition to the museum here, the Sainsbury Wing that he designed for the National Gallery in London was completed in July, and he was awarded the Pritzker Prize, architecture's highest honor.


Lassonde Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


State of Game? Not the Same Everywhere
As the rhetoric between small markets and large markets in major league baseball continues to heat up, Commissioner Fay Vincent added his own chilling message today by echoing the fears of teams outside of New York, Chicago and California and citing the potential for a drastic falloff in national television revenues after contracts with CBS and ESPN expire following the 1993 season.
"The present salary situation is out of hand and small-market franchises cannot compete in this environment," Vincent said here today during his state-of-the-game address at the annual winter meetings.


GUATEMALAN BARS REBEL RIGHTS PLAN
President Jorge Serrano Elias has rejected the demands of the guerrilla front for a "truth commission" to investigate political killings during Guatemala's civil war, saying it is more important that the current peace negotiations create mechanisms for pardon and reconciliation.
"In 30 years of conflict, many people have been hurt and tremendously affected," he said in a recent interview, "but we don't need to know everything that they have suffered. What we need to figure out is how to reach peace, how we are going to reconcile."


The Times in Big Type
The New York Times will begin selling single copies of its weekly large-type edition on newsstands in Miami, Tampa and West Palm Beach, Fla., on Mondays, starting Dec. 16, William L. Pollak, The Times's senior vice president for circulation, said yesterday.
The copies will sell for $1.50 each.
The weekly, which has been published since 1967, has been sold only through home subscriptions.


INSIDE
One Tax Battle Resumes . . .
Resuming a fight that has racked Connecticut, the House of Representatives voted to repeal the three-month-old tax on wages.
Page B1. . . .
Another About to Start
Bad budget news is forcing Florida to consider the politically poisonous remedy of an income tax.
Page A22.
Test for Roe v.
Wade Pushed
Pennsylvania asked the United States Supreme Court to rule on its abortion law, a move that could set the stage for a test of Roe v.
Wade.
Page A29.
United Wins at Pan Am Sale
United won a heated bidding war for the remaining Pan Am assets with an offer of $160 million and a promise to rehire 1,000 workers.
Page D1.
Holtzman Reprimand Stands
The United States Supreme Court refused to consider Elizabeth Holtzman's appeal of a reprimand for criticizing a trial judge while she was Brooklyn District Attorney.
Page B3.


Patterns
Alaia Shop Closes
The Azzedine Alaia boutique closed down Saturday after more than three years in business at 131 Mercer Street in SoHo.
There were lots of skinny people there Saturday trying on tight little skirts and tops, reduced to $50 from about $500.
Since Mr.
Alaia is something of a hot designer -- his figure-clinging styles being much favored by top fashion models and widely imitated by other designers -- it was something of a mystery why the shop would suddenly close.
Jacqueline Schnabel, the owner, said in a statement, "Due to the lack of timely showings and deliveries of new collections, it has become increasingly difficult to maintain an operation based solely on the sales of Alaia." Ms.
Schnabel would not elaborate.
Mr.
Alaia, a Paris designer, holds his fashion shows in July and January, rather than the March and October dates favored by most ready-to-wear houses.
That could make clothing deliveries a bit late.
Several store employees, insisting on anonymity, offered their own theories.
"People's first impression is that it's the recession," said one.
"But we had people here in September ready to buy things from the new collection, and there was nothing here."
But another employee said she was surprised that the boutique was unable to stay in business, since the Alaia merchandise sold out "to the piece" whenever it was delivered.
"The store would have made a profit but was always poorly run," she said.
Coincidentally, Bergdorf Goodman recently placed a large order for the Alaia spring collection for the first time in six years.
Sample Sale
Many fashion houses hold private sales at this time of year, to clear out samples and returned merchandise from the fall season.
But an invitation to a sale for Emanuel by Emanuel Ungaro and Miss V by Valentino this week was somewhat intriguing.
The merchandise was advertised as "Resort/Early Spring 1992" and included "all sizes," according to the postcard mailed out by Soiffer/Haskin, the company putting on the four-day sale, which begins today.
Resort is the season the stores are selling now; early spring is the merchandise just now being delivered.
It is unusual for such backdoor sales to include merchandise that is still fresh in the stores, making this, in effect, a preseason sale.
Emanuel is a lower-priced Ungaro collection that was recently introduced in this country with heavy promotion.
A spokeswoman for Gruppo GFT, which produces the Emanuel and Miss V lines, said the sale was not unusual and would include spring "discards," or styles that were not produced.
In the future, perhaps companies should just skip the advertising, promotion and fashion shows and go straight to the sample sale.
At Sharper Image Stores
In a strange marriage of designer and retailer, Nicole Miller plans to open in-store men's accessories boutiques in about a dozen Sharper Image stores next year.
Nicole Miller women's clothes are sold in stores like Bloomingdale's and Saks Fifth Avenue.
The Sharper Image, a 75-store chain founded by Richard Thalheimer, specializes in electronic gadgets, "toys for grown-up boys," as the advertising puts it.
Nicole Miller men's ties, boxer shorts and shirts were tested in the Sharper Image Christmas catalogue.
"We didn't understand the customer base at first," said Bud Konheim, the president of Nicole Miller, "but it was sensational. They sold 1,500 of one style, our medical tie, in six weeks through their catalogue. Apparently, doctors and lawyers are big customers there."
The Nicole Miller men's wear will be sold in separately designed niches in selected Sharper Image stores.


Brest: Witness to History
Brest, the Byelorussian border city where three republics agreed over the weekend to form a commonwealth from the crumbling Soviet Union, has been witness to a number of historic events.
The republics' leaders apparently chose to meet there mindful of its significance to the region's past.
The city is best known as the site of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty, which was signed in 1918 by the leaders of Russia and Germany, ending Russian participation in World War I. Bolshevik leaders accepted crippling terms, giving up claims to their western territories, including Ukraine, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia.
The Soviet Government scrapped the treaty after Germany was defeated.


Bamberger Polymers reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Music in Review
The Cosmopolitan Symphony Orchestra  Town Hall
Saturday afternoon's music came from south of the border and across the Caribbean.
The Cosmopolitan Symphony Orchestra played.
Tania Leon conducted.
With Revueltas and Villa-Lobos adding a little gray eminence to the program, everything else belonged to a postwar generation now in its 30's and 40's.
Ricardo Lorenz-Abreu (Venezuela) made his Sinfonietta Concertante into one long evolving narrative drama for strings and solo winds.
He likes ostinato figures, both slow and fast, and decorates them with birdlike wind ornament.
"Glosas," a piano concerto by Roberto Sierra (Puerto Rico), had a kind of joyous brutality.
Scales in contrary motion -- diatonic, chromatic and whole-tone -- provided the basic coloring.
Jose Ramos-Santana, the piano soloist, who is also from Puerto Rico, raced through them all with rapid-fire efficiency.


Connecticut Representatives Vote to Repeal First Wage Tax
A majority of the members of the House of Representatives voted tonight to repeal Connecticut's first tax on wages, which has enraged residents since it was approved three months ago.
But the vote was short of the two-thirds margin needed to override a veto promised by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.
The battle on the tax between the Governor and the Legislature is expected to rage through this week at least, and perhaps into next year.
Mr.
Weicker, a third-party Governor who proposed the tax in February, stood by it through three budget vetoes last summer and has vowed to defend it again by vetoing the bill passed tonight.
The vote in the House was 86 to 63, or 15 votes short of the two-thirds majority of 101 votes needed to override the Governor's veto.
The Senate would also have to pass the bill and provide a two-thirds margin to override a veto if the measure is to become law.
Repeal leaders said after the vote that the fight was not over and that a strong vote in the Senate on Tuesday could still swing some House votes toward repeal.
"When the Senate vote comes through well over two-thirds, the pressure on the House members will be very strong," said Representative Reginald L. Jones, a Republican from Darien who led the repeal forces in the House debate, which raged for more than five hours before the vote.
Raising Other Taxes
The repeal plan, which critics attacked as financially unbalanced and cruel to the poor, would raise most other taxes and cut state spending by about $213 million to compensate for the $1 billion that would be lost by eliminating the wage tax.
Repeal leaders released the final elements of their plan to replace the income tax just hours before the debate began, giving no time for public comment or analysis.
But because the pivotal vote will actually come with the attempt to override the veto, probably later this week, the details were ignored by many speakers anyway.
Some focused their comments on the next legislative elections, now only 11 months away, or on the broad philosophical issues of taxation, representative government and whether it is nobler to vote one's conscience or to mirror the will of one's constituents.
It was clear that many lawmakers viewed the importance of the day's work in larger terms than the success or failure of one piece of legislation.
Many spoke of the huge rally on Oct. 5 that drew tens of thousands of tax protesters to the Capitol grounds and the vast unrest that those people represented.
"We can't just dismiss 50,000 people who came to protest," said Robert M. Ward, a Republican from North Ford.
"Please vote with me to repeal."
If the repeal bill survives, it would restore much of the tax code that existed before August.
But the measure has a handful of twists that would give some money back through tax cuts, take some away through spending and service cuts and leave some in place.  7 Percent on Capital Gains
The state sales tax, now 6 percent, would go up to 8 1/4 percent, with the last one-quarter percent tacked on to pay off last year's deficit.
And while the tax on wages would be revoked, the previous taxes on other types of income would be restored in a way that would hit more people -- and some people much harder.
Capital gains from the sale of assets or stock would be taxed at 7 percent as before.
But for the first time, gambling income would also be taxed at that rate.
Gambling income in the state is expected to go up next year when the Mashantucket Pequot Indian tribe opens a casino.
An earlier version of the bill approved tonight would have expanded the the state's gambling franchise with the introduction of video-slot machines.
Of that gambling revenue, about $60 million a year would have been channeled back to local government to aid distressed cities.
But gambling opponents amended the bill on the floor to eliminate the slot machines.
The budget bill would cut about $213 million from the $7.6 billion budget for the year that ends June 30.
The single biggest reduction -- $50 million -- would come from the state's contribution to general assistance welfare.
Cuts in Welfare
Under current law, the state pays 90 percent of local welfare costs.
The House bill would cut that contribution to 45 percent, leaving towns the option of making up the difference themselves or cutting benefits.
The House bill would also tax income from dividends and interest at a sliding scale of from 5 percent to 10 percent.
That is similar to the old law, but with a tax cut at the top, which was previously 14 percent.
Income from rents and royalties would be taxed for the first time under that schedule, erasing many of the gains.
Debate on the plan echoed the elements of give-and-take embodied in the proposal.
Supporters said that ending the system of wage-tax withholding would bring help the economy as residents opened their wallets.
Opponents said the cuts were simply too harsh.
"This is a very mean-spirited budget whether individuals want to believe that or not," said Representative Ernest E. Newton II, a Democrat from Bridgeport, who voted against the repeal plan.


Three Investors Hatch A New Way of Life
As government bond brokers in the 1980's, Deborah and Matthew Loving practically lived in suits and out of suitcases, trading in London, Toyko and New York.
But Wall Street and its trappings are history for the Lovings now, fading a little further each morning as they roll out of bed in pastoral Colts Neck to feed the ostriches.


In a Time of Deficits, Florida Ponders The Unpopular Idea of an Income Tax
In a state that owes its rapid growth almost as much to its image as a tax haven as to its warm weather, officials are trying to avoid something that most of Florida's 13.5 million residents are dead set against: a personal income tax.
The Florida Legislature is to convene for a special session on Tuesday, and its mission will be to slice $622 million in spending from the state's $29.5 billion budget to comply with the state constitution's requirement of a balanced budget.


Careers; Customized Management Training
ENTHUSIASM is growing among executives and educators over customized M.B.A. programs, in which schools and companies work together to create management training courses.
John W. Rosenblum, dean of the Darden School, the Unversity of Virginia's graduate school of business administration, sees such programs as a way for companies to educate managers throughout their careers.


Stocks Decline in Tokyo
Stock prices dropped today in Tokyo on arbitrage-related selling, and the closely watched Nikkei index closed below 22,000 for the first time in a week.
At the end of the afternoon trading session, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 399.82 points, or 1.8 percent, to 21,953.06.
On Monday, the index lost 92.18 points.


CHRONICLE
GREGORY MOSHER, whose tenure as the director of Lincoln Center Theater is coming to an end, knew a farewell party was in the works, but he thought it would be on Jan. 13.
Last night he headed out to the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater at Lincoln Center for a reading of "Hamlet," and when he walked in -- "Surprise!" -- he found 300 people waiting for him.


Dow Drops 14.75, to 2,871.65, in Late Selling
The stock market fell late yesterday afternoon as declines by I.B.M. and General Motors dragged the Dow Jones industrial average down 14.75 points, to 2,871.65.
The market was up in the morning and early afternoon trading before weakness in blue-chip stocks, aided by program selling, forced the Dow down sharply in the final hour.


Fairfield Communities Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Honors
*
Michael Drexler, executive vice president and worldwide media director of Bozell Inc., New York, has been named media director of the year by Mediaweek.
He and eight other executives will be honored in New York tonight at the magazine's annual "Media All-Stars" ceremony.


Kerr Addison Mines reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Florida Rock Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.N. Passes Voluntary Register to Curb Arms Sales
At a time when the international arms trade may be starting to grow again after a sharp decline, the United Nations General Assembly voted overwhelmingly today to establish the first register of international arms sales.
The aim of the register, which won strong support in the wake of the Persian Gulf war, is to curb the international traffic in arms by publicizing transactions and identifying potential trouble spots by showing where arm stocks are increasing.


Surveillance in the Shower
A union representing employees at an Amoco Corporation plant is suing the company for $10 million over a hidden camera installed in the women's shower room.
Company officials said the camera was installed because a man had been sneaking in.


Personal Diagnostics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COURT TO CONSIDER BANS ON WRITE-INS
Accepting a challenge to Hawaii's election law, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether states may constitutionally prohibit write-in votes.
Three states in addition to Hawaii ban write-in voting, and many others limit the practice.
A Federal appeals court upheld the Hawaii law earlier this year, rejecting a challenge brought by a lawyer who moved to Honolulu from New Jersey and found no candidates on the ballot whom he wished to support.


Epic Data reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Fontes Wants to Wipe Out a Wipe-Out Block
On further review, Wayne Fontes, the Detroit Lions' head coach, stopped short of accusing Jets fullback Brad Baxter of dirty play in the Lions' 34-20 victory over the Jets on Sunday.
The run block that Baxter threw low on nose tackle Jerry Ball while Ball was being blocked high by center Jim Sweeney will cost Ball the rest of the season because of the injury to his right knee sustained on the play.


Now, Where to Buy It?
AS if choosing the right personal computer were not difficult enough, now comes the problem of choosing the right place to buy one.
Computers today are sold by electronics stores, computer superstores, mom and pop computer boutiques, giant computer chain stores, mail-order catalogues, 800 telephone numbers, office supply stores, cable television shopping channels, newspaper classified ads and specialized dealers called value added resellers.
Each has advantages and disadvantages.


Endowment Grants Go To 13 New York Groups
Cultural organizations in New York State received 13 of the 40 challenge grants announced yesterday by the National Endowment for the Arts.
The grants total $13 million.
The New York City Opera received the only $1 million grant awarded by the endowment this year.
It is to support the presentation of 13 American operas in the next two and a half years, establish an opera commissioning fund, and commission small-scale works by American composers for school and community facilities.


Novell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Encor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


City Ballet To Put On New Works In Spring
The New York City Ballet will stage a weeklong series of new works by 10 choreographers in May.
Peter Martins, the company's artistic director, envisions the series, to be called the Diamond Project after its major financial donor, the Aaron Diamond Foundation, as part of a long-term effort to stimulate new directions in ballet.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.50
4.62
7.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.14
4.24
6.86
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.15
4.23
6.74
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.71
6.73
7.88
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.78
7.80
8.12
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.87
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.86
6.87
7.46
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate
**Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer
Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Longview Fibre Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


H.I.V. Infection Foiling Tests That Detect Deadly TB Germ
The battle against a dangerous wave of tuberculosis outbreaks in prisons, shelters, drug treatment programs and inner-city hospitals is being crippled by a serious gap in medical technology: it can be extremely difficult to detect the disease in people who are also infected with the virus that causes AIDS, the group in which most of the new cases have occurred.
For various reasons, virtually all the tests normally used to detect the presence of tuberculosis are either misleading or unreliable when used in people who are infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
For example, lack of immune response makes the skin test unreliable, and X-rays are often clouded by other infections.


Books of The Times; As Society Changes, So Too Do the Illnesses
From Paralysis to Fatigue  A History of Psychosomatic Illness in the Modern Era  By Edward Shorter 419 pages.
The Free Press. $24.95.
In his last book, a lively study of the relationship between doctors and their patients ("Bedside Manners"), the medical historian Edward Shorter suggested that as much as a quarter to a third of all illnesses seen by the family doctor were probably psychological in origin.
In his latest book, "From Paralysis to Fatigue," he zeroes in on those illnesses, using them as an index of changes in medical thought and larger shifts in the cultural climate.


Learning to Survive After Mate Loses Job
A FRIEND of Judith Guthman recently confided that her husband had been downsized.
This is corporate-speak for fired.
Mrs.
Guthman knew that joblessness was happening to thousands across the country, 241,000 last month alone.
Everyone knows someone who's been downsized.
That's how dread of the future spreads.
Mrs.
Guthman knew the standard rationale for job-chopping, the need to cut costs by cutting people, especially middle management.
But until recently Mrs.
Guthman had no idea of the familywide impact of this modern Darwinism on the husband, on the wife, on their emotional and physical relations, on the children and on everyone's values and expectations for the future. (Not to mention the wrath directed at political incumbents.)


Isco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 1


Fluor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Dinkins Says Subways Are Shortchanged on Transit Aid
Mayor David N. Dinkins left his car for the subway yesterday to dramatize his concern that the state's formulas for allocating mass-transit subsidies shortchanged New York City's subway and bus riders.
Mr.
Dinkins rode the Lexington Avenue express at 10 A.M. from Grand Central Terminal to City Hall to show his opposition to the proposed increase in the subway fare.
The Mayor's deputies have proposed changing the formulas to give the Transit Authority, which operates the subways and buses, a larger share than the suburban commuter railroads.


Entertainment Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


And Cuomo Chooses: (Budget? Duty? Ego? Gore?)
"It's as simple as that," Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo was saying today, explaining how the state budget mess continues to control his decision on whether to run for President.
But to many who watched Mr.
Cuomo in the last two months, little has seemed simple about his decision making.
Those who have dared to read the Cuomo tea leaves have found a muddy brew of contradictory signals in their cups.


It's 'Soviet Mission,' Until Someone Calls
The receptionist in the lobby answered the phone with a curt, "Soviet Mission." The bright red flag with the hammer and sickle still flew inside the building.
And the sullen-faced guard stood watch, interrogating visitors as if the cold war had never ended.
Life went on yesterday at the Soviet Mission in Manhattan, even as leaders thousands of miles away were presiding over the eclipse of the Soviet Union.


Forest City Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Ahold nv reports earnings for 12wks to Oct 6


Electronic Publisher Fills a Senior Position
Franklin Electronic Publishers Inc., a publisher of electronic books, has hired an executive of the American Express Company, Stan Krangel, as its president.
Mr.
Krangel was also named a director of the company, which is based in Mt.
Holly, N.J.
This is the second senior-level executive the company has hired recently.
Earlier in the month, Franklin hired Edgar T. Irons as chief scientist.
He is the co-founder and ex-chairman of Yale University's computer science department.


Repaving With an Old-World Touch


Medicare Discourages House Calls by Doctors
To the Editor:
Re "Meet Dr. Jarman. He Makes House Calls" (Op-Ed, Nov. 16): Medicare discourages home visits.
Those of us who persist in making house calls do so largely on moral grounds (though primary-care physicians are the worst paid large group of doctors by a Federal insurance system designed to protect the elderly).


Deliberations Begin In Slain Tourist Case
A Manhattan jury yesterday began deliberating the fate of four defendants charged with the fatal subway stabbing of Brian Watkins and the robbery and assault of his family.
The 12 jurors recessed last night without reaching a verdict and are to resume deliberations this morning.


Flames Blame Sabres
DOUG RISEBOROUGH, the general manager-coach of the Calgary Flames, said the brawl that occurred during a game Sunday night in Buffalo was "an embarrassment" to the National Hockey League and to Buffalo and blamed the Sabres for starting the fight.
Riseborough, whose Flames snapped a four-game losing streak by defeating the Sabres, 4-2, referred to a first-period brawl that resulted in 10 ejections and 147 penalty minutes.


Bridge
The most striking change in bidding practice in the past decade has been the decision by almost all American experts to adopt Roman key-card Blackwood, a sophisticated version of the simple convention devised by Easley Blackwood in 1933.
A comprehensive description of the convention, with a full array of the options available after it has been used, has been written by Edwin Kantar, a former world champion and one of the world's most respected player-writers.
It is "Roman Keycard Blackwood -- The Untold Story," and it is available for $11.95, which includes postage, from "Bridge Today," 18 Village View Bluff, Ballston Lake, N.Y. 12019.


As Teamsters Vote, the Only Certainty Is Change
On the 11th floor of a downtown Washington office building, people pull 6-foot-tall cages on wheels off the elevators.
The cages contain corrugated paper trays of thousands of pre-paid envelopes printed on specially weighted paper.
Computerized codes identifying the senders have been typed on the envelopes.
They contain smaller envelopes with ballots inside that will be opened and counted in the "ballot security room."
There's an election going on, and the Federal Government, which is running it, is taking extraordinary precautions against fraud.
The candidates are members of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, the nation's biggest private-sector union, the richest, and historically the most corrupt.
For the first time, the 1.55 million rank-and-file members of the union that saw three of its last five presidents jailed get to vote for the top officers, and by secret ballots they mail from the seclusion of their homes.


Lessons From Jupiter
Jupiter is 50 times the size of Earth, has an atmosphere thousands of miles thick and probably has no solid planetary surface.
Despite these dissimilarities to Earth, scientists say they have recently observed some intriguing correlations between the equatorial temperature oscillations of both planets.
Dr.
A.
James Friedson, a scientist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., said scientists used an infrared telescope in Hawaii to measure heat emitted by the stratosphere of Jupiter.
Dr.
Friedson is a principal researcher in the study reported in the current issue of the journal Nature.


United Bid Gets Assets Of Pan Am
United Airlines won a fierce bidding war last night with American Airlines for the Latin American routes and other assets for sale at the liquidation of Pan American World Airways.
The winning bid, for $160 million and offers of jobs for 1,000 former Pan Am employees, came at 11:20 P.M. in a dramatic bankruptcy-court auction that began at 3 in the afternoon.


Florida's Culpepper Is a Real Option Player
The next game for Brad Culpepper will be the Sugar Bowl on New Year's Day when his team, Florida, plays Notre Dame at New Orleans.
Beyond that, he says, the future is a bit uncertain, even though Culpepper is projected as a first-round choice in the National Football League's draft next April.
He is not counting the big money yet, and he says the $18,000 scholarship grant he will be awarded tonight by the National Football Foundation will allow him to keep his educational opportunities open, no matter what happens with the N.F.L.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Gregg Olson, pitcher, on a two-year contract.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Agreed to terms with Wally Joyner, first baseman, on a one-year contract.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Named Thomas Gausden director of player negotiations.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Named Doug Rader hitting instructor. National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Waived Jeff Parrett, pitcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
CHICAGO CUBS -- Agreed to terms with Paul Assenmacher, pitcher, on a three-year contract.
Designated Yorkis Perez, pitcher, for assignment.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Acquired Craig Pueschner, outfielder, from the San Diego Padres as the player to be named later in the Randy Myers-Bip Roberts trade.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Announced a one-year agreement with Bend, Ore. as its Class A farm team.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Announced the resignation Pat O'Conner, director of Florida operations.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Waived Nelson Santovenia, catcher, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Named Phil Favia and Dennis Cardoza scouts.
NEW YORK METS -- Traded Blaine Beatty, pitcher, to the Montreal Expos for Jeff Barry, outfielder.
PHILADELHIA PHILLIES -- Agreed to terms with Danny Cox, pitcher, on a minor-league contract.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Signed Stan Fisher, pitcher, to a minor-league contract.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Waived Rick Parker, outfielder, for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Signed Elliot Perry, guard.
Waived Greg Grant, guard.
Continental Basketball Association
COLUMBUS HORIZON -- Traded Barry Stevens, guard, to Wichita Falls for a 1992 first-round draft pick and a player to be named later.
ROCKFORD LIGHTNING -- Traded Danny Jones, forward, and Kenny Miller, center, to Grand Rapids for Gerald Paddio, guard, and Darrin Mayo, center.


Rise in Minority-Group Jobs
Despite the lack of progress in promoting minority groups to managerial positions on the field, major league baseball today announced that progress had been made in the hiring of black and Hispanic people in non-uniform positions.
According to figures released by major league baseball today, minority-group members hold 16 percent of front-office positions (353 of 2,216), up from the 15-percent rate recorded in both 1990 (305 of 2,032) and 1989 (273 of 1,854) and the 2-percent rate recorded in 1987.


Harkin Yearns for Grand Old Democrats
In an overheated room that smells faintly of wet boots, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa is mixing it up with the next generation.
"I want to challenge this country just as John Kennedy challenged me," he tells the students who have gathered to hear him at the University of New Hampshire.
"I want to challenge the American people like Franklin Roosevelt challenged us in 1932."


Matthews Studio Equipment reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Juilliard Naming Dormitory for a Composer
The Juilliard School will be naming its new dormitory the Meredith Willson Residence Hall in honor of the composer of "The Music Man" and "The Unsinkable Molly Brown."
Joseph W. Polisi, the school's president, said on Sunday that the Juilliard board had decided to name the hall for Mr.
Willson after the composer's widow, Rosemary Willson, contributed $5 million toward a $35 million fund the school is raising to pay for the hall and other recent modifications.
Mrs.
Willson's gift is the largest individual contribution the school has received.


Sports of The Times; Bowl Game To Top All Bowls
JOE PATERNO was saying that, sure, as a coach and a competitor he would like to see a national championship game between the two top college football teams in the nation.
Such an event has been in the news recently since the Home Shopping Network has offered the National Collegiate Athletic Association the not inconsiderable holiday package of $33 million for a proposed Jan. 18 game in Tampa Stadium, with the money being distributed among the 106 Division 1-A schools.
Paterno grew up in Flatbush in the 1930's, and remembers the games between 26th Street and Avenue R, when it was first down and two sewers to go, and you wanted to see who was best in the neighborhood then, too.
In those days the two biggest obstacles, he recalled, "were cars driving down the street and the people calling the cops because we were too noisy."


Amerihost Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dynamics Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IPL Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 28


On My Mind; Israel: Decision Time
In a few weeks, Israel will face a critical decision affecting its future -- a decision not about the Arabs but about itself.
Its politicians at last will have to vote on reforming an election system that has had the country walking a dangerous political high wire for years, made its Governments vulnerable and party to bribery and chained down its economic growth.


Hoboken Nights
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 29 article on Hoboken, N.J., suggests some civic concern over late-night drinking by young people along the famous waterfront.


BRIEFS
*
Allen-Bradley, Milwaukee, a maker of industrial automation controls and systems, said it had reached an agreement with Tecnost, under which Allen-Bradley would acquire all the operating assets of OSAI A-B, Ivrea, Italy, a joint venture of Allen-Bradley and Tecnost that makes computerized numerical control systems.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Brent Walker Group P.L.C., London, said it had agreed to sell 57 public houses, or pubs, to Allied-Lyons P.L.C. for $:26.1 million, or $47 million cash.


Afrikaner Resistance Leader Cuts Off Talk With Official
In a surprise move today, South Africa's white die-hard Afrikaner Resistance Movement met with a top Government official to discuss its demand for a separate Afrikaner state as apartheid is dismantled.
But any possibility that the meeting might pave the way to general right-wing participation in multiparty constitutional negotiations scheduled to start Dec. 20 faded when the leader of the neo-Nazi resistance movement, Eugene Terre'Blanche, walked out of the meeting with the Constitutional Affairs Minister, Gerrit N. Viljoen.


Observer; What Homer Lacked
The rest of you may find "Scarlett" the most irresistible page-turner since Odysseus got back to Ithaca, but you won't get my nose out of "WordPerfect Workbook" and "WordPerfect Reference" until I've solved the maddening mystery of  [ END FIELD ] .
"Workbook" is a svelte 482 pages; "Reference," an amazing 992.
I say amazing because it is packed with episodes that begin as follows:


20,000 ALBANIANS RALLY IN CAPITAL
About 20,000 Albanians rallied in Tirana today to celebrate the first anniversary of pro-democracy protests that ended more than four decades of Stalinism in Europe's poorest country.
But the mood was dampened by a lack of heating in many cities as a cold wave swept the country, increasing the misery of a weary population already suffering from chronic food shortages and a paralyzed Government.


Out of the Soviet Wreckage
Recognizing that further disintegration can lead to common suffering, the leaders of Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia have wisely banded together to form a new commonwealth.
Americans can only hope that by doing so, the three Slavic republics of the former Soviet Union can stave off ethnic and border strife, prevent beggar-thy-neighbor economic nationalism and keep control of nuclear arms.
Mikhail Gorbachev had hoped to hold all 15 republics together in a renewed confederation, a result that the West once fervently rooted for.
But Ukraine's overwhelming vote for independence last week dashed that fading hope.
The task now is to build a new association of republics from the bottom up.


Merrill Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Finley Is Looming Bigger In Eyes of Mets' Harazin
The Mets have a shortage of top-quality starting pitchers.
The California Angels have an even more severe shortage of hitters.
Their general managers met today and discussed how they could help alleviate the other's shortage.
They expect to talk again.
Chuck Finley is the pitcher the Mets, along with many other clubs, covet.
The Mets can give the Angels Kevin McReynolds, an outfielder the Angels can use and who has become expendable by the signing of Bobby Bonilla.
The Mets also can offer Dave Magadan to reploce Wally Joyner at first base, but the Angels very likely would ask for McReynolds and Gregg Jefferies.


Top Burger King Post Is Going to a Retailer
The Burger King Corporation, the fast-food chain that Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., inherited when it swallowed the Pillsbury Company two years ago, has hired an outsider to run its 900 company stores.
In January, James B. Adamson, the executive vice president of marketing for the 1,200-drugstore Revco D.S.
Inc. chain, will become the new president of Burger King's USA Retail division.
He will succeed Robert J. Stetson, who is becoming the chief executive of another Grand Met subsidiary, Pearle Inc.


Geac Computer reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Com Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harriet Feldman, School Leader, 56
Harriet Feldman, a former school board president in Roslyn, L.I., died on Saturday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 56 years old and lived in Roslyn.
She died of cancer, her family said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
United Airlines won a fierce bidding war with American Airlines for the Latin American routes and other assets for sale at the liquidation of Pan Am.
The winning bid, for $160 million and offers of jobs for 1,000 former Pan Am employees, came at 11:20 P.M. in a dramatic bankruptcy-court auction.
United's bid topped American's last offer of $155 million.  [ Page D1. ]


Halftime Commercial On Different Channel
To stand out from the clutter of multimillion-dollar Super Bowl commercials, Frito-Lay Inc. announced yesterday that it would run a series of Super Bowl halftime spots on another network.
The snack-foods unit of Pepsico Inc. has planned a promotional tie-in with the Fox Broadcasting Company to introduce a bite-size version of its Doritos tortilla chips.
The two companies hope to entice the estimated 120 million viewers of Super Bowl XXVI to change channels during halftime -- from CBS, which will telecast the game on Jan. 26, to Fox -- by offering a special live episode of the Fox series "In Living Color."


Coors Planning Britain Venture
The Adolph Coors Company said today that a brewery in Scotland had agreed to brew Coors Extra Gold under license for distribution in Britain.


Call Haiti Under the Army What It Is: A Military Dictatorship
To the Editor:
An unidentified State Department official in your Nov. 19 front page article on forced repatriation of Haitian asylum seekers intercepted on the seas by the Coast Guard makes the preposterous assertion that "Haiti is a democracy, even if it is a suspended democracy right now."


Boonton Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


A Forecast for '91 Spending Is Revised to Show a Decline
Advertising spending in the United States will decline this year for the first time in 30 years, a leading industry forecaster said yesterday, calling it the largest drop in that closely watched barometer of economic activity since World War II.
For the year, spending will total $126.7 billion, Robert Coen, senior vice president and director of forecasting for McCann-Erickson U.S.A., said at the opening session of the 19th annual Paine Webber Conference on the Outlook for the Media.
That would be a 1.5 percent decline from the $128.6 billion spent last year, and it marks the second time that Mr.
Coen has slashed his 1991 estimate.
Last December, his forecast stood at $136 billion, up 4.6 percent; in June, he trimmed it to $132.6 billion, up 3.1 percent.


Cuts in Public Jobs May Hurt Blacks Most
On a winter morning 17 years ago, James L. Smith, a father of eight, began working for the city of Chicago and inching his way, ever so slowly, toward the middle class.
Over the years, Mr.
Smith moved out of a crumbling and dangerous public housing project and saw all his children off to college.
He himself had never gotten further than high school.


Spiro Kostof, Professor, Is Dead; Architectural Historian Was 55
Spiro Kostof, an architectural historian who was the host of the five-part series "America by Design" on public television in 1987, died on Saturday at his home in Berkeley, Calif.
He was 55 years old.
He died of lymphoma, said his physician, Dr. Norman Cohen.


Report Finds Women Lag in Senate Roles
Women fill 31 percent of the four highest-paying jobs among Senate aides, as against 3 percent of the top jobs in Fortune 500 companies, according to a survey published today by the Congressional Management Foundation.
But the study said that on the average, women were paid 78 percent as much as male Senate aides were, largely because they remained under-represented in higher-paying jobs and over-represented in lower-paying ones.
Women made up 62 percent of the Senate personal office staff, it said.


Pennsylvania Asks Court to Rule on Abortion Law
The Attorney General of Pennsylvania today filed an appeal of a Federal court ruling that upheld most of the provisions of the state's new abortion law, one of the strictest in the nation.
The appeal filed by the Attorney General, Ernest D. Preate Jr., could set the stage for the first direct test of the 1973 Roe v.
Wade decision establishing a constitutional right to an abortion if the United States Supreme Court agrees to hear the case.


Carter Hawley Hale reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


EUROPEANS ACCEPT A SINGLE CURRENCY AND BANK BY 1999
Already committed to forming the world's largest trading bloc in 1993, the 12-nation European Community took a major step toward economic unity today, agreeing to create a single currency and a regional central bank no later than 1999.
Britain, which has consistently tried to slow the community's moves toward greater economic and political union for fear of losing some of its sovereignty, refused to promise that it would one day give up the pound sterling.
But it made no effort to block its partners' decision.


From Fraternities to Front Office, Pat Riley Speaks Up
After the Knicks' practice yesterday, Pat Riley called Nets' coach Bill Fitch "a lifer."
He said this with the admiration for a senior member of a hallowed fraternity.
He meant that Fitch, the 57-year-old veteran who has coached four National Basketball Association teams, has lasted as long as he has because he is one of those old professionals who will get the job done if he is allowed to do the job.


Belmac Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CBS Affiliate in California Plans Earlier Prime Time
The CBS television affiliate in San Francisco, KPIX-TV, yesterday became the second West Coast television station to decide to move its network prime-time programs to 7 P.M. each night from 8 P.M.
The decision may lead even more stations in the West to change their hours of prime time.
One or more of KPIX's competitors among network affiliates in San Francsico may adopt a similar policy, the manager of KPIX said yesterday.


Harry Rivlin, 87, Dean Emeritus Of Fordham School of Education
Dr.
Harry N. Rivlin, dean emeritus of the Fordham University School of Education and a former educator at Queens College and the City University of New York, died on Saturday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart disease, his family said.


Atlas Consolidated Mining reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Seagram Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Computerland Officer
The Computerland Corporation said today that it had hired Edward R. Simon, the former president of the rival Businessland computer retail chain, as its executive vice president and president for international operations.
Mr.
Simon went to Businessland as president and chief operating officer in November 1990 to help save the struggling computer retailer, which was sold earlier this year to JWP Inc.
Before Businessland, Mr.
Simon was president and chief operating officer of Herman Miller Inc., an office furniture company.


The Labor Man in the Middle
If a man's personality is revealed in his fantasies then there is much that can be read into what Stanley Hill, leader of the largest labor union in New York City, considers a dream vacation.
The hard-working Mr.
Hill does not yearn to snorkel in the Bahamas, gamble with high-rollers in Las Vegas or vineyard-hop in Tuscany.
His ideal vacation retreat, he says, is Toronto.
He admires the city for its sporting events, restaurants and shows.
"Believe it or not," he confided quite solemnly, "it is a wonderful place."
Temperance, modesty and a distinct lack of flamboyance are all virtues ascribed to the 55-year-old Mr.
Hill by friends.
Yet those are the very qualities offered by his detractors to describe why they fear that Mr.
Hill, who is among the most important figures in municipal politics, may not have what it takes to grapple with the city's worst fiscal crisis in 15 years.


Rule to Force Fast Reports By Insurers
A committee of the nation's state insurance regulators put the final touches yesterday on a plan recommending that states require insurers to account for losses on real estate and mortgage loans earlier than they must currently.
Industry experts said the move would give customers a more realistic picture of their insurance company's financial condition.
But the proposal by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, which is expected to be adopted by most states, is considerably less stringent than a comparable requirement imposed by Federal banking regulators on commercial banks.


Geneva Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Holocaust as a Cartoonist's Way Of Getting to Know His Father
Art Spiegelman looks at his books and wonders what kind of writer he is.
The question never troubled him when he began writing about how his parents survived the Holocaust in "Maus I: My Father Bleeds History" (Pantheon), and when he continued his family story in "Maus II: And Here My Troubles Began."
But then a very commercial thing happened.
Mr.
Spiegelman's book drew excited reviews, all of them marveling that a comic book on the Holocaust could be so moving and so well written.
Then "Maus II" landed on several best-seller lists, and editors had to decide whether it was fiction or nonfiction, and Mr.
Spiegelman suddenly found himself puzzled about what kind of book he had written and what kind of author he was.


Music in Review
Yale Music Spectrum  Merkin Concert Hall
The clarinetist David Shifrin set an imposing standard for a program of chamber music presented by the Yale School of Music on Saturday evening with grippingly virtuosic solos in Weber's Clarinet Quintet in B flat (Op. 34).
Nothing that followed proved so consistently compelling in terms of performance, despite Mr.
Shifrin's return for the final work, Beethoven's far less flashy Clarinet Trio in B flat (Op. 11).


Critic's Notebook; From Jury Box and TV, Rape Trial Is Seen on Very Different Channels
In any courtroom drama, the journey of the defendant from defense table to witness chair -- much more common in fiction than in the courtroom -- naturally excites expectations in an audience whose reasonable or unreasonable doubts have been formed in part by television itself.
The second week of the rape trial of William K. Smith in West Palm Beach, Fla., began with the strong prospect that the co-star, who has so far not uttered a word audible to television viewers inside the chamber, would take the stand.
And, in accord with the rules of such dramas, through his words or his demeanor, the truth about what happened that night would finally out.
At the close of yesterday's session it looked as though Mr.
Smith would take the stand this morning.


Donor Hails The Neediest As 'Efficient'
When John and Sandy Firestone were married in 1986, they started a tradition of contributing to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"We wanted to give something back, and we thought the Neediest Cases was one of the most efficient ways we could help people who really need help in ways that aren't just temporary," Mr.
Firestone said in a telephone interview yesterday.
Through the stories that appear in The Times, he said, "the Neediest Cases has always tried to persuade the mind and the heart, which may be very difficult but it is also very honest."


The Down (and Questionably) Dirty Jets
Usually it's the team that loses that howls the loudest.
That took a turn Sunday after the Lions defeated the Jets, 34-20, at the Silverdome and immediately started crying foul, contending that the Jets played dirty.
"There were definitely a lot of plays where guys were cheap-shotted," said Detroit running back Barry Sanders.
"It matches the worst I've been in."
Sanders thought that he took some late hits out of bounds that were uncalled for.
Jets defensive end Jeff Lageman disagreed.
"Every hit he got was totally legal," he said of Sanders.
"If he'll go back and watch film, he'll understand that.
"It wasn't a dirty game, it was a football game. I could pull a few things out, but I'm not going to sit here and moan about it like Detroit. It's just part of football." An Injury-Causing Block
Detroit took particular exception to a block that Jets fullback Brad Baxter used in the first quarter to cut down Lions nose tackle Jerry Ball, which sprained Ball's right knee, knocking him out of the game and ending his season.
Ball and his teammates thought the block was illegal and a dirty tactic because it was aimed at Ball's legs.
Baxter, who was helping center Jim Sweeney block on the play, said he did not intentionally injure Ball.
Greg Aiello, the National Football League's director of information, said that the play was reviewed today by Jerry Seeman, the league's director of officiating, who determined that Baxter threw a legal block.
"It was a straight running play," Aiello said.
"It's not an illegal block. That blocking technique is illegal if it's a pass play. If the offensive lineman is set up to pass block, then the cut block is illegal."
Aiello said the league cannot judge intent.
He also said that the plays in which Detroit cornerback Ray Crockett, Jets tight end Trevor Matich and Jets free safety Lonnie Young were ejected would be reviewed.
Typically, players who are ejected from games are fined a minimum of $500.
Last season the Jets were criticized for the cut-blocking technique by Buffalo defensive end Bruce Smith and Dallas defensive end Jim Jeffcoat, who complained that the Jets coaching staff was teaching a technique that was questionable at best.
Today, the Jets reacted sharply to the criticism from the Lions that they were playing dirty.
"If they say it was the dirtiest game they've ever been in, it's probably because they were doing some of the dirt," said Jets cornerback Mike Brim.
"This thing is being blown completely out of context because Jerry Ball went down.
"They took their shots at us also. They just weren't successful in putting anybody out. We never had the intention of going out trying to do anything dirty. We said we were going to play hard, and we're not apologizing for that.
"After they look at their film, they will see that they did some things that probably were unnecessary. I'm not going to say dirty. Those things just happen in football." Not an Unusual Block
The Lions are not above reproach.
Detroit cornerback Melvin Jenkins was fined $5,000 last week for hitting Vikings receiver Anthony Carter with a helmet tackle in a game at Minneapolis on Nov. 24.
Jets defensive tackle Scott Mersereau said cut blocking along the line of scrimmage occurs all the time.
He said that was how he sustained injuries to both ankles this season.
"I just accept it as part of the game," Mersereau said.
"You're never going to get that called. You can complain about it until you're blue in the face."
Jets Coach Bruce Coslet said his team doesn't play dirty, and the Detroit game was no exception.
"I played too long to let something like that happened," Coslet said.
"If I sense that in a player, I'd take him off the field. Our defensive linemen got cut down to smithereens. They had an illegal crack-back block against Marvin Washington. They got called for that." Self-Destructive Play
But Coslet said the team did lose its poise.
"I'm not talking about fighting, but in terms of not playing team defense and offense," he said.
"We don't have a chance to win if we lose our poise."
Coslet said he walked away from Sunday's game against the Lions thinking that the team had self-destructed, but he said he didn't see that as an irreparable situation.
"I don't think you can tear down the house because you knock out a window," Coslet said.
"We knocked out a window yesterday. The house is there and solid."


SBE Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
A report in the Guide column of the Connecticut Weekly on Sunday about the production of "Take Joy!" at Sprague Hall in New Haven misstated the schedule.
The performances will be at 2 and 8 P.M. on Saturday and 5 P.M. on Sunday.


With Major Water Shortages, Jordan Hopes Talks Can Help
Fadlallah al-Hamud picked his way through the stubble of rushes that once thrived in the limpid pools of this oasis deep in Jordan's eastern desert.
As he moved, his feet loosed puffs of fine gray powder, the sunbaked remains of rich bottom ooze from the oasis, whose very name in Arabic, meaning blue, testifies to the historic abundance of water.


County Chiefs Join Dinkins On Medicaid
Mayor David N. Dinkins forged an alliance yesterday with 17 county executives from both parties to lobby the State Legislature to shift Medicaid costs to the state, as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has proposed.
But even as the Mayor appeared at Gracie Mansion with the county leaders to announce the lobbying effort, the political stresses that will influence whatever legislation is eventually considered were evident.
For example, the Nassau County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, a Republican whose support is considered crucial, did not attend and later offered only qualified support for the effort.


AM International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Resignation Controversy At Kidder
Charles Peabody, a banking analyst at Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, has left the Wall Street firm amid a controversy that his recent research critical of the Chase Manhattan Corporation had been suppressed.
He left his post last Tuesday to become a founding partner of East Shore Partners, Springfield, N.J., a new securities firm specializing in research and trading in banking securities.


Philadelphia Council Appreciates Bagels
Great bagels "may be the only reason" an advertiser would want to go to New York, says a soon-to-be-released advertisement from the Philadelphia Council of the American Association of Advertising Agencies.
In the ad, one in a series intended to promote Philadelphia agencies, a photo of a bagel is accompanied by the boast, "There are still some things you can only get in New York." But the statement concludes, "Great advertising is no longer one of them." Several Philadelphia business magazines and newspapers are scheduled to run the ads beginning next month.


In East German City, the Future Stays Murky
For many Germans, this city used to be a paradigm of hell, a place where huge chemical industries that had run amok under Communist management destroyed an entire landscape and many of the people who inhabited it.
Two years after East Germany's Communist Government toppled, the picture has changed.
The air is clearer, the water is better and plans are afoot for urban and industrial renewal.


A Productive Weekend for Americans
With the start of the Albertville Olympics just two months away, athletes from the United States enjoyed one of their most encouraging weekends this past Saturday and Sunday, winning medals in five different World Cup events.
Foremost among them was A. J. Kitt, whose victory in the men's downhill in Val- d'Isere, France -- the Olympic downhill mountain -- was the first for an American skier in a World Cup event since 1984.


Giant 'Pancake' Is Clue To Origin of Universe
SUCH is the turmoil in cosmology that theories rise and fall and sometimes rise again with stunning alacrity, none more so than those creative attempts to explain the architecture of the universe.
It is among the most perplexing problems in astrophysics: how did the universe, which seems to have been incredibly smooth and featureless in the beginning, develop such large structures as the galaxies and chains of connecting galaxies seen today?


National Trustco reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Midnight's Hostage
If the ordeal is over for Americans held hostage by fanaticism, it continues with no end in sight for Salman Rushdie, the Indian-born British author.
He has been under death sentence since Valentine's Day 1989, when Ayatollah Khomeini of Iran castigated his novel "The Satanic Verses" as blasphemous.
A bounty of $1 million was put on his head by Iranian foundations; new contracts have reportedly quadrupled that sum.
Small wonder his guards have urged Mr.
Rushdie to shun windows in his ever-changing hideaways, lest he become a sniper's target.
There were hopes last December that the Ayatollah's fatwa, or decree, might be rescinded when Mr.
Rushdie embraced Islam and halted plans for a paperback edition of his book.
To no avail: the fatwa was reconfirmed and unknown assailants soon murdered Mr.
Rushdie's Japanese translator and tried to kill his Italian counterpart.
In November, as Mr.
Rushdie ended 1,000 days in hiding, a British appeal for clemency was rejected by Iran's Foreign Minister.


Medicare Discourages House Calls by Doctors; High Cost of Training
To the Editor:
"Meet Dr. Jarman. He Makes House Calls" (Op-Ed, Nov. 16) provides some striking examples of what is wrong with health care in the United States.
Howard H. Hiatt's point is well taken: Americans could certainly benefit from a health care system that provided primary care for all.
Unfortunately, Dr.
Hiatt eloquently describes the problem, but doesn't suggest a solution.


GORBACHEV REJECTS MOVE TO DISCARD KREMLIN ROLE; U.S. KEEPS LINK TO MOSCOW
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today rejected the right of the leaders of Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia to dissolve the Soviet Union, adding to the uncertainty over the fate of the Soviet lands.
"The fate of our multinational country cannot be decided by the will of three republican leaders," Mr.
Gorbachev said in a statement read on the evening television news.
"This question can only be resolved through constitutional means with the participation of all sovereign states and taking into account the will of their peoples."  [ Text of statement, page A18. ]


Broadway Prices Going Up And Down
The price of orchestra seats at "Miss Saigon" and "The Phantom of the Opera" will rise to $65 from $60 starting March 9, the producer Cameron Mackintosh announced yesterday.
On that date the $100 top-price ticket for "Miss Saigon" will be dropped and a new $15 ticket-price scale will be initiated for "Miss Saigon" and his other musicals, "Phantom," "Les Miserables" and "Five Guys Named Moe," which is to open on Broadway in April.
The top orchestra price at "Miss Saigon" and "Phantom" will be raised "to make available the new low-price seats," said Alan Wasser, Mr.
Mackintosh's general manager in the United States.
Mr.
Mackintosh was on vacation and could not be reached for comment.


In Recycling Waste, The Noble Scarab Is Peerless
IN the vast world of beetles, they have the stamp of nobility, their heads a diadem of horny spikes, their bodies sheathed in glittering mail of bronze or emerald or cobalt-blue.
The ancient Egyptians so worshipped the creatures that when a pharaoh died, his heart was carved out and replaced with a stone rendering of the sacred beetle.
But perhaps the most majestic thing about the group of insects known romantically as scarabs and more descriptively as dung beetles is what they are willing and even delighted to do for a living.


Japan Bond Deal Breaks Ground
TOKYO, Dec. 9 --
In a first for the Japanese corporate bond market, the Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation said today that it would issue bonds at the same price to all investors, rather than offering discounts to preferred customers.
This unusual approach to an underwriting in Japan, like most changes in Japan's financial markets, was induced by an outsider -- in this case Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
It pushed for the change and will co-manage the offering with Nomura Securities, N.T.T.'s traditional underwriter.


Central Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Push Urged to Educate Patients About Drugs
The Commissioner of Food and Drugs, Dr.
David A. Kessler, today called on doctors, pharmacists and consumer groups to begin a new effort to educate patients about their prescription drugs.
Dr.
Kessler, in an article in the current issue of The New England Journal of Medicine and in a speech given for him today, said there was a gap between what patients wanted to know about their drugs and what they actually learned from doctors and pharmacists.
Calling drug counseling an integral part of good health care, he said health providers had failed patients by generally doing a poor job of it.


Pacificorp Electric President Plans Retirement for Jan. 1
David F. Bolender, who two years ago engineered the merger of the Pacific Power and Light Company and the Utah Power and Light Company to form the third-largest utility in the West, has said he will retire on Jan. 1 as president of the combined company, Pacificorp Electric Operations.
Mr.
Bolender, who is 59, leaves after 17 years with Pacific Power and Pacificorp Electric.
His replacement is not expected to be named until early next year.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GOING SLOWER ON THE HOMELESS
Mayor Dinkins said he would seek to build a broader consensus on how to handle the homeless before he proceeds with his plan to scatter homeless shelters in neighborhoods across the city.
The Mayor said he wanted to find the "common ground" on an issue that has generated such strong public outcry.
A1.
INSIDE THE COLOMBO MOB
Even within the violent councils of America's Mafia, the Colombo family has long been feared as an erratic, troublesome gang.
The latest battle for internal control has claimed five lives, but leadership struggles have afflicted the family for 30 years.
B3.
DIRE TIMES AT COLUMBIA U.
Columbia University's president said the university's budget was in worse shape than previously thought, with a deficit that could reach $87 million by the 1993-1994 academic year.
B3.
DINKINS ENTERS THE FARE WARS
Joining in the jousting over the transit fare, Mayor Dinkins left his car to ride the subway and dramatize his opposition to a proposal to raise the fare to $1.40.
He said he was concerned that the state's formulas for allocating subsidies shortchanged bus and subway riders in the city.
B3.
Supreme Court refuses to consider Holtzman's appeal of reprimand. B3.
Lawyer guilty of stealing from clients. B4.
Mayor Dinkins promotes campaign to shift Medicaid costs to the state. B10.
Advocates for the homeless accused of bias against people with AIDS virus.
B13.
REGION  MEMORIES OF ATTICA
It has been 20 years since the tear gas and bullets broke the morning quiet in the prison at Attica.
But the years sometimes seem like minutes in a Buffalo courtroom, where a trial is under way to determine if former state officials are legally responsible for the bloodshed that made Attica part of American history.
A1.
DIVINING CUOMO'S MEANING
"It's as simple as that" is Governor Cuomo's explanation for how the state budget mess continues to control his decision on whether to run for President.
But those who have dared to read the Governor's Presidential tea leaves have found a muddy brew of contradictory signals in the bottoms of their cups.
B9.
TRADING PLACES
As government bond brokers in the 1980's, Deborah and Matthew Loving practically lived in suits and out of suitcases.
But Wall Street and its trappings are history for the Lovings now, fading a little further each morning as they roll out of bed at their farm in pastoral Colts Neck, N.J., to feed the ostriches.
B6.
BUSINESS WARNING ON TAX DISPUTE
Business groups that adamantly opposed Gov.
Jim Florio's $2.8 billion tax increase 18 months ago warned that New Jersey would collapse if the taxes were eliminated.
The state's most powerful business associations warned of chaos if the taxes are withdrawn.
B8.
Neediest Cases B4
Our Towns B6


Eleanor Tufts, Art History Professor, 64
Eleanor Tufts, a professor of art history at Southern Methodist University in Dallas, died on Dec. 2 at Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas.
She was 64 years old and lived in Dallas.
She died of cancer, said Eugene Bonelli, the dean of the Meadows School of the Arts at the university.


Maxwell Son Assets Are Frozen
LONDON, Tuesday, Dec. 10 --
A judge has imposed a freeze on the assets of Kevin Maxwell, the younger son of Robert Maxwell, of up to $:450 million ($815 million), marking one of the first legal actions taken against the sons since the Maxwell publishing empire started unraveling.
The freeze, imposed on Sunday, suggests that Kevin Maxwell, who is 32 years old and had the leading role in running the Maxwell empire after his father's mysterious death, is under greater suspicion than his older brother, Ian, of having moved assets out of employee pension funds and the two main public companies in the empire: the Mirror Group Newspapers P.L.C. and the Maxwell Communication Corporation.


New Fiat From Poland Draws on Old Mystique
In an unmarked workshop on an unassuming street in a suburb of gray and wintry Turin, engineers are going through the motions of keeping the least-kept secret of Italian motoring -- a new Fiat mini-car that, for many Italians will recall the cramped Fiat 500, which motorized the nation in the 1950's.
The car, at present, is literally under wraps.
Pre-introduction test models are disguised by masking tape that blurs their lines and covers the name.
Word of the new arrival, though, long ago seeped out as Fiat S.p.A., long Italy's leading employer and the second-largest European auto maker, after Volkswagen, tries to find a new niche in the mini-car market.
For many years that market was its staple, until competition increased from Volkswagen and Ford.


Sherwin-Williams Debt Is Upgraded
The rating on the Sherwin-Williams Company's senior debt has been upgraded by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation to A, from A-, and its commercial paper has been raised to A-1, from A-2.
In addition, the rating for a shelf registration of $200 million in debt securities has been raised on a preliminary basis to A, from A-.


Eviction Policy in Savings and Loan Bailouts Should Stand
To the Editor:
In "New Yorkers Suffer Fallout From Bank Bailout" (letter, Nov. 25), Assemblyman Alexander B. Grannis protests the intention of the Resolution Trust Corporation, which administers failing savings and loan institutions, to evict nonpurchasing tenants of cooperative and condominium apartment buildings it has taken over.
The agency will sell the apartments to help defray its costs.


Steelers Coach to Meet With Unhappy Brister
Pittsburgh Steelers Coach CHUCK NOLL said he planned to meet with unhappy quarterback BUBBY BRISTER, who said, "I don't mop up for anybody," after refusing to enter the game in the fourth quarter of Sunday's 31-6 loss to Houston.
Brister, who hasn't played since Oct. 14, declined to warm up after the starting quarterback, NEIL O'DONNELL, and offensive coordinator JOE WALTON apparently argued on the sidelines with six minutes remaining.


Connecticut Natural Gas reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aaron Kahan, 76, A Rabbi and Author
Dr.
Aaron Kahan, a rabbi long active in community affairs, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
He was 76 years old and had homes in Manhattan and Jerusalem.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Holtzman Bid to Reverse Judicial Reprimand Fails
Elizabeth Holtzman's four-year battle with the officials who monitor lawyers' conduct in New York State ended today when she failed to persuade the United States Supreme Court that the reprimand she received for criticizing a state trial judge raised free-speech issues worthy of the Justices' attention.
Ms.
Holtzman, now the New York City Comptroller and a candidate for the Democratic nomination for the 1992 Senate race, was the Brooklyn District Attorney in 1987 when the highly publicized incident that led to the reprimand took place.


U.S. Concerned That as the Union Breaks Up, So Does the Soviet Military
The Soviet military, with its huge industrial base, is breaking up along the lines of the fragmenting Soviet political union, specialists inside and outside the United States Government said today.
They said the commonwealth agreement announced by the leaders of Russia, Byelorussia and Ukraine on Sunday has accelerated a largely unplanned dissolution of the worldwide Soviet military apparatus with no successor in place and an uneasy transition ahead.


What Mr. Bush Can Do on AIDS
Magic Johnson's disclosure that he is infected with the virus that causes AIDS has contributed mightily to public concern about the epidemic.
Americans in great numbers now want to be tested for the virus; some cities are reporting 10 times the customary number of requests.
Yet this surge of interest will fade unless President Bush seizes the moment.
When Mr.
Bush met with his AIDS Commission yesterday, he asked what he might do to help.
That's easy.
He can correct the flaws in the Government's AIDS prevention strategy.


Johannesburg Journal; Mean Streets Swallow the Orphans of Apartheid
The grimy cotton quilt on the sidewalk looked like a heap of discarded rags until it began to wiggle.
In the dim glow of a street lamp, two 13-year-old vagabonds, Zani and Sipho, crawled from their makeshift bed.
Sipho said he had run away from Katlehong, a black township a dozen miles away.
Zani said he drifted in from Newcastle, 240 miles distant, in Natal.
They were what are known in Zulu as "malunde," children living wild in South African cities as the ultimate discards of apartheid.


Atco Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; A Bleak Season For Natural Gas
THE futures market for natural gas and the market for shares of natural gas companies have both just about written off the winter of 1991-92 as another disappointment for the long-depressed industry.
The contract for January gas in the spot market fell again yesterday, by 4 cents, to $1.94 for one million British thermal units, from a peak of $2.33 on Oct. 15.
The plunge has coincided with several weeks of unusually warm weather in the East.


In Switch, Business Groups Favor Keeping New Taxes
Business groups that adamantly opposed Gov.
Jim Florio's $2.8-billion tax increase 18 months ago warned today that New Jersey would collapse if the taxes were eliminated.
In testimony before the Senate Appropriations Committee, the state's most powerful business associations, the New Jersey Chamber of Commerce and the New Jersey Association of Business and Industry, predicted "chaos" if the taxes are withdrawn and accused the Democrats of undertaking a "scorched-earth policy" for moving to repeal the taxes.


A Protest in Moscow


FT Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Analog Devices reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


ECI Environmental Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Serbs in Croatia Build Political Foundation to Support Their Military Gains
In a winery near the Danube River, the victorious local Serbs are organizing a civilian government on land that has been part of Croatia.
They cast they themselves as founding fathers, and they seemed almost giddy as they huddled behind closed doors marked "Defense Ministry" or "Agriculture Ministry." But to the diplomats trying to end the war in Yugoslavia, these khaki-clad politicos are emerging as a stumbling block, potentially more intransigent than the Serbian leadership in Belgrade.


Thomas's Fumbles Draw Grumbles
Jets Coach Bruce Coslet said today that he was losing patience with Blair Thomas, mainly because of the running back's trouble with holding onto the football this year.
"I can't have people in there that fumble," Coslet said.
"I don't know the reason for the fumbles. It just happens. He's not trying to fumble. Blair is a wonderful guy. He's a team guy. But regardless of all that, if he's going to go out there and every 25th carry fumble, we can't have him on the field."


Washington Opera Settles Contract Dispute
The musicians of the Kennedy Center Opera House Orchestra voted yesterday to accept a two-year contract with the Washington Opera, ending a three-and-a-half-month dispute that resulted in the announcement two weeks ago that several productions would be canceled.
Those productions, starting with Offenbach's "Tales of Hoffmann," will now take place as scheduled, starting Dec. 28, the company said.
The company and its musicians have been negotiating since Aug. 31, when their last contract expired.
The 61 musicians were seeking to be recognized as an ensemble with a guaranteed salary, rather than as a freelance group in which the musicians were paid individually by the number of performances they played.
They were also seeking raises and improved benefits.
Martin Feinstein, the company's general director, argued that meeting the musicians' demands would increase the company's deficit to more than $1 million.


Bush Asks for Advice On Ways to Curb AIDS
President Bush was briefed by the Government's top AIDS officials and scientists today, and said he would "welcome suggestions from anybody on what more we could do" to stem the epidemic.
It was the first time the President had met with all the senior Federal officials on AIDS, including the full National Commission on AIDS.


Banker Tells How Noriega Used B.C.C.I. Account
Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega and his family deposited at least $23 million into several secret numbered accounts at the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, and then shifted the money from country to country to keep their mounting personal wealth hidden, a former banker for the deposed Panamanian leader testified today.
The banker, Amjad Awan, a 44-year-old Pakistani who ran the Panama branch of B.C.C.I. in the early 1980's, said General Noriega made individual cash deposits as large as $3.4 million into four secret accounts he maintained for personal use.
Beginning with an initial deposit of $100,000 in January 1982, General Noriega made large deposits "every two or three months" until early in 1988, when he was indicted by two grand juries in Florida on charges of cocaine trafficking, racketeering and money laundering.


BioWhittaker Inc. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


U S West Plans to Cut 6,000 Jobs
U S West Inc., the Colorado-based regional telephone company for 14 states, said yesterday that it planned to lay off or give early-retirement incentives to about 6,000 employees, or nearly 9 percent of its work force.
The company also said it would sharply lower the value of $1.7 billion of real estate holdings on its books.
As a result, U S West will take a $590 million charge against earnings that is likely to slice its full-year profits in half.
The earnings penalty, known as a non-cash charge, means that the company will perform an accounting entry that does not require new money or the setting aside of special funds.
Similar to Other Bell Moves
Even though U S West had not previously announced that it expected a charge, analysts did not express surprise at the announcement.
Other of the so-called Baby Bells have either taken or are considering similar charges.


Maxwell Reportedly Was on Medication at Death
Shortly before his death at sea last month, Robert Maxwell took a medicine to decongest his chest and improve his breathing, the Spanish daily newspaper El Pais said today.
It said that doctors at a Madrid institute that conducted detailed forensic tests had found traces of difenhidramin, an expectorant, in parts of Mr.
Maxwell's body.
If true, the finding seems in line with the earlier images of a man in physical and perhaps emotional distress during the final hours of his life.
A waiter at a restaurant where he dined the evening before his death had noted that he had difficulty breathing.
Once back on board of his luxury yacht from where he disappeared, the 68-year old entrepreneur asked several times for the air-conditioning to be changed.


Joyner Signs One-Year Pact With Royals for $4.2 Million
A tearful Wally Joyner reluctantly bolted the California Angels today and joined division-rival Kansas City in an emotional decision that outweighed the business considerations.
Joyner, in one of the most unusual developments in the free-agent era, opted for a one-year, $4.2 million contract over a four-year, $15.75 million offer.
The first baseman's decision, coming after California jettisoned Dave Winfield, left the Angels devoid of the major share of their puny 1991 offense and made it almost mandatory for them to sign Danny Tartabull, the free-agent outfielder, whose agent has riled Whitey Herzog, the Angels' general manager.


PALESTINIANS FEEL PRESSURE ON TALKS
Israel and its Arab neighbors prepared to reopen direct peace talks on Tuesday with the Palestinian delegation under growing pressure either to win quick concessions from Israel or to place conditions on future negotiations that the Israelis would certainly reject.
Parties on all sides engaged in a final public-relations blitz today, with the joint Jordan-Palestinian delegation insisting that it would send two teams to the State Department on Tuesday -- one to negotiate with Israel on Jordanian matters, and a second to deal exclusively with Palestinian issues.


Review/Music; Two Groups for Bohemians Who Tap Feet, Not Dance
The opening concert of the Not Just Jazz season at Town Hall on Friday night brought together two groups -- the Lounge Lizards and Bobby Previte's Empty Suits -- that offered post-jazz music, but from radically different positions.
Two groups were paired, presumably, because they draw a similar, bohemian audience formed in the late 1970's and early 1980's, an audience that wants music that has a pop sense of ecstasy and movement, but doesn't encourage actually dancing, art music for tapping your feet.
Though the series is subtitled "The New Tradition," both Mr.
Lurie and Mr.
Previte have been working in New York for roughly a decade; the amount of gray hair in the audience suggested that their idea of bohemianism hasn't enlisted too many new converts.
The Lounge Lizards closed the show with long evolutionary pieces that mixed rhythm-and-blues power with big band riffing.
Led by the saxophonist and actor John Lurie, the band, which included Steven Bernstein on trumpet and Michael Blake on saxophones, moved through digressions that wrung as much meaning as possible out of dynamic change.
The horns might state loud blues phrases, backed by the rhythm section, after which the horn players would walk offstage while a guitarist and a drummer performed a quiet duet, to be joined later by the group's bassist, Oren Bloedow.
Mr.
Lourie would return, for a solo, only to be joined by the rest of the horns for a shouting, wild polyphonic section that dissipated into a guitar solo.


Wanted: Clear-Cut Winner In Final
The quality of play in the Division I soccer tournament here was of the highest caliber in collegiate soccer, but the lack of a goal in the championship game left a sour taste and marked another setback in the history of the 32-year-old tournament.
For the third consecutive year, the championship game failed to produce a winner after 150 minutes of soccer.
With no goals in the last two championship games, the winner was determined on penalty kicks, which, everyone agreed, was better than the fiasco of 1989.


Earthquake Lights Linked to Bubbles
EARTHQUAKE lights, the mysterious glowing balls and curtains of light that sometimes appear during earthquakes, may be explained by a simple phenomenon seen in chemistry laboratories, a scientist says.
When chemists transmit high-energy sound waves through tanks of water, flashes of light are emitted from the water, said Dr.
Arch C. Johnston of the Center for Earthquake Research at Memphis State University.
This is because the sound waves compress and extend the water so that tiny bubbles are formed under pressure.
When the bubbles implode, Dr.
Johnston said, a number of water molecules break into atoms of hydrogen and oxygen and then quickly recombine back into water.
This process releases photons of light.


Europe's Unity: A 40-Year Dream
MAY 9, 1950: France proposes pooling French and West German production of coal and steel, and setting up a multinational organization for that purpose.
APRIL 18, 1951: Treaty of Paris establishes the European Coal and Steel Community with France, West Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg as members.
Britain declines to join.


Accounts
*
Samuel Goldwyn Co., Los Angeles, to J. Walter Thompson Los Angeles, following a review.
Billings for the motion picture company's account were estimated at $10 million to $12 million.
An agency spokeswoman said Cadwell Davis Partners, New York, was the other finalist.
Media buying had previously been handled by ICG, Los Angeles, while the creative work had been assigned on a project basis. *
Tom's of Maine, Kennebunk, Me., to McCabe &amp; Co., New York, to advertise its toothpastes, shampoos and other personal-care products.
Billings are estimated at $2 million for media, a company spokeswoman said, adding that Tom's advertising had previously been handled by other agencies on a project basis.


Socanav Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-21  GORBACHEV WON'T BURY UNION
President Gorbachev rejected the right of the leaders of Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia to dissolve the Soviet Union, adding to the uncertainty over the fate of the Soviet lands.A1  TRYING OUT NEW ROLES
After a career spent issuing decrees and amassing emergency powers, President Gorbachev is trying on some new responsibilities.
A18  MILITARY FOLLOWS PATTERN
An uneasy transition lies ahead as the Soviet military is fragmented along the same fault lines as the union.
A19  In New York, the Soviet Mission carries on with its Soviet mission.
A19  U.S.
WON'T ABANDON MOSCOW
The announcement of the birth of a commonwealth does not mean the U.S. will break off relations with the central Government or recognize the new entity.
A1  Europe professes little surprise over events in the Soviet Union.
A20  EUROPE DECIDES ON CURRENCY
The European Community, in a newly minted decision at Maastricht, said the continent would create a single currency and central bank by 1999.
A1  PRESSURE BEFORE PEACE TALKS
On the eve of peace talks with Israel, the Palestinians are under pressure to win quick concessions or to put conditions on future negotiations that Israel is sure to reject.
A13  Sheik Abdel Karim Obeid called for a prisoner exchange.
A14  Rachelim is not much, but residents say it is worth fighting for.
A14  U.N.
CREATES ARMS REGISTER
The U.N.
General Assembly voted to establish the first register of international arms sales.
A11  SURRENDER RAISES DOUBTS
Surrendering Colombian death-squad commanders said they were seeking peaceful negotiation, but many political analysts doubt that their motives are altruistic.
A10  Johannesburg Journal: Apartheid's youngest victims.
A4  Serbs settling Croatian lands create an obstacle to peace.
A3  National A22-29, B14-17  SLIPPING OFF THE LADDER
Over the past couple of decades government employment has allowed thousands of blacks to enter the middle class, but the national recession is narrowing that route up.
A1  SENATOR IN A NEW DEAL MOLD
As he crisscrossed New Hampshire seeking votes for President, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa left no room for mistaking his views: he is a liberal Democrat eager to return to party and the nation to the policies of Franklin Roosevelt.
A22  FLORIDA FLIRTS WITH A TAX
Florida is one of seven states without a personal income tax.
But a worsening budget situation is forcing lawmakers to consider one, even though they know what a politically dangerous idea it is.
A22  CLARIFYING VOTERS' RIGHTS
While the right to vote is constitutionally protected, how much authority do states retain to regulate their election procedures?
That was the issue as the Supreme Court agreed to decide whether states may prohibit write-in votes.
A27  SMITH POISED TO TESTIFY
William K. Smith is likely to take the witness stand today in the rape trial against him.
But his lawyer wants assurances that the prosecutor will not be able to present evidence about allegations of previous sexual assaults by the defendant.
B14  Critic's notebook: When real life is reduced to a TV drama.
B14  TEST SOUGHT ON ABORTION LAW
Pennsylvania has asked for a United States Supreme Court ruling on its abortion law, setting up the first direct test of Roe v.
Wade.
A29  A POET FOR TODAY
Washington at Work: As expected at the time of his appointment in May, Joseph Brodsky, the first foreign-born poet to be named poet laureate of the United States, has brought the "penetrating observations of the outsider" to his job.
B15  MILESTONE FOR TEAMSTERS
A secret-ballot election for president of the teamsters' union, supervised by the Federal Government, neared its end as workers prepared to count the ballots.
B16  SEEKING TO RESOLVE DISPUTE
Accused by Democrats of conflict of interest, the head of the White House Council on Competitiveness is considering putting his financial holdings in a blind trust.
B15  Union sues company for installing camera in a women's shower.
A22  10 died in a Chicago fire.
A26  Metropolitan Digest, B1 SEEKING HOMELESS CONSENSUS
Mayor Dinkins says he will seek "a common ground" on how to handle the homeless issue before he scatters shelters across the city.
A1  RECALLING ATTICA VIOLENCE
The 20 years since bullets broke the quiet of Attica prison seemed to melt away during a trial to determine whether former state officials are legally responsible for the bloodshed that ended an insurrection.
A1  Neediest Cases B4  Business Digest, D1  Science Times C1-13  OBSTACLES TO TB CONTROL  A gap in medical technology makes it difficult to detect tuberculosis in people infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
Most new cases in a recent outbreak have occurred in that group.
A1  In recycling waste, the noble scarab is peerless.
C1  Giant "pancake" is a clue to the origin of the universe.
C1  New studies map the mind of the rapist.
C1  Taxonomy, a neglected discipline, is about to get its due.
C4  Arts/Entertainment C14-21  New ticket prices for Mackintosh shows on Broadway.
C15  New museum opens in Seattle.
C15  City Ballet plans a series of new works.
C20  Music: A cantor's music.
C15  Word and Image: The Holocaust as a cartoonist's encounter.
C15  A new book on changing times and changing illnesses.
C19  Fashion B18  Flaring, bouncy and look at those knees  Obituaries B20  Spiro Kostof, architectural historian  Sports B21-27  Baseball: Joyner signs one-year pact with Royals.
B21  Vincent disturbed by financial inequities.
B25  Column: Berkow on Paterno B21  Football: Handley regrets not taking firmer hold B21  The Jets are down (but are they dirty?) B21  Olympics: A good winter weekend for Americans.
B24  Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials A30  Out of the Soviet wreckage.
What Bush can do on AIDS.
Midnight's hostage.
Jersey's cynical Democrats.
Letters A30  A. M. Rosenthal: Israel -- decision time.
A31  Russell Baker: What Homer lacked.
A31  Robert Legvold: While we sleep.
A31  Randy Shilts: Good AIDS, bad AIDS.
A31


Meyer (Fred) Inc.(O) reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 9


Business and Health; A Plan to Cover Early Retirees
LARGE companies that promise extensive medical benefits to future retirees could save enormous amounts if the Medicare eligibility age dropped to 60 from 65.
But the change, which was proposed by Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, is strongly opposed by small businesses, which typically do not provide extensive retiree health benefits.
Mr.
Rostenkowski, Democrat of Illinois, whose bill would be paid for by raising the Medicare payroll tax paid by employers and employees, has said that Congress is unlikely to enact sweeping changes in health policy until after next year's elections.
But debate on the measure could become part of the broader issue of a national health insurance system.


Echoes of Violence: Attica's Story Retold in Court
It has been 20 years since the tear gas and the bullets broke the morning quiet in the prison at Attica, not far from here.
But the years sometimes seem like minutes in a paneled Buffalo courtroom, where for the first time a trial is under way to determine whether former state officials are legally responsible for the bloodshed that ended the insurrection at the prison on Sept. 13, 1971, and made Attica a part of American history.


By Design; New Twists in Hairdos
If you've just been to the hairdresser and a passing wind whips up your coiffure, don't be mad -- be happy.
This season, the deliberately disheveled hairdo is the height of style.
Top stylists like Oribe, the hair maestro at the Elizabeth Arden Salon, are making sure their customers leave the shop looking as if an errant breeze had already dislocated a lock or two.
"It's a way to make the popular 60's bouffant look younger, sexier and more modern," Oribe said.
What Oribe does is set, tease and arrange a coif the usual way.
Then he coaxes some pieces and tendrils to drop out of place.
Oribe invented this degage hair style for the spring Chanel showing in Paris.
Some of the models, particularly the exotic Yasmin LeBon, who appeared with two large hunks of hair obscuring her eyes, looked quite startling.
But as Oribe explained, this was purposeful exaggeration to create runway drama.
"All Karl Lagerfeld, the designer, asked me to do," he said, "was make the girls feel wonderful -- and they did."


Gates/FA Distributing Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giants' Fall: Explanations Exist but Don't Ease Pain
In 1987, when the Giants followed a Super Bowl championship with a 6-9 season, everyone seemed to have an explanation.
The players let success go to their heads.
They wrote too many books and celebrated too much.
They thought it would be easy to win again.
It was a strike season.
Their strike-replacement team was awful.
And on and on.


Gunmen Yield in Colombia; Is It Altruism or Necessity?
When 35 members of Colombian rightist death squads surrendered to the authorities last month, their leaders said that armed action was no longer useful in solving a long, costly conflict with leftist guerrillas.
The death-squad commanders said they were taking the path of peaceful negotiation and called on their enemies of the armed left to follow them.


Medicare Discourages House Calls by Doctors; Nurse Practitioners
To the Editor:
In "Meet Dr. Jarman. He Makes House Calls" (Op-Ed, Nov. 16), Howard Hiatt focuses on the merits of general practitioners in the British National Health Service.
Any valuation of a national health plan for this country would be shortsighted if it underestimated the role of G.P.'s and resisted the fundamental change this would mean to medical school education and admissions.
However, I suggest he should have gone further.


SOVIET ATOM ARMS WORRY EUROPEANS
Since it has been clear for several months that the "mighty, indivisible, indestructible" Soviet Union was a thing of the past, its formal unraveling has not come as an unsettling surprise to Western European leaders trying to decide here today how to knit their own countries more closely together.
The Soviet Union began falling to pieces immediately after President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and other leaders of constituent Soviet republics faced down the hard-line coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev it August.
Though the coup failed, it weakened Mr.
Gorbachev, and most West European leaders now apparently believe that his power cannot be restored.


Music in Review
Golub-Kaplan-Carr Trio  Weill Recital Hall
More of Bruce Adolphe's elegant chamber music on Friday night.
The Golub-Kaplan-Carr Trio played the Trio from 1986: slender in its pretensions, but with a keen ear for melodic movement and a fastidious sense of organization and color scheme.


Deliberation in Miller Case To Continue for a 3d Day
A jury completed its second day of deliberations yesterday without reaching a verdict in the fraud trial of Mel Miller, the New York State Assembly Speaker, and one of his top aides.
Mr.
Miller and the co-defendant, Jay Adolf, are charged with defrauding their law firm's clients in a series of investments in cooperative apartments.
At the jury's request, some testimony of the prosecution's main witness, Avi Cohen, was read back to the jurors in the afternoon.


CHRONICLE
No one can say that that the decorators of the White House Christmas tree, unveiled for the press yesterday by BARBARA BUSH, skimped on decorations.
The Oregon fir, standing 18 1/2 feet tall in the Blue Room, has 1,200 needlepoint ornaments, including a six-inch white-haired angel with three strands of pearls that The Associated Press reported bears a marked resemblance to the First Lady.
Mrs.
Bush made three decorations herself: Raggedy Ann and Andy dolls and a jowly rendition of her dog, Millie, wearing an elf's cap.
The other ornaments include dozens of Santa Clauses, rocking horses, rocket ships, giraffes, carousels and even a school bus.
Eighty-two needlepoint houses form an old-fashioned village around the tree and on the mantels.
The White House estimated that volunteers put in 150,000 hours making the ornaments.


Trade Center Set to Combat Middle Age
The World Trade Center, still sleek on the outside, is unmistakably aging on the inside and in need of hundreds of millions of dollars in renovations if it is to hold its place in a competitive real-estate market.
Some of its shortcomings are subtle -- by today's computerized standards, for example, the elevators that climb the 20-year-old, 110-story twin towers of the center do not move efficiently.


William Kravitz, Lawyer, 45
William N. Kravitz, a partner in the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 45 years old and lived in Oyster Bay Cove, L.I.
He died of cancer of the esophagus, said Peter P. Mullen, the firm's executive partner.


New Jersey's Cynical Democrats
Scheming leaders of the Democratic majority in the New Jersey Senate propose to repeal the $2.8 billion in taxes they approved barely 18 months ago.
Doomed to minority status next year, they are taking a parting shot at the victorious Republicans by forcing them to reapprove the taxes or slash spending.
That's cynical and irresponsible.
Its perpetrators deserve the defeat they suffered in last month's elections.
Anti-tax sentiment fueled the Republicans' November sweep to veto-proof majorities in both houses.
Their platform proposed repealing the increase in the sales tax, which went to 7 percent from 6 percent.
In campaigning, however, they played on resentment of Gov.
Jim Florio and his fellow Democrats for tax increases in general.


Corrections
A table in Business Day on Tuesday with an article about high-definition television misidentified the scanning method used by the proposed HDTV system known as Advanced Compatible Television.
The system uses interlaced scanning, in which the odd-numbered lines are scanned first, then the even lines, producing a full image when the two scans are combined.


ERC Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Noting Uncertainty in New Union, Washington Takes Cautious Path
The Bush Administration said today that while it was ready to work with the projected commonwealth of former Soviet republics, it did not plan to break relations with the central Government of Mikhail S. Gorbachev or recognize the new commonwealth.
The sudden announcement on Sunday of the new commonwealth by the leaders of Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia was viewed by Washington as a hastily arranged initiative, inspired by


Lawyer Says He'll Call Smith if Talk of Past Accusations Is Barred
The chief defense lawyer for William K. Smith said he planned to call the defendant to the stand Tuesday, but only if he got additional assurances from the court that prosecutors could not introduce accusations of previous sexual misconduct made against Mr.
Smith.
The lawyer, Roy E. Black, argued that if Mr.
Smith took the stand, his credibility would be at issue but not his character.
Thus, he said, while evidence of his general reputation for truthfulness would be admissible as evidence, accusations about specific previous acts of misconduct would not be.


Flaring, Bouncy and Look at Those Knees
Short, bouncy dresses with full skirts rank high in retailers' orders for spring, manufacturers report.
Long, slinky styles made with seductive slits caused the most comment at last month's fashion shows because they were new and somewhat controversial.
But as the confirmed orders come in from stores around the country, it is clear that short flaring styles are in the ascendancy.
"They are young and flattering, and buyers feel they will have no trouble selling them," said Gerald Solovei, the president of Scaasi Boutique on Seventh Avenue.
"They have a familiar look, which is a plus in selling these days, but the full skirts make them seem fresh."


Music in Review
Academy of St. Martin-in-the-Fields  Avery Fisher Hall
Seven years from now, the music world will mark the bicentennial of Haydn's "Creation." Note will be taken, there will be flurries of performances, but at the end of the 20th century there is no way to recapture for today's listeners the work's astonishing success at the end of the 18th.
Long accustomed to music in which suffering and pessimism have been granted the imprimatur of nobility, many people are, I think, bewildered by Haydn's supremely optimistic oratorio, and a few may subliminally resent it.
His contemporaries adored "The Creation" because it confirmed what the Enlightenment had taught them, that for humanity a happy ending was just around the corner.


Carver Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Duty Free International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Doctor Named in Insider Suit
The wife of Sanford I. Weill, chairman of the Primerica Corporation, filed a lawsuit on Monday, seeking $5.5 million in damages from her former psychiatrist, whom she accused of illegally trading on secret information he learned in her treatment.
Joan Weill said Dr.
Robert Willis, a Manhattan psychiatrist, violated doctor-patient confidentiality in 1986 by using what she had told him about her husband's plans to become head of the BankAmerica Corporation.


Buchanan, Urging New Nationalism, Joins '92 Race
Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator, entered the race for the Republican Presidential nomination today with a biting attack on foreign aid and President Bush's "globalist" passions, and with a plea for a new nationalism.
Mr.
Buchanan cast his candidacy as a crusade for a party and a country forsaken by its President.
He asserted that Mr.
Bush had abandoned conservative precepts, lost touch with the nation and become consumed with world affairs, while Americans struggle with recession and increasing economic competition from abroad.


Theater in Review
Galileo
Jean Cocteau Repertory  Bouwerie Lane Theater Manhattan Through Feb. 14
By Bertolt Brecht; English version by Charles Laughton; direction and lighting by Eve Adamson; set by John Brown; costumes by Jonathan Bixby; music by Hanns Eisler; production manager, Patrick Heydenburg.
Presented by the Jean Cocteau Repertory Theater, Robert Hupp, artistic director.
WITH: Harris Berlinsky, Jeanne Demers, Ian Duckett, Robert Ierardi, Corinne Julie Kendall, Joseph Menino, William Charles Mitchell, Grant Neale, Kate Sherry, Craig Smith, Elise Stone, Tony Stone, Angela Vitale and Mark Waterman.
Throughout history, every major advance in mankind's halting march toward knowledge has been accompanied by a crisis of faith.
But with the possible exception of Darwin's voyage on the Beagle, none were more critical than at the dawn of the Age of Reason when Galileo cobbled together a telescope, trained it on the heavens and expanded our universe.


With Court on Its Side, Nassau County Resumes Furlough Program
Nassau County reinstated its furlough program for almost 1,300 county employees today after a court ruling found no fault with the plan.
"We're now free to go ahead with the program," said Robert W. Schmidt, the county attorney.
"But first we still have to iron out some of the problems in putting it into effect."


Credit Data Suit Settled By TRW
TRW Inc. agreed to broad changes in its credit-monitoring unit today that are intended to give consumers less costly, faster and more accurate readings on their past use of debt.
The action ended a lawsuit brought by 19 states and the Federal Trade Commission.
"This is an issue of huge importance," said Robert Abrams, the Attorney General of New York, whose office investigated hundreds of consumer complaints against TRW and other credit-reporting companies for two years before the lawsuit against TRW was filed here, where the company has its consumer assistance office, in July.


Handley Planning to Look Ahead As Giants' Season Winds Down
The Giants, apparently, finally, the Ray Handley Giants, get a 10-month head start on next season when they play the Redskins in Washington on Sunday.
At least that's the nice, upbeat way Handley looks at it.
What other motivating reasons can the rookie coach bring to play in this game, or the season's finale against the Oilers?


American Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Canwest Global reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Dylex Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Nuclear Metals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


KCS Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mountain Medical Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Schools Have to Act To Stop Shootings
To the Editor:
When New York City public school officials can only respond to an event such as the murder of a student and the wounding of a teacher inside a school building by saying they too are victims of social forces, our schools and our society are in trouble.


Moguls: Up and Away
Moguls is a ski event that combines freestyle aerials, speed and turning maneuvers down a steep course that is usually just under a quarter of a mile in length.
Skiers try to master the banked course with tight turns and flamboyant jumps, while maintaining their speed.
Seven judges rate the competitors on all three facets: speed, aerials and turns.
Skiers must present two aerials, which must be different from each other.
The seven judges' high and low scores are discarded.
The speed score and the aerial score each count 25 percent, while turning counts 50 percent.


More 'October Surprise' Surprises
Secretary of State Baker now acknowledges that the incoming Reagan Administration "might very well" have approved Israel's secret sale of U.S.-made weaponry to Iran in 1981.
His comment followed a report in The New York Times on Sunday that approval had indeed been granted -- and that the sales were breathtakingly large, exceeding previous estimates by billions of dollars.
These disclosures do not confirm potentially devastating claims that Ronald Reagan's campaign aides conspired with Iran to thwart President Carter's efforts to free American hostages -- the "October surprise" that Republicans feared.
But Mr.
Baker's comment clearly strengthens the case for an inquiry.
Such an inquiry has been authorized, but not funded, by Congress.


Industrial Training Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Advanced Tobacco Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Applied Extrusion Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Study Shows Improvement In Service On Subways
The on-time performance of New York City's subway during the morning rush hours showed "significant improvement" between 1988 and 1990, according to a report released yesterday.
Eighty-five percent of all trains between 7 and 9 A.M. ran on time last year, the study, by the Inspector General of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, determined.
In 1988, only 76 percent of the trains were on time during the same hours, a previous study by the Inspector General found.


CHRONICLE
The Rev.
M.
WILLIAM HOWARD JR. of Lawrenceville, N.J., has been elected the ninth president of the New York Theological Seminary.
He is the first black to head the seminary, which has the city's largest program preparing men and women for the Protestant ministry.
Mr.
Howard, 45 years old, will assume the presidency in the spring.
He has been the executive director of the African-American Council of the Reformed Church in America since 1972 and is a former president of the National Council of Churches.
The Reformed Church is a Protestant denomination with 250,000 members.
Mr.
Howard is an ordained minister of the American Baptist Churches.


Wine Talk
THE retail wine business has seen better times.
Some shops are reporting brisk sales since just before Thanksgiving, but the customers are spending less than in the past.
Whether that means that Mouton-Rothschild voters are scaling down to Mouton Cadet is not clear yet, but it's a safe bet that quite a few people are discovering how good a $15 -- or $8 -- bottle of wine can be.
Many former high fliers were forced out of their first-growth fixations last year.
For them, and for all the folks from Salomon Brothers, I.B.M. and the sick banks who are flying economy for the first time, here are some Bordeaux buys to help weather the economic storms.
Welcome to the back of the plane.


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day in some copies yesterday about plans to begin selling the Large Type Weekly of The New York Times next week on some newsstands in Florida misstated the single-copy price.
It will be $1.25.


Glacier Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Fed Official Optimistic On Growth
WASHINGTON, Dec. 10 --
The economy is not so weak as is popularly believed, and a resumption of solid growth is very likely by mid-1992, the second-ranking Federal Reserve Board official said today, despite what he called a "pervasive sourness" among both business people and consumers.
Asked when expansion would again reach a fairly normal 2 1/2 percent to 3 percent pace, David W. Mullins Jr., the Fed's vice chairman, declared, "It looks promising that we could be back on that path sometime next year -- late spring, early summer." He added, "It looks promising, certainly by midyear we should be back squarely in the positive growth category."


Trade Deficit Rose in Quarter
The nation's foreign trade deficit, which includes services and investments as well as goods, climbed to $10.5 billion in the July-September quarter, the Government said today.
The deficit in the current account, the broadest measure of the nation's performance with the rest of the world, followed rare back-to-back quarters of surplus.
In the first two quarters, the perennial merchandise trade deficits were offset by contributions made by the allies to pay for the Persian Gulf war.


Clinton Gas Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Economic Scene; Mozart's Money Misunderstanding
POOR Mozart.
Everybody who saw the movie knows genius went unrewarded, that the composer of "Don Giovanni" and "The Magic Flute" lived hand to mouth and died a pauper.
In fact, say William Baumol, an economist at New York University, and Hilda Baumol, an economics consultant in New York, everybody got it wrong.
In a paper written for the Mozart Bicentennial Symposium at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, the husband-wife team calculates that Mozart's income in the last decade of his life was thoroughly middle class by 1990's standards -- a remarkable achievement for a time in which most wage earners lived at the raw edge of subsistence.


Century Telephone Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Canadian Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Metropolitan Diary
PAT BARTHOLOMEW, on her way to work from Manhattan to downtown Brooklyn, gets ready to switch for an express subway at Chambers Street.
When the doors open, Ms.
Bartholomew is ready for the pushing and shoving and swearing.
What she isn't prepared for is the painful whack a woman delivers across her back.
Ms. Bartholomew wheels around. "Are you crazy?" she asks the woman.


Johnson's Emotions
In an interview with CBS's CONNIE CHUNG tonight, MAGIC JOHNSON says that the only time he wept after learning he had tested positive for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, was when he told his Laker teammates.
"So I got to the locker room and I was making my announcement," Johnson said.
"I was going to make my announcement at 3 o'clock and I was talking to the team, I think, at 2, to tell them what was going on because they didn't know. It was the only time I cried through this whole time."


Daniel Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Old Foe Of Racism, A New Test
His eyes are almost sightless now, but Lyman T. Johnson, the 85-year-old veteran of generations of desegregation battles in this former frontier town on the Ohio River, may be an example of the proposition that insight does not necessarily require eyesight.
His vision of a United States absent its historical preoccupation with race as license for injustice is just as vivid now as it has been for most of his adult life.


BRIEFS
*
American Business Products Inc., Atlanta, said that its joint venture, Curtis 1000 Europe G.m.b.H., had acquired all the outstanding stock of Neuwieder Couvert Fabrik, a German envelope manufacturer. *
Booker P.L.C., agreed to sell its shares in P. Leiner Nutritional Products Corp., Torrance, Calif., to PLI Investors Inc. for $13.75 a share in cash.


Gelman Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Greenman Bros.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Berenice Abbott, 93, Dies; Her Photographs Captured New York in Transition
Berenice Abbott, a pioneer of modern American photography, died yesterday at her home in Monson, Me.
She was 93 years old.
She died of congestive heart failure, said Hank O'Neal, her biographer.


Book Notes
Levi's Death
A doctor who was a friend of Primo Levi says that the writer did not commit suicide four and half years ago and that the authorities reached the wrong conclusion when his body was found at the foot of the stairwell in his family home in Turin, Italy.


Fellow Ex-Hostage Calls Waite 'Reasonably Difficult' to Tolerate
Thomas M. Sutherland, who was released last month after six years as a hostage in Lebanon, today criticized a fellow former hostage, Terry Waite, the Anglican envoy who went to Beirut to free the hostages.
In a departure from the solidarity with which the released hostages greeted their freedom, Mr.
Sutherland described Mr.
Waite, who lay next to him for a year, as "a reasonably difficult man to get along with on many occasions."


Spenser May Be Tough, But Not His Ideal Menu
About 140 people paid $100 apiece Monday night to sample dishes described in the next of Robert B. Parker's novels about Spenser, a Boston detective who is as meticulous about what he eats as he is efficient in dispatching the bad guys.
Mr.
Parker was the host of the dinner at Michela's, a Cambridge restaurant.
Proceeds will go to Community Servings, an organization that delivers home-cooked meals to people with AIDS in the Boston area.


Accounts
*
Pharmaceuticals Manufacturers Association, Washington, to Eisner &amp; Associates Inc., Washington, for its $5 million to $7 million advertising account, an association spokesman said yesterday.
Ehrlich-Manes &amp; Associates, Washington, had been the agency of record.
Eisner was selected after a review of 17 agencies; the other finalist was Adworks Inc., Washington. *
Freeman Cosmetics Corp., Los Angeles, to Asher/Gould Advertising, Los Angeles, for its $6 million television advertising account.


Salvador Talks Fall Short of Goal
Salvadoran Government and rebel negotiators concluded their talks here tonight with considerably less progress than they had set out to make but with some hope of still achieving peace by the year's end.
In a last attempt to push the two sides to a treaty before his tenure expires on Dec. 31, the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, called them to New York for a new round of meetings on Monday.


Reluctant Prince Spurns Arafat Kiss
"No kissing please," Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia said angrily as Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, rushed to embrace him at a meeting of Islamic nations here.
Saudi delegates said today that the Crown Prince also turned away to avoid a handshake with King Hussein of Jordan.
Both incidents took place on Monday.


'Nick and Nora' to Close
"Nick and Nora," a musical written and directed by Arthur Laurents with music by Charles Strouse and lyrics by Richard Maltby Jr., is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Marquis Theater, 1535 Broadway, at 45th Street.
The Sunday matinee of the play, starring Barry Bostwick, Joanna Gleason and Christine Baranski, will be its ninth regular performance; it had 71 previews.


A Turnpike Radio May Soon Be Tuning In Your Tolls
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company and Vapor Canada Inc. of Montreal have agreed to jointly market a highway toll-collection system that would automatically deduct tolls from computerized credit cards without requiring drivers to stop.
The system, which the companies said would be available early next year, combines Vapor Canada's radio-based technology for identifying vehicles with A.T.&amp; T.'s Smart Card, a device that looks like a credit card and contains a computer chip and enough memory to store four single-spaced typewritten pages of data.


Inventor Wins Chrysler Suit
In the second big victory for Robert A. Kearns, an independent inventor, a Federal jury in Detroit ruled yesterday that the Chrysler Corporation had infringed Mr.
Kearns's patent for the intermittent windshield wiper, which has been installed on tens of millions of cars made by manufacturers around the world.
The jury will reconvene on Jan. 21 to determine the amount Chrysler should pay in damages.
Mr.
Kearns, who lives in Houston, won a similar suit against the Ford Motor Company in January 1990, after which Ford agreed to pay the inventor $10.2 million to settle claims.
The inventor has also sued most of the world's other automobile manufacturers, and today's verdict increases the chances that more of them will try to reach out-of-court settlements.


Excavation Brings Woe To Neighbor
The 19th-century building that houses the New York City Planning Department is sagging, shaking and cracking because of foundation work that is meant to protect it from the construction next door of a new Federal office tower.
The damage, disclosed yesterday by Federal and city officials, further complicates what has already been a most intricate excavation.


Meridian Diagnostics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Michael's Hands Tied Without a Budget
"Soon. It should happen soon."
Gene Michael spoke with an air of finality that had not been apparent in any previous statement made by a Yankee executive in quite some time.
Still, Michael's statement that the Yankees could decide on whether or not to spend on free agents any day now, reconfirmed the obvious: the Yankees, in the middle of baseball's annual winter meetings trade-and-sign fest, are still a team without a budget, thus leaving Michael to try to improve through trading, something he continues to admit is a yeoman task, one without any apparent success as of today.


Grey Advertising Picked by Raytheon
Moving to consolidate advertising for accounts that had been handled by a dozen agencies, the Raytheon Company, Lexington, Mass., yesterday named Grey Advertising, New York, as its agency of record.
The announcement followed a three-month review that began with 20 agencies and ended with Grey facing one other finalist: Della Femina, McNamee Inc., New York.
Many advertising executives had considered Della Femina the front-runner, because it had handled advertising for Raytheon's corporate and government groups.


General Parametrics reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Real Estate; Some Small Signs of Optimism for Denver's Office Market
IN this city, where too many office buildings have been attracting too few tenants since the mid-80's, the Resolution Trust Corporation has given the market a lift by proposing to lease 148,000 square feet for its regional headquarters in Republic Plaza, a 56-story downtown building.
"I didn't know anybody could find happiness in having the R.T.C. around," said Kevin Shields, a Resolution Trust spokesman.
The Federal agency was created to manage and dispose of the assets of failed savings and loan associations, many of which lent heavily to builders of the office space that is now in oversupply in much of the nation.


Suave Shoe reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Perfectdata Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stewart F. Alexander Medical Specialist, 77
Dr.
Stewart F. Alexander, a retired New Jersey internist and cardiologist, died on Friday at the vacation house of a daughter on the Caribbean Island of Mustique.
He was 77 years old and lived in Park Ridge, N.J.
He died of skin cancer, said his sister-in-law, Marian Vafiades.


Expansion and Geography Lessons
National League owners gave the first formal indication today that they are ready to consider geographic reality.
But the Chicago Cubs and the St.
Louis Cardinals may insist that baseball's map remain convoluted.
Bill White, the league president, said the owners discussed the possibility of realigning their two divisions beginning in 1993, when the league will expand to 14 teams with the addition of Miami and Denver.
Under the plan, the Cubs and the Cardinals would switch from East to West and the Atlanta Braves and the Cincinnati Reds from West to East.


Canadian Western Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cellular Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Greenwich Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Opening Expanded For 'Prince of Tides'
Columbia Pictures said Monday that the strongly positive weekend preview reaction to the film "Prince of Tides" had led to a last-minute scheduling change for its opening.
Instead of opening in New York, Los Angeles and Toronto on Dec. 18, the film will be released nationwide on Dec. 25, Columbia executives said.
They said the initial plan, to open "Prince of Tides" in three cities to build word-of-mouth reaction, was unnecessary because of the strong audience reaction at weekend previews in New York, Los Angeles and other cities.


The truth appears to be, with regard to the alleged extermination of the European Jews, that there was no order, no plan, no budget, no weapon . . .  -- From advertisements in college newspapers
College newspapers are facing a dilemma that pits free speech against historical deception.
A group calling itself the Committee for Open Debate on the Holocaust has sent an advertisement to at least a dozen leading campus dailies.
The ad contends that the Holocaust never occurred.
Newspapers at Harvard, Yale, Brown, the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Southern California have refused to run it.
Those at Northwestern, Cornell, Duke and the University of Michigan have published it amid protests from students, faculty and members of their own editorial boards.
At Rutgers, the ad was printed free of charge on Dec. 3 as a "guest commentary," surrounded by rebuttals.


BF Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


William Stewart, 80, Advertising Executive
William B. Stewart, a retired New York advertising executive, died on Friday at Phelps Memorial Hospital in Tarrytown, N.Y.
He was 80 years old and lived in Scarborough, N.Y.
He died of pneumonia, his family said.


Agency Rent-A-Car reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Big Rebound Off the Court
It was an upbeat and expanded version of the Lafayette basketball team that assembled on the first floor of the Brooklyn high school yesterday afternoon for the four-stop ride on the B train to New Utrecht High School deep in the heart of Bensonhurst.
Fresh off a championship tournament weekend at Poly Prep, including a solid final-round victory over the same New Utrecht team they were about to face, the Frenchies were confident for their first game in the tough Brooklyn Division I.
Back in the fold after three months of ineligibility were three starters from last year's team: Hardin Desire, Yohance Boyce and Kareem Sims, all seniors.
And still in the lineup was 6-foot-9-inch center Antonio Carrasquillo, a senior who gained eligibility for the first time this fall.
All four had fulfilled the requirements set by the Public School Athletic League's eligibility committee, passing four academic subjects plus gym on their report cards, which were handed out earlier yesterday.


Transmedia Network reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Mayor of Nation's Capital Finds Sober Reality Dulls Bright Promise
In the 11 months since Sharon Pratt Kelly replaced Marion S. Barry Jr. as Mayor of the nation's capital, sober reality has dulled some of the sheen of her bright promise of change and supplanted some of her do-it-yesterday eagerness.
Mrs.
Kelly -- she was Sharon Pratt Dixon until this past weekend, when she married James R. Kelly 3d, a businessman who has homes in New York and Los Angeles -- took office in early January promising to "clean house." She was eager to deal with the drug-driven crime bedeviling the city.
She could hardly wait to wrestle the bloated City Hall bureaucracy she inherited from Mr.
Barry, whose 12-year tenure ended with him bound for prison on a drug conviction.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day yesterday referred incorrectly in some editions to a son of Robert Maxwell shown leaving his office in London.
He was Ian Maxwell, not Kevin.


Terry Anderson Receives Hero's Welcome at A.P.
Punchy with liberty and exhaustion, Terry Anderson returned to America yesterday, sweeping into the marble foyer of The Associated Press headquarters in New York as his colleagues dropped yellow rose petals from their offices above.
First they chanted, then they clapped.
Finally, they cried as Mr.
Anderson walked haltingly into their world again.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.35
4.50
7.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.18
4.14
6.83
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.19
4.15
6.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.70
6.71
7.82
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.78
7.78
8.06
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.80
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.86
6.86
7.46
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Astrotech International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Public &amp; Private; Room at the Inn
Ten years ago Harold Brown decided to do something that he had never done before but that he believed his Catholic faith required him to do.
He began to help house the homeless.
He and his wife, Virginia, and a group of volunteers from Sacred Heart Church in Queens set up a small shelter in the basement of the church in response to a call to action from the Mayor, the Cardinal and the Partnership for the Homeless.
For a decade they have provided a bed each night, as well as breakfast, a bag lunch, a hot dinner, a change of underclothes and, after the plumber hooked extra water lines up, a shower and the use of a washer and dryer.


Hemacare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


C.I.A. Chief's Warning
Robert M. Gates warned that the fragmenting Soviet Union faces its most severe instability in more than 70 years.
Page A18.


Analytical Surveys Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cheyenne Software reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Knicks Clobber Nets, But Not Unexpectedly
Two professional basketball teams were scheduled to play at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight.
Only one team seemed genuinely interested.
The Nets, a team with an embattled coach and inept players, disintegrated early and were manhandled by the Knicks, 114-88.
How bad was it?
The Knicks led by 22 points in the first half.
They led by 33 early in the fourth quarter.
Perhaps the Nets (5-14) were embarrassed, but you have to care to be embarrassed.
And how much the Nets care about winning is open to debate, especially after this performance.


Maybe a Nightmare on Elm St. Inspired Addams
Ron MacCloskey keeps meeting people here who are looking for the Addams family mansion.
He thinks it's about time.
Mr.
MacCloskey is Westfield's unofficial Charles Addams historian.
Before you even ask, he'll tell you that the late New Yorker cartoonist was born here in 1912, grew up in a modest two-story house at 522 Elm Street, graduated from Westfield High, roomed at Colgate University with a Westfield pal and stayed in touch with Westfield friends long after he became known for his witty and macabre creations, including the Addams Family.


France Is the Place to Dig
To The Living Section:
Perhaps France is after all the best place for a dig: "For Acheologists, Joy Is Digging Through the Camp's Larder"  [ Oct. 23 ] .
I spent a summer in the Dordogne some years ago excavating a Mousterian site with Prof.
Francois Bordes of the University of Bordeaux.
We lived in tents in the field behind his stone farmhouse.
I used to prepare breakfast, fresh cafe au lait served in bowls and fresh bread with sweet butter and jam.


Cangene Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Government Should Increase Flu Vaccine Role
To the Editor:
The outcry about the shortage of influenza vaccine (Science Times, Dec. 3) suggests that the problem is new.
It is not.
Every year there is a shortage of influenza vaccine, perceived or unperceived, and the situation will not change without Government intervention.


Anadarko Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Assault at a Korean Fruit Store Was Bias Related, Police Say
Seven to 10 masked men burst into a Korean-American fruit store in Flatbush, Brooklyn, yesterday morning, threw piles of produce to the floor, broke several fixtures and assaulted two workers, the police said.
The police are investigating the case as a bias-related incident "based on the testimony of the victims that the men were black," said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Edward Burns.


Pinning Medals on California Wines
WINE buyers often take their cues from critics.
Now, an unusual wine-buying guide that charts the medals that wines have won in contests has become nationally available for the first time.
The book, "California Wine Winners" (Varietal Fair, $6.95), focuses on 1,700 California wines from 472 wineries awarded medals by panels of judges in nine 1991 competitions.
It is the ninth edition of the pocket-size paperback, but the first to be sold outside California in national chain bookstores, said the co-publisher, Trudy H. Ahlstrom, who edits it with her husband, J. T. Devine, an architect.


Supradur Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Salaxi Journal; For Chinese, an Ancient Scourge Loses Its Terror
When Du Dayi found out that he had leprosy, the short, soft-spoken peasant was as worried about his neighbors as about the disease.
In those days, more than four decades ago, Chinese villagers sometimes burned leprosy patients alive in an attempt to destroy a disease that they loathed like none other.
"People were afraid of us then and looked down at us," said Mr.
Du, who has lost an eye as well as his nose to the disease, the latter affliction apparently distorting his speech.
"But now it's no problem, and I can go around easily. I can even go to the bank!"


Tokyo Stocks Plunge
Stock prices plunged in Tokyo today.
At the close of trading, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 450.16 points, or 2.05 percent, to 21,502.90.
On Tuesday, the Nikkei lost 399.82 points.


Greg Smith Shop Sets Closing Date
Greg Smith &amp; Partners, an agency in Santa Ana, Calif., will close at the end of the year, a spokeswoman said yesterday, after its billings plunged to $8 million, from $17 million.
The agency's five remaining accounts, as well as several of its 24 employees, will move to another agency in Santa Ana, Salvati Montgomery Sakoda, she added.
Smith is the latest of dozens of agencies in the competitive Southern California market to close.
John Good, the publisher of California Adnews, said yesterday that the number of agencies in Orange County, south of Los Angeles, had declined in the last year, to about 250 from 420.


Britain's Way: A Qualified Agreement
Margaret Thatcher made so many dramatic confrontations at European Community summit meetings over 11 years that the other leaders almost looked forward to her performances.
One against all, there she always was, swinging her "hammer," as Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany recalled Monday night, rejecting with an emphatic "No, no, no!" all proposals to make of Europe anything more than a big common market.


Freed From Censorship, Culture in Hungary Now Suffers Lack of Security
Censored and pampered, troubled and self-satisfied in the Communist decades, the creators of Hungary's always vigorous cultural life are seeking their bearings two years after the coming of democracy and a market economy.
No firm principles and practices have yet taken the place of the contradictions and compromises that governed literature, theater and films under Communist rule.


Medicine Promotes Itself, With Professional Help
"WE'RE on the phone 40 hours a week for him; we mail out videos, press kits, action photos; we give him an angle, a special hook," exults Lilly Lipton, a public relations consultant in Studio City, Calif.
"He is a celebrity. He is!"
Is her client an actor?
A rock star?
Maybe a rising politician?
No.
He is Dr.
Ian R. Brown, a surgeon.
Thanks to Ms.
Lipton's aggressive promotion, Dr.
Brown says, he has appeared on dozens of television programs from the news to "Entertainment Tonight" to "Geraldo." As a result, his cosmetic surgery practice is thriving.


Louisville Debates Plan to End Forced Grade School Busing
Barbara Bosan, a mother of six, has heard all the arguments supporting busing school children for racial desegregation.
Theoretically, she said, she agrees with most of them.
But personally, Mrs.
Bosan, who is black and was a student in the Louisville school system when it was deeply segregated, is troubled.


Irwin Toy reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Along 90 Blocks of New Jersey, A New World of Latin Tastes
SAVORING a rich sugary dessert, spoonful by ecstatic spoonful, is often described by food writers as if it were a sacred rite.
But at Restaurant la Cachita, on Bergenline Avenue in West New York, N.J., dessert actually is a religious experience.
From her altar over the espresso machine, the Virgin of Caridad del Cobre, patron saint of Cuba, keeps watch as patrons consume wickedly jiggling yellow concoctions of milk, sugar, eggs and coconut.
The Virgin, in a golden cape, yellow candles burning at her feet, lends a new dimension to the concept of dessert as sin.


Microwave Cooking
I'M not the kind of jolly mother in a frilly apron who is constantly whipping up batches of sweets for little smiles.
I'm not much on candy, particularly for young teeth.
Come the holiday season however, I do make candy for gifts and as extra treats to keep around the house.
This is a time of true gratitude for the microwave oven.
Sugar and microwaves seem to have a love affair.
The timing is precise; there are never any nasty crystals or scorched pots, and the whole process is as easy as can be.
If any candy sticks to the cooking container, simply fill the container with water and microwave for a few minutes until the sticky stuff dissolves.
You will find that some of the candies use a little less liquid in a low-wattage oven as there is less evaporation there.


Highlights of the Ruling That Struck Down New York's 'Son of Sam' Law
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in Simon &amp; Schuster v.
Members of the New York Crime Victims Board, striking down a New York law that required criminals to forfeit their earnings from books or movies about their crimes.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor wrote the opinion for the Court, which was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and by Justices Byron R. White, John Paul Stevens, Antonin Scalia and David H. Souter.
Justices Harry A. Blackmun and Anthony Kennedy filed opinions concurring in the judgment.
Justice Clarence Thomas was not on the bench when the case was argued and did not vote.
BY JUSTICE O'CONNOR, For the Court
New York's "Son of Sam" law requires that an accused or convicted criminal's income from works describing his crime be deposited in an escrow account.
These funds are then made available to the victims of the crime and the criminal's other creditors. . . .
. . .
Since its enactment in 1977, the Son of Sam law has been invoked only a handful of times.
As might be expected, the individuals whose profits the Board has sought to escrow have all become well known for having committed highly publicized crimes.
These include Jean Harris, the convicted killer of "Scarsdale Diet" Doctor Herman Tarnower; Mark David Chapman, the man convicted of assassinating John Lennon; and R. Foster Winans, the former Wall Street Journal columnist convicted of insider trading.
Ironically, the statute was never applied to the Son of Sam himself; David Berkowitz was found incompetent to stand trial, and the statute at that time applied only to criminals who had actually been convicted. . . .
This case began in 1986, when the Board first became aware of the contract between petitioner Simon &amp; Schuster and admitted organized crime figure Henry Hill.
. . .
In August 1981, Hill entered into a contract with author Nicholas Pileggi for the production of a book about Hill's life.
The following month, Hill and Pileggi signed a publishing agreement with Simon &amp; Schuster. . . .
The result of Hill and Pileggi's collaboration was Wiseguy, which was published in January 1986.
The book depicts, in colorful detail, the day-to-day existence of organized crime, primarily in Hill's first-person narrative.
Throughout Wiseguy, Hill frankly admits to have participated in an astonishing variety of crimes. . . .
. . .
Within 19 months of its publication, more than a million copies were in print. . . .
From Henry Hill's perspective, however, the publicity generated by the book's success proved less desirable.
The Crime Victims Board learned of Wiseguy in January 1986, soon after it was published.
. . .
The Board ordered Hill to turn over the payments he had already received, and ordered Simon &amp; Schuster to turn over all money payable to Hill at the time or in the future.
Simon &amp; Schuster brought suit in August 1987, . . . seeking a declaration that the Son of Sam law violates the First Amendment and an injunction barring the statute's enforcement. . . .  [ T ] he District Court found the statute consistent with the First Amendment.
A divided Court of Appeals affirmed.
. . .
A statute is presumptively inconsistent with the First Amendment if it imposes a financial burden on speakers because of the content of their speech. . . .
. . .
The Son of Sam law is such a content-based statute.
It singles out income derived from expressive activity for a burden the State places on no other income, and it is directed only at works with a specified content. . . .
. . .
The Board next argues that discriminatory financial treatment is suspect under the First Amendment only when the legislature intends to suppress certain ideas.
This assertion is incorrect; our cases have consistently held that " [ i ] llicit legislative intent is not the sine qua non of a violation of the First Amendment." . . .
The Son of Sam law establishes a financial disincentive to create or publish works with a particular content.
In order to justify such differential treatment, "the State must show that its regulation is necessary to serve a compelling state interest and is narrowly drawn to achieve that end."
The Board disclaims, as it must, any state interest in suppressing descriptions of crime out of solicitude for the sensibilities of readers. . . .
The Board thus does not assert any interest in limiting whatever anguish Henry Hill's victims may suffer from reliving their victimization.
There can be little doubt, on the other hand, that the State has a compelling interest in ensuring that victims of crime are compensated by those who harm them. . . .
The State likewise has an undisputed compelling interest in ensuring that criminals do not profit from their crimes. . . .
The Board attempts to define the State's interest more narrowly, as "ensuring that criminals do not profit from storytelling about their crimes before their victims have a meaningful opportunity to be compensated for their injuries." Here the Board is on far shakier ground.
The Board cannot explain why the State should have any greater interest in compensating victims from the proceeds of such "storytelling" than from any of the criminal's other assets.
Nor can the Board offer any justification for a distinction between this expressive activity and any other activity in connection with its interest in transferring the fruits of crime from criminals to their victims. . . .
. . .
In short, the State has a compelling interest in compensating victims from the fruits of the crime, but little if any interest in limiting such compensation to the proceeds of the wrongdoer's speech about the crime.
We must therefore determine whether the Son of Sam law is narrowly tailored to advance the former, not the latter, objective.
As a means of ensuring that victims are compensated from the proceeds of crime, the Son of Sam law is significantly overinclusive.
As counsel for the Board conceded at oral argument, the statute applies to works on any subject, provided that they express the author's thoughts or recollections about his crime, however tangentially or incidentally.
In addition, the statute's broad definition of "person convicted of a crime" enables the Board to escrow the income of any author who admits in his work to having committed a crime, whether or not the author was ever actually accused or convicted.
These two provisions combine to encompass a potentially very large number of works.
. . .
We conclude simply that in the Son of Sam law, New York has singled out speech on a particular subject for a financial burden that it places on no other speech and no other income.
The State's interest in compensating victims from the fruits of crime is a compelling one, but the Son of Sam law is not narrowly tailored to advance that objective.
As a result, the statute is inconsistent with the First Amendment.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is accordingly reversed.
BY JUSTICE BLACKMUN, Concurring
I am in general agreement with what the Court says in its opinion.
I think, however, that the New York statute is underinclusive as well as overinclusive and that we should say so.
Most other States have similar legislation and deserve from this Court all the guidance it can render in this very sensitive area.
BY JUSTICE KENNEDY, Concurring
The New York statute we now consider imposes severe restrictions on authors and publishers, using as its sole criterion the content of what is written.
The regulated content has the full protection of the First Amendment and this, I submit, is itself a full and sufficient reason for holding the statute unconstitutional. . . .


Regenex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Texscan Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Bond Is Closer To Bankruptcy
Alan Bond, who once ranked among Australia's richest men, failed to overturn an order that he pay $194 million under a guarantee he gave to three banks.
The decision by an Australian appeals court means the banks will ask the Australian Federal Court on Friday to declare Mr.
Bond bankrupt.
The creditors will call for the immediate repayment of the loans, although Mr.
Bond has said he does not have the money.


Grand Casinos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27


Dixon Ticonderoga Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Television; A Veritable Feast of Music for Christmas
The holiday pattern is by now familiar.
While the networks gorge themselves on Christmas movies, public television sings itself hoarse with music specials.
Anything with Luciano Pavarotti, apparently, is considered fail-safe.
Tonight's schedules alone include: "A Christmas Special With Luciano Pavarotti" on Channel 21 at 7:30 and Channel 13 at 10:05; and "Pavarotti in the Park," on Channel 21 at 10:40.
The one-man feast threatens to become a glut.
Viewers reaching the saturation point, no doubt temporary, will welcome tonight's "Carnegie Hall Christmas Concert," taped just three evenings ago and being edited down to the wire.
It will be shown tonight at 8 on Channel 13 and at 8:45 on Channel 21.
The occasion's impressive scope is established in the opening salvo, a performance of "Mary's Boy Chile," its infectious Caribbean rhythms wending their way through all the islands of talent artfully arranged on stage disks that appear to be floating around the center core: the Orchestra of St.
Luke's, conducted by Andre Previn.


Miscellany
*
The Advocate, the gay and lesbian magazine based in Los Angeles, has opened a New York sales office and has hired two sales representatives there: Paul Ruck, who becomes national sales manager, and Ellen Abrams, who becomes regional sales manager.


Books of The Times; A Call for Freedom, From an Unstifled Voice
Freedom From Fear And Other Writings By Aung San Suu Kyi Edited with an Introduction by Michael Aris Illustrated. 338 pages.
Penguin Books. $12 (paperback).
Viking Press. $25 (hard cover).
All over the world, military dictators enjoy using euphemisms -- words with built-in lies -- for tyranny.
For example, "house arrest" is called "restricted residence." Not allowing the winner of an election to take office is merely a means of "preserving law and order."


CML Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Bramalea Ltd.  reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Sports of The Times; L. T., Banks Look to '92, But Where?
THEY stood side by side again yesterday, as they have for eight years on the Giants, outside linebackers with an inside knowledge of what it takes for a team to be a Super Bowl champion twice.
But now Lawrence Taylor and Carl Banks stood together in the disappointment of a team that can't even qualify for the Super Bowl playoffs.


Editorial Notebook; A Good Neighbor Shelter
Mayor David Dinkins deserves the support of all New Yorkers as he calls for lowered voices and dispassionate discussion of his new plan for the homeless.
Despite the angry, often poorly informed rhetoric it has aroused, the plan to close several squalid armories and replace them with 24 new shelters remains well conceived.
Anyone with doubts would be well advised to visit 8 East Third Street, commonly known as the Men's Shelter.
It deserves to be Exhibit A in any serious discussion of the homeless issue.


Decision Praised as a Victory for Free Speech Rights
Publishers and lawyers involved in First Amendment cases praised the United States Supreme Court's decision yesterday striking down New York State's "Son of Sam" law, saying the state had used the issue of compensation to victims to suppress the stories of unsavory and unpopular criminals.
"What the state was really saying all along is that people shouldn't profit from their misdeeds," said Ira Glasser, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union.
"But they knew that that issue, by itself, would never carry weight against the freedoms guaranteed by the First Amendment. And so they threw in this idea of compensating victims as a diversion, and the Supreme Court wisely called them on it."


Chicago Rivet &amp; Machine Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Intersolv Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Pope Names Conservative New England Prelate to Be Archbishop of Hartford
Bishop Daniel A. Cronin, a staunch church conservative who spent his early career working for the Vatican foreign service, was appointed yesterday by Pope John Paul II as the new Archbishop of Hartford.
Bishop Cronin, who is 64 years old, had not been among those mentioned in church circles as a possible candidate for the prestigious post, but the choice fit the conservative mold of other recent papal appointments.


Anac Holding Corp. reports earnings for 12wks to Nov 16


New Post at U.S.T.A.
The United States Tennis Association announced yesterday that it had appointed STEVE DEVOE, an Indianapolis lawyer, to the newly created position of director of professional tennis, ending a search that began last June.


In Home Health reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Recession, as Seen From 1993
Excerpts from news conference in June 1993 with Thomas Foley, Democrat and Speaker of the House, and Newt Gingrich, House Republican whip
.
Reporter: Back in December 1991 the economy was sagging and threatening to get much worse.
The number of people working fell an astonishing 250,000 in one month.
Now, 18 months later, the economy's still stagnating.
Looking back, Mr.
Gingrich, why did you propose tax subsidies on retirement savings of the rich?


Bridgeport U. Put on Probation By College Accrediting Agency
The University of Bridgeport, already in crisis, received another blow yesterday when it was announced that a major accrediting agency had placed the university on probation because of its poor financial picture.
The announcement by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges means the university is only one step away from losing its accreditation, without which its degrees and programs have little meaning for students or employers.


Met-Pro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


LTX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Mays (J.W.) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Southwest Cafes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 11


A Gift Guide To How-To Videotapes
A fire is burning.
Bright, rich flames reach upward.
This is a strong fire, but it emits no smell, no heat.
This is a video fire.
It's also a meditation tape, part of "The Friendly Flames Stress Reduction Program With Dr. Jon Kabat-Zinn." A soothing voice wafts over the flames, urging the viewer to wash away the stresses of life.


Central Park Holds First Rat D-Day
A mild, windless morning, lighted by bright sun.
Everyone agreed it was a perfect day for poisoning rats in Central Park.
At 8 A.M., about 80 Parks Department and Central Park Conservancy employees gathered in the building known as the Swedish Cottage on the west side of the park.
There they received their marching orders for the first day of the first parkwide rat extermination blitz ever.


Mets Subtract Brooks But Don't Add a Pitcher
The Mets achieved two of their winter-meeting goals today, shedding a surplus player (Hubie Brooks) from their roster and money (about $1.5 million) from their bulging payroll.
But they didn't attain their No. 1 goal: adding a top-quality starting pitcher.
Nor do they expect to this week during baseball's annual gathering.
"The chances are remote, maybe later on when teams reassess their situations," Gerry Hunsicker, a Mets executive, said of the team's quest for the pitcher who would bolster their suddenly suspect starting rotation.


Optimumcare Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Police Shoot Suspect In a Queens Robbery
A robbery suspect running from a restaurant in Queens was shot and critically wounded last night when he pointed a pistol at a police sergeant who happened to see him fleeing, the police said.
The robbery and the shooting took place shortly after 8 P.M. at a Roy Rogers restaurant at 94th Street and Northern Boulevard in Astoria, said Officer Ralph St.
Just, a police spokesman.


Theater in Review
Greetings
One Dream  232 West Broadway, entrance on North Moore Street Manhattan Through Dec. 22
By Tom Dudzick; directed by Seth Barrish; set by Markas Henry; costumes by Nina Canter; lighting by Eileen H. Dougherty; sound by David Schnirman; stage manager, Marjorie S. Goodsell; production supervisor, Nancy Kramer; fight director, Rick Sordelet; technical director, Timothy Noble.
Presented by the Barrow Group.
WITH: Marcia DeBonis, Tom Riis Farrell, Aaron Goodwin, Vince O'Brien and Natalie Ross.
Tom Dudzick's "Greetings" mixes crabby humor and holiday sentiment so deftly that one can almost forgive it for shamelessly manipulating a well-worn formula.


Exco Tech reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Shopko Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Algorex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Friars Who Tend the Forgotten, Helped by the Neediest Cases Fund
A tall, bearded man wearing a monk's coarse black robe and sandals strode along the streets of the South Bronx -- past the rubble lots, the garbage, the gutted cars, the buildings burned down or bricked up.
A group of homeless men around a bench sized him up him warily.
The eyes of four teen-age boys followed him down the sidewalk.
The night before, he recalled, a woman cackled hysterically as he walked by.


Smith Tells Rapt Courtroom His Side of Story
After remaining largely mute over the eight months since he was accused of rape, William K. Smith filled a quiet and spellbound courtroom today with his version of what happened at the Kennedy estate in the wee hours of March 30.
Under the gentle prodding of his chief defense counsel, Roy E. Black of Miami, Mr.
Smith told his long-awaited story in 29 minutes -- one-sixth the time the prosecutor in the case, Moira K. Lasch, would then spend trying to shake it.
Mr.
Black wound up his examination by asking Mr.
Smith if he had "at any time" raped his accuser.
"No, I did not," he replied.


INSIDE
Renewed Talks, Old Script
Arab and Israeli negotiators met for a second round of Mideast talks, with some substantive exchanges and some procedural wrangling.
Page A3.
U.S.
Studying Iraq Options
The Bush Administration is reviewing how the United States might react militarily to a coup by senior Iraqi generals, officials said.
Page A8.
Help for The Daily News
Unions at The Daily News said they would serve as a buyer of last resort if that is the only way to save the troubled newspaper.
Page B3.
Proposal to Cut Aid to Poor
The Governor of California has proposed sweeping changes in the state's welfare policies.
Page A25.
The Doctor Show
Many doctors, helped by public relations firms, are making themselves visible on television and in the press.
It's good for business.
Page C1.
Berenice Abbott Dies at 93
A pioneer of modern photography, she was best known for capturing New York City's energy and spirit in a time of transformation.
Page D25.


Novametrix Medical Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Vertex Industries reports earnings for Year to July 31


First Georgia Holding reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Regardie's Magazine Asks Readers to Pay
The owner of Regardie's Magazine, an irreverent business magazine that flourished as a chronicler of Washington's high and mighty in the 1980's, appealed today to its readers, most of whom receive the magazine free, to start paying in order to save the dying publication.
"Brother, can you spare a five?" William A. Regardie asked of readers at a news conference in his office overlooking the Potomac, a room full of such kooky props as an oversized cartoon duck mask, a four-foot-tall papier-mache man donning a gas mask, and a mounted and stuffed brown bear.
Just outside the door: eight rubber chickens hanging on the wall.


Allercare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Anangel-American Shipholdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 6
Nov. 29
Dec. 7
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.0
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.2
2.9
Gasoline stocks
211.5
206.5
221.7
Distillate stocks
141.4
140.1
133.4
Crude imports, daily
6.7
4.4
4.7
Product imports, daily
1.5
2.5
1.7
Crude stocks
346.8
341.4
332.1
Crude production, daily
7.4
7.4
7.4
Refinery utilization (%)
82.3
83.9
83.0
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


U.N. LINKS DU PONT TO IRAQ ARMS PLAN
The big American chemical producer, E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, and the Pennsylvania subsidiary of a German engineering company are among companies whose products were used in Iraq's covert nuclear weapons program, United Nations inspectors who have examined the equipment say.
A list of some 13 companies, most of them German, is being prepared by the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations body charged with tracking down and destroying the secret Iraqi program.
It will be sent to Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar later this week along with the report of the eighth and most recent nuclear inspection team to visit Iraq.


Spurning Fine-Tuning; Any Fixes Washington Might Do to Help Could Just as Well Harm, Economists Say
Republicans and Democrats alike are hard at work seeking ways to pump up the American economy and let the good times roll again.
That is what prominent economists used to think Government was all about.
But now the economics establishment has generally lost confidence in the ability of the Government to fine-tune the economy, afraid that anything that Washington might do would be as likely to harm as help.


Heritage Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Foreign Affairs; Mr. Clinton Tries On . . .
Bill Clinton has fashioned a deft way to neutralize President Bush's electoral muscle on foreign affairs, as you will see tomorrow when he delivers his first address on the subject.
The Arkansas Governor will present himself fully and interestingly as a bleeding-heart conservative, a man of liberal ends tempered by conservative means.
He will not slash away at the Bush/Reagan international record.
Democratic Presidential challengers have tried that approach for over a decade, and failed.


Loewen, Ondaatje, McCutcheon reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CGI Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Poor Find Going Broke Is Too Costly
Almost a million Americans went bankrupt last year, but others were not so lucky.
Many Americans are too poor to go bankrupt.


HDR Power Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Georesources Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The truth appears to be, with regard to the alleged extermination of the European Jews, that there was no order, no plan, no budget, no weapon . . .  -- From advertisements in college newspapers
College newspapers are facing a dilemma that pits free speech against historical deception.
A group calling itself the Committee for Open Debate on the Holocaust has sent an advertisement to at least a dozen leading campus dailies.
The ad contends that the Holocaust never occurred.
Newspapers at Harvard, Yale, Brown, the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Southern California have refused to run it.
Those at Northwestern, Cornell, Duke and the University of Michigan have published it amid protests from students, faculty and members of their own editorial boards.
At Rutgers, the ad was printed free of charge on Dec. 3 as a "guest commentary," surrounded by rebuttals.


Panel Steps Up Census Dispute With Bush Official
The tug of war over politically volatile census data erupted into an angry confrontation today as a House subcommittee chairman said Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher had "put himself outside the law" by refusing to appear and turn over the full set of alternative census counts subpoenaed by the panel.
Although Mr.
Mosbacher's aides appeared before the subcommittee today and agreed to turn over half of the adjusted counts, the chairman, Tom Sawyer, Democrat of Ohio, said, "No Cabinet official has ever failed to appear before the Legislature when withholding subpoenaed documents."


Computer Language Research reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Arabs and Israelis Renew Talks Quarreling Over the Shape of the Furniture
Arab and Israeli negotiators finally met today for a second round of Middle East peace talks, with Israel and Syria and Israel and Lebanon holding substantive exchanges, but the Israelis, Palestinians and Jordanians wrangling over who sits at which table.
Six days after the date the United States proposed for the parties to get together to follow up their first direct talks in Madrid last month, the Arab and Israeli negotiators gathered at their appointed rooms in the State Department this morning.


Community Bancorp reports earnings for 12mos Sept 30


60-Minute Gourmet
THE pairing of sweet and sour, or sweet and hot, in cooking goes back centuries.
The Chinese are master blenders of spices, and their sweet and sour dishes -- with pork, beef and seafood -- can be exquisite in the right chef's hands.
Indian curries combine sweet and hot sensations that add complexity and depth.
The sweetness, usually a banana or an apple, also curtails the hot, sometimes acrid spices.
The French are not known for spicy food, so this technique rarely finds its way into their culinary repertory.
I recently decided to experiment with some pork tenderloins.
Apples and white seedless grapes were chosen as the sweet ingredients.
Cumin was the spicy element, and vinegar the sharp one.


Sharper Image Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Edgar W. Ward, 66, Presbyterian Minister
The Rev.
Edgar W. Ward, director of the vocations ministry unit of the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), died Sunday at Norton Hospital in Louisville, Ky.
He was 66 years old and lived in Louisville.
Mr. Ward died of cancer, a church spokeswoman, Marj Carptenter, said.


De Klerk Cancels Soviet Trip
A trip by President F. W. de Klerk to the Soviet Union, which was billed here as a major diplomatic breakthrough, was postponed indefinitely today in the light of political developments in the Soviet Union.
Foreign Minister Roelof F. Botha, who made the announcement, said, "Important constitutional and national issues are preoccupying the leaders in Moscow and the various former Soviet republics, and South Africa would not want to add to their already heavy workload."


Hector Communications reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big Banks Discriminate In Mortgages, Group Says
New York City's largest banks have been engaging in a pattern of redlining and discriminatory home-lending practices, according to a study released yesterday by a community group that monitors the industry.
The group, the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now, or Acorn, found that in 1990, 36 percent of blacks who applied for mortgages in New York City were turned down, 25 percent of Hispanic applicants were refused, and just 18 percent of whites were turned down.
"It's a very disturbing trend," said Jon L. Kest, an organizer of the New York City Acorn group.


Erudition? In Gastronomy?
To The Living Section:  The proposal to establish a master's degree in gastronomy at Boston University, "A University Offers Food for Thought"  [ Nov. 20 ] , while well-intentioned, shows a misunderstanding of graduate education.


Consilium Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Cavco Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scott's Hospitality reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


The Pop Life
Jazz at Carnegie
A four-concert jazz series at Carnegie Hall is to begin in October, officials at the hall announced yesterday.
Carnegie also plans to maintain a jazz orchestra, led by the trumpeter Jon Faddis, for the shows.
The performers have not yet been chosen, but the programming, which has been budgeted for $250,000, will be done by George Wein, who also programs the JVC Jazz Festival.


Contrans Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Catherine Stores Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Street Inspector Held On Bribery Charges
A New York City street inspector was arrested yesterday and accused of soliciting bribes from a contractor, the city's Department of Investigation said.


Alico Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Official Seeks to End Dispute Over His Stock
The staff director of the White House Council on Competitiveness said today that he would put his financial holdings in a blind trust to help put to rest accusations of conflict of interest.
The staff director, Allan B. Hubbard, announced his decision in a letter to Representative Henry A. Waxman, the California Democrat who has said Mr.
Hubbard may have violated Federal conflict-of-interest laws by working on pollution regulations that affect companies in which he owns stock.


It's Time to Reverse Harm Done by Cars
To the Editor:
That environmental officials are considering giving electric vehicle users free parking, free battery charges and toll exemptions, as you report in "A Tough Sell for Electric Cars" (Business Day, Nov. 26) shows how far we are from coming to grips with the harm to our society done by private automobiles.


Lincoln Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shermag reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


It's Not How Dirty They Are, But How Good Are the Jets?
Amid all the controversy over whether the Jets are a dirty football team or whether Blair Thomas can be trusted to go forth and never fumble again, several key things have been overlooked.
Sure Thomas's first-quarter fumble proved to be a golden opportunity for the first of the two touchdowns scored by Lions running back Barry Sanders, who picked up 114 yards on 20 carries.


Theater in Review
Reality Ranch  American Place Theater 111 West 46th Street Manhattan Written and performed by Jane Gennaro; directed by Peter Askin; scenery and costumes by John Esposito; lighting by Natasha Katz; sound by Daniel Schreier; composer, Mr.
Schreier; production stage manager, Michael Robin.
Presented by the American Place Theater, Wynn Handman, director; Dara Hershman, general manager.
Zoe Henry, the protagonist of Jane Gennaro's loopy monologue, "Reality Ranch," longs to write fiction but is sentenced to paraphrase "infotainment" for a slick, trendy magazine.
On assignment, she flies to the ranch that gives the show its title.
At this "last resort," she encounters a crowd of post-Club Med vacationers seeking self-help in the sunshine.


Somali Fighting Keeps Aid From a Suffering City
Artillery shelling in the Somali capital, Mogadishu, worsened today, preventing a last-ditch attempt to unload a Red Cross ship with badly needed supplies for the war-torn city, aid workers said.
The ship had been docked at Mogadishu, on the Indian Ocean, since fierce clan fighting broke out three weeks ago.
But it will have to leave the port with its 800-ton cargo because it is running short of water and food for the crew, Gregoire Tavernier, a Swiss who is the deputy head of the delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross for Somalia, said here today.


Alias Research reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


When Buyout Boutiques Find Little to Leverage
While much of Wall Street is back in the black this year, the buyout business still has the blues.
And among the biggest casualties are the handful of leveraged buyout shops that were able to make their names and their astonishing fortunes in the 1980's.
Adler &amp; Shaykin, a New York boutique that specializes in leveraged buyouts, is the most recent case in point.
Leonard P. Shaykin, one of four managing general partners of the firm, said yesterday that some of his limited partners were pressuring him to let them withdraw from the firm's $178 million buyout fund.


EUROPEANS AGREE ON A PACT FORGING NEW POLITICAL TIES AND INTEGRATING ECONOMIES
European Community leaders agreed early today on a treaty that sets the 12-nation bloc along a path toward closer political and economic unity including the establishment of common foreign and defense policies and a single currency by the end of this decade.
The two-day summit meeting on regional unity almost broke down during its final hours over Britain's refusal to allow the community to define domestic social policies.
But at the last moment a formula was found enabling Britain to decide which community measures it will adopt, thereby accommodating Britain's concerns about loss of sovereignty.


Hurco Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


President Mingles With the People In Chicago as Economy Is an Issue
President Bush chose a trip to the middle of America today to make the oft-debated political point that he is, too, in touch with the average person.
In trips to the Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Mr.
Bush waded happily through mobs of commodities and financial futures brokers on the frenzied trading floors, perhaps the nation's most vivid examples of robust capitalism.
Later, speaking to the Illinois Farm Bureau Federation, he waxed enthusiastic about the moral and social values of rural America.


Unilens Optical Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Bergen Brunswig Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Chefs International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27


Public University in New York Begins Drive for $55 Million
In another indication of the growing competition between private and public universities, the State University of New York at Albany began a drive yesterday to raise $55 million in voluntary contributions, the first capital campaign in its 147-year history.
The money will be used to put up buildings on the Albany campus and to support academic programs and student scholarships.


Airgas Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Heinz (H.J.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Fronteer Directory Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bio-Dyne Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hard Times Present Hard Choices
For charities around the New York region, the current hard times mean more than rising caseloads.
They mean hard choices -- choices that in some cases include cutting off funds to programs whose value has been proved, simply because the money is not available or is needed more desperately elsewhere.
When officials at the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service contemplate such cuts, they think of two women who almost lost their children to foster care: a 30-year-old with AIDS who faced frequent hospital stays, and a 27-year-old mother of three who was winning her battle with drugs, but who was kept away from home by her daily counseling sessions.


Healthvest reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Red Sox's Clemens Is on Trial in Houston
ROGER CLEMENS listened quietly yesterday in a Houston courtroom to testimony about the events that resulted in the arrest of the Red Sox pitcher and his brother,
BRIAN JACKSON testified for the second day in Clemens's trial on misdemeanor charges of hindering apprehension of his brother.


HONG KONG OUSTS MORE BOAT PEOPLE
Hong Kong sent 28 Vietnamese back home today in the second forced repatriation under an agreement with Hanoi for the return of tens of thousands of boat people held in detention camps here.
The operation proceeded largely without incident.
The 28 boat people included 13 "double-backers" and their families who had fled to this British colony, volunteered to return to Vietnam and accepted assistance money, and then came back again.


New Restrictions in Maxwell Case
An American suspected of having played a central role in helping Robert Maxwell siphon off hundreds of millions of dollars from employee pension funds has been barred from leaving Britain, it was disclosed today.
Larry Trachtenberg, who became a director of Bishopsgate Investment Management Ltd. in September and resigned last week, was ordered by a judge not to leave the country.
Mr.
Trachtenberg was also an executive at London and Bishopsgate International Investment Management P.L.C., which is under investigation for its role in transferring pension funds.


New Slump Is Unlikely, Survey Says
A survey of a group of purchasing managers from industrial companies predicted yesterday that the economy would remain troubled into next year but that a return to recession was unlikely for 1992.
The National Association of Purchasing Management said that 49 percent of the 300 purchasing executives surveyed predicted an increase in manufacturers' revenues next year.
On average, they saw a modest overall gain of 4.2 percent before adjustment for inflation.
The purchasing managers also expect strong growth in exports, particularly in the first half of next year.


Geonex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Small Shops Move to Hire Top Directors
TWO smaller New York agencies known for their originality are seeking to break out of the pack by hiring two executives with similar reputations as creative directors.
One is Bergelt Litchfield Inc., the home of humorous radio commercials that urge commuters to ride the Long Island Rail Road by dramatizing the drudgery of driving.
Bergelt has hired Cary Lemkowitz, formerly of Young &amp; Rubicam New York, as its president and executive creative director.


Genesee reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


New Chief Executive Is Named at Conductus
Conductus Inc., a young company working on electronic applications of superconductors, has appointed Barry H. Whalen its new president and chief executive officer.
Dr.
Whalen has been the senior vice president of the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation, an electronics industry consortium based in Austin, Tex.
Dr.
Whalen, who will start at Conductus in January, said the move "is a chance for me to get back into the product business." M.C.C., the Texas consortium, only does research.


California Proposes Cutting Aid to Poor
The Governor of California has proposed sweeping changes in welfare policy in the nation's most populated state that would slash grants to long-term recipients, use increased benefits as a way to encourage certain forms of behavior and limit payments to indigent families who move here from other states.
Similar proposals are on the table in several other states, but none would affect as many people, involve as much money or inspire the kind of heated debate that is likely to occur here on sensitive issues of race and class.


Stuarts Dept. Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Security Environmental reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


JG Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economics establishment has generally lost confidence in the ability of the Government to fine-tune the economy.  [ Page A1. ] ]


Healthcare Technologies Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Velcro Industries NV reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Newark Is Fighting Crime With Closed-Circuit TV
In a security experiment rarely undertaken in large cities, officers began monitoring a large part of Newark's central business district today on closed-circuit television.
Three monitors in a small prefabricated police kiosk can display as many as four sectors simultaneously.
They are linked by fiber optic cable to six cameras on light poles along the city's primary business streets, Broad and Market.


Canal Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Intermetco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Russian Farms Need More Than Privatization; Women Keep It Going
To the Editor:
"No Matryoshkas Need Apply" by Yelena Khanga (Op-Ed, Nov. 25) presents Soviet women as either pretty, young and dreaming of becoming "high-class call girls" or ugly, old and doomed to do boring, dirty jobs.


Interfirst Bankcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Imco Recycling reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  4 ARE CONVICTED IN WATKINS MURDER
In a case that crystallized public concern about violent crime, a jury convicted four young men of the stabbing murder of a Utah tourist and the violent robbery of his family.
Although the prosecution conceded that none of the four defendants had wielded the knife, the jury nevertheless convicted them of murder on the grounds that they had participated in the robbery that led to the slaying.
A1.
TERRY ANDERSON'S RETURN
Punchy with liberty and exhaustion, Terry Anderson returned to America, sweeping into the marble foyer of the Associated Press headquarters in Rockefeller Center as colleagues dropped yellow rose petals from their offices above.
B3.
ON TIME MORE OF THE TIME
The subway system's on-time performance during the morning rush hours has improved significantly since 1988, according to a new report.
Eighty-five percent of all trains between 7 and 9 A.M. ran on time last year, compared with 76 percent in 1988, the report found.
B3.
BANKS ACCUSED OF REDLINING
New York City's largest banks have been engaging in a pattern of redlining and discriminatory home-lending practices, a study found.
B4.
Korean-owned grocery in Brooklyn vandalized. B3.
Unions say they might buy The News. B3. REGION  'SON OF SAM' LAW IS STRUCK DOWN
The United States Supreme Court declared unconstitutional a New York law aimed at limiting the ability of criminals to profit from selling their stories to book publishers or movie makers.
Voting 8 to 0, the Court said that the "Son of Sam" law, a model for laws now in effect in most states, violated the First Amendment by singling out earnings from a criminal's speech or writing about the crime.
The decision was hailed by publishers and lawyers involved in First Amendment cases.
A1 and B8.
VIDEO REASSURANCE IN NEWARK
Inside a small prefabricated police kiosk in downtown Newark, officers began monitoring a large part of the central business district on closed-circuit television in an unusual security experiment that city officials hope will encourage shoppers to go downtown again.
B7.
ON MORTICIA'S TRAIL
Ron MacCloskey of Westfield, N.J., keeps meeting people who are looking for the Addams family mansion.
He thinks it's about time.
B7.
TAX VOTE DELAYED IN HARTFORD
A scheduled Senate vote to consider repeal of Connecticut's three-month old tax on wages was scrubbed, with opponents and supporters asking for 24 hours more to regroup and rethink their strategies after the vote in the House of Representatives on Monday night.
B6.
Accreditation agency places Bridgeport U. on probation.
B6.
Court lets Nassau proceed with furloughs. B7.
New Archbishop for Hartford. B7.
Jersey City Mayor takes the stand. B9.
Former Atlantic City Mayor pleads guilty. B9. About New York B5  Neediest Cases B7


Critic's Notebook; Cool Performance in a Heated Legal Melodrama
For people watching on television, the first big difference between the testimony of William K. Smith and his accuser was that you could see his face.
Boyish, open, it turned the memory of CNN's blob or Court Television's sci-fi masks into something almost sinister.
No fault of the accuser, but however winning her features or persuasive her expressions, they were lost outside the courtroom.


BRE Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Computrac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Consulier Engineering Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Texas Player Faces Ban
Texas forward DEXTER CAMBRIDGE stands to lose an entire season of eligibility because of a rules violation that affected his amateur status, the National Collegiate Athletic Association has ruled.


Cellular Telephone Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Deere &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Gencor Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


McFarland Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Gifts for Cooks, Think of the Basics
THE unmistakable trend in cooking today is toward unfussy, homestyle fare.
This movement back to basics can be seen everywhere from leading French and American restaurants to dinner parties at home.
Of course, preparing good simple food requires the same skill and sensitivity as does more elaborate fare.
One also needs quality kitchen tools to do the job efficiently.


Ames Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Disrupting Film Sites in a Drive for Minority Jobs
After a seven-month boycott that ended this spring, Hollywood is once again using New York City as a shooting location.
That means it's open season for Mustafa R. Majeed.
In the last two months, Mr.
Majeed, a self-described "community leader and activist" who wants to find jobs for blacks and Hispanic people in the film industry, has appeared with bands of supporters at movie locations all over Manhattan.
Lately he has sought to disrupt filming on Woody Allen's untitled work in progress, at "Night and the City," the Irwin Winkler film starring Robert De Niro, and the NBC television series "Law and Order."


Unions at Daily News Promise to Be Buyer of Last Resort
The unions at The Daily News said yesterday that they would become a buyer of last resort to keep the paper alive should that prove necessary.
The fate of The News has been in doubt since the death of its owner, Robert Maxwell, and the collapse of his business empire.
Last week, the paper filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.


Gandalf Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Check Technology Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Quotation of the Day
"There are probably a million people in the country who would like to file for bankruptcy, but can't afford it." -- GARY KLEIN of the National Consumer Law Center.  [ A24:1. ]


STOR Furnishings International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 11


German Concern To DDB Needham
Henkel KGAA, Dusseldorf, Germany, has selected DDB Needham Worldwide to handle the detergent advertising account it had pulled from Euro RSCG, Bruce Crawford, president and chief executive of the Omnicom Group Inc., DDB Needham's parent, said yesterday.
At a presentation at the Paine Webber media conference in New York, Mr.
Crawford said that as of Jan. 1, DDB Needham's nine offices in Europe would begin handling the account, which includes Henkel's giant detergent brands like Atlas and Diaxon.
He estimated billings at $75 million to $85 million.


Cipsco Inc. reports earnings for 12mos Oct 31


GORBACHEV VYING FOR ARMY BACKING OVER YELTSIN'S BID
As President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's waning authority headed for a critical and perhaps final test in the Russian Parliament on Thursday, he and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia appeared today to be vying for the support of the Soviet military, ultimately the key to any power struggle.
As they did, the Parliaments of Ukraine and Byelorussia today firmly rebuffed Mr.
Gorbachev's efforts to keep the Soviet Union alive by ratifying the treaty that their leaders signed with Mr.
Yeltsin on Sunday to create a commonwealth of former Soviet republics.


Lionel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Acton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Miller-Trial Jury to Return
Ending its third day of deliberations, the jury in the trial of Mel Miller was excused for the night yesterday after sending out a note that said, "We are very tired; tempers are rising." Judge Raymond J. Dearie, conducting the fraud trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, sent the jury home and said the deliberations would resume at 10 A.M. today.
Mr.
Miller, a Brooklyn Democrat who is the New York State Assembly Speaker, and a top aide, Jay Adolf, are charged with defrauding their law firm's clients in a series of investments in cooperative apartments.


American Safety Closure Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Critic's Notebook; Cool Performance in a Heated Legal Melodrama
For people watching on television, the first big difference between the testimony of William K. Smith and his accuser was that you could see his face.
Boyish, open, it turned the memory of CNN's blob or Court Television's sci-fi masks into something almost sinister.
No fault of the accuser, but however winning her features or persuasive her expressions, they were lost outside the courtroom.


Bush to Seek Higher Medicare Premiums
President Bush's budget director is proposing to increase Medicare premiums for affluent people, to impose new limits on the cost of biomedical research and to expand programs encouraging teen-agers to abstain from sex.
But the proposals, described in confidential budget documents, include no comprehensive plan to control health costs, now increasing twice as fast as the Consumer Price Index, or to provide health insurance to any of the 34 million people who lack coverage.
President Bush has indicated he will address both problems in his State of the Union Message late next month as well as in his budget request, but the White House is apparently developing its proposals with only limited involvement by the Department of Health and Human Services.


ReLife Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dart Group Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Imperial Metals reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SKIING: Albertville Profile; Spin Control at a Very High Speed
A stubborn fog draped Killington Peak, so Donna Weinbrecht decided this was not the time to hunt for snowdrifts or ski off a mountain bank at 60 miles per hour.
For now, she would rest patiently inside the training center near the base lodge, surrounded by the clunking sound of hard boots on wooden floor, waiting for the sun to burn through the morning cover.
Weinbrecht has crafted her career on these bumps along the way.


Son Picks Up Nobel Prize for a Detained Burmese Dissenter
The 18-year-old son of the Burmese opposition leader accepted the Nobel Peace Prize for his mother today, declaring her confinement by the military Government of Myanmar, formerly Burma, to be "part of a much larger struggle, worldwide, for the emancipation of the human spirit and freedom from psychological subjection."
The opposition leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, is the daughter of U Aung San, who is regarded as the founder of modern Myanmar and was assassinated in 1947 on the eve of independence from Britain.
She has been under strict house arrest in the capital, Yangon, formerly Rangoon, since July 1989.


A Christmas Appeal: The Neediest Cases


Review/Film; Peter as a Middle-Aged Master of the Universe
Now we know: if Michael Milken and Ivan Boesky had been less power-driven and more in touch with the child within, Wall Street would have been spared a great scandal and each man a prison term.
That is the balmy subtext of "Hook," Steven Spielberg's gargantuan, very long screen update on James M. Barrie's 1904 play, "Peter Pan," and the subsequent Barrie stories about the little boy who refused to grow up.
The film is a Wall Street-size financial gamble in itself.


Smith Tells Rapt Courtroom His Side of Story
After remaining largely mute over the eight months since he was accused of rape, William K. Smith filled a quiet and spellbound courtroom today with his version of what happened at the Kennedy estate in the wee hours of March 30.
Under the gentle prodding of his chief defense counsel, Roy E. Black of Miami, Mr.
Smith told his long-awaited story in 29 minutes -- one-sixth the time the prosecutor in the case, Moira K. Lasch, would then spend trying to shake it.
Mr.
Black wound up his examination by asking Mr.
Smith if he had "at any time" raped his accuser.
"No, I did not," he replied.


Pico Products reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Spira Gets 2 1/2 Years In Trial on Extortion
Howard Spira, the 32-year-old admitted gambler from the Bronx who was convicted in May for attempting to extort money from George Steinbrenner, was sentenced to two and a half years in prison yesterday by a Federal judge in Manhattan.
Judge Louis L. Stanton sentenced Spira to a total of two years on the six extortion counts involving Steinbrennera and a total of two and a half years for the two unrelated counts of threatening to injure a United Airlines employee.


Japan Leaders Are in Disarray On Troop Role
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa and his five-week-old Government have been thrown into disarray by a string of embarrassing setbacks that culminated today with the sudden collapse of legislation to let Japan participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Japanese officials said this evening that the peacekeeping bill, which would have authorized the first dispatch of army troops abroad since World War II, was dead.


HPSC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Penril Datacomm Networks reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Anderson Exploration reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Tribute to Ballerina
A tribute to Natasa Boskovic, a Yugoslav ballerina who taught in the United States for many years, is to be held tomorrow at 6 P.M. at the Yugoslav Press and Cultural Center, 767 Third Avenue, at 48th Street, 18th floor, in Manhattan.
As part of the tribute, the speakers, including the American ballet star Igor Youskevitch, will open an exhibition from the Museum of Theater Arts in Belgrade.


Buffton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


STV Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kit Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Supreme Equipment &amp; Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Senate Delays Tax Decision After Narrow House Vote
A scheduled Senate vote to consider repeal of Connecticut's three-month-old tax on wages was scrubbed today, with opponents and supporters asking for another 24 hours to regroup and rethink their strategies after the vote in the House of Representatives on Monday night.
The vote in the House to repeal the wage tax was 86 to 63, well short of the 101 votes that would be needed to override Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s certain veto.
Repeal leaders had said before the House debate that they were within five or six votes of the 101-vote threshold, which marks the two-thirds majority in the 151-member chamber.


Clinical Technologies reports earnings for Year to July 31


Xytronyx Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
Considering that she was preoccupied with the opening of her husband's latest play, "Park Your Car in Harvard Yard," GILLIAN HOROVITZ did astonishingly well in the New York City marathon on Nov. 3.
She came in 11th among the women.
But she wanted to take advantage of all the training she had done, so her husband, ISRAEL HOROVITZ, wrote to the Barbados International Marathon, entered her, and on Sunday shewon first place.
"Because it's so hot here -- it was 80 degrees -- they start the race at 5:30 A.M., so my biggest problem was waking up at 3:30," she said from her hotel on Barbados yesterday.


Treasury Prices Mostly Unchanged
Prices of Treasury securities moved erratically but ended mostly unchanged yesterday, as credit market participants struggled to sort out remarks made in Washington by David Mullins, vice chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.
In a speech delivered at the National Economists Club, Mr.
Mullins gave an essentially upbeat economics assessment, saying that the Fed's persistent reductions in short-term interest rates since mid-1990 should produce a pickup in economic activity by the middle of next year.


Cantel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-20 BIG STEP TOWARD EUROPEAN UNITY
Leaders of the European Community agreed on a treaty that sets the 12-nation bloc along a path toward closer political and economic unity, including the establishment of common foreign and military policies, and a single currency by 1999.
A1  John Major is trying to go along with other Europeans on basic issues.
A20


A New System for Storing Mountains of Data
Military suppliers have often stumbled with projects aimed at business customers rather than at the Government, but the story could be different in the small but growing market for systems that store vast amounts of computer data.
E-Systems Inc., a maker of sophisticated electronics used for secret Government projects and for military spying during the latter years of the cold war, has begun shipping the type of huge data-storage system that industry consultants say will be needed by hundreds, if not thousands, of companies by the late 1990's.
The Mobil Corporation, which helped E-Systems customize a system for the oil industry, will have the company's first commercial product installed next week.


Pattern Processing Tech reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Islanders and Blues: The Defense Rests
Ray Ferraro got a hat trick for the Islanders.
The Blues' Brett Hull unveiled one, too.
And Steve Thomas bounced the Islanders' seventh goal, a restorative game-tying goal off the goalie's catching mitt with just 17 seconds left in regulation, enabling the Islanders to skate off with a 7-7 tie tonight against the St.
Louis Blues.
Until Thomas's goal, a blooping slap shot from Nelson Emerson that clanged just inside the crossbar at 17 minutes 1 second of the final period, the Islanders were caught in a game filled with scoring bravado and defensive lapses.


Emcon reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Manhattan Company to Take On the Cable TV Monopoly
In a challenge to the cable television monopoly in New York City, a Manhattan company is lining up antennas on apartment house rooftops to deliver the same kaleidoscope of programs that cable systems provide through wires under the streets.
The company, Liberty Cable and Telephone, says the television pictures it transmits will be as clear as those cable customers get.
It says its prices will be about half what the two cable systems serving Manhattan charge.


But Alas, There's No Union of Minds
The following interview was recorded today on a slushy Moscow street: "What's happening in the Union?" a citizen was asked.
The man, in his early 40's, replied, "What do you mean by Union?"
The response was not meant to be sarcastic.
The man was simply trying to pinpoint which of the various available definitions the questioner had in mind.


WNET to Sell Rights To 'Charlie Rose'
WNET, Channel 13, will sell rebroadcast rights to its talk program "Charlie Rose" to the Learning Channel, executives at the station and the cable channel announced yesterday.
Both sides said they believed this was the first time a program on a public-television station had been sold for a second play to a cable channel.
Neither side would say how much the Learning Channel was paying.


Jack Tannen, 84, Whose Shop Of Old Books Was a Rarity, Too
Jack Tannen, a retired antiquarian bookseller whose lower Manhattan emporium was a mecca for book lovers, died early yesterday in Memorial Hospital in Hollywood, Fla.
He was 84 years old and lived in Hollywood.
The cause of his death was not clear but was probably heart failure, his family said.


Scheib (Earl) Inc.(A) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


South Korea Is Asking North For Mutual Visits to A-Sites
Stepping up pressure on North Korea to open its secret nuclear installations, the South Korean Government today proposed a program of mutual inspections that would allow the North to send delegations to American military bases here to verify the removal of all nuclear weapons.
The proposal, made at the opening of the fifth round of talks between the Prime Ministers of the two nations, would also require that a delegation from Seoul be permitted to visit suspected nuclear installations in the North, including Yongbyon, where North Korea is believed to be producing plutonium for the development of a nuclear bomb.


Yank-Related Suit vs. Vincent Dropped
One of the three lawsuits brought against Commissioner Fay Vincent and his associates in the wake of the 1990 investigation of George Steinbrenner has been dropped.
And, according to one of Steinbrenner's limited partners, the move could mean only one thing.
"Signal," the executive said when informed of the latest development in the Yankees-Vincent-Steinbrenner saga, the implication being that Steinbrenner is beginning the process of clearing the way for an appeal of his lifetime ban from running the Yankees' baseball operations.
No Comment From Steinbrenner
The suit in question, brought against Vincent by Daniel McCarthy and Harold Bowman, two of Steinbrenner's limited partners in 1990, was dropped Friday.
That was one day after Steinbrenner's successor, Robert Nederlander, announced he would resign as managing partner of the team, effective Dec. 31.
It was also one day after speculation immediately started that Steinbrenner would use the opportunity to try to overturn the agreement he reached with Vincent in July 1990 that led to his ban.


International Epitek reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Woodward's Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


If They Remember How to Be Democrats; Insult to Buchanan
To the Editor:
"The Louisiana Lesson" by A. M. Rosenthal (column, Nov. 19), associating the campaigns for the Republican Presidential nomination by Patrick Buchanan and David Duke, is the worst kind of McCarthyism.


American Republic Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Food Notes
BAKERS in and around New York are up to their elbows in batter for fruitcakes, cookies, elaborately decorated yule-log cakes and a host of other seasonal items.
It's not too soon to place orders with these and other fine bakers.
Those who place orders should be sure to verify delivery arrangements, if necessary, and any extra charges.
BAREFOOT CONTESSA, 46 Newtown Lane, East Hampton, L.I.; (516) 324-0240.
A homey, custardy bread pudding, $6.50 a pound, works out to about $65 for a large pan that will serve 18 to 20.


Methode Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Dow Off 7.83, to 2,863.82, in Heavy Trading
Stocks fell for the sixth straight session yesterday in active trading, as the Dow Jones industrial average fell 7.83 points, to 2,863.82.
A late wave of futures-related buying made up for much, but not all, of a steep morning fall.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 192.9 million shares, up from 174.8 million on Monday, and losing stocks outnumbered gainers, 1,041 to 639.


New Local Ownership Will Control Islanders
Almost a year after he put the Islanders up for sale, John O. Pickett Jr. said last night that he had agreed to sell a minority interest in the team to a group of Long Island investors who would take over active control of the operation.
Pickett, who did not disclose the price, said the investors had options to acquire a half interest within five years.
"I expect to be a passive investor," said Pickett, who described the new owners as "an outstanding group of young, very active and successful investors from Long Island." He said he had no intention of selling the other half of the club.


Smoking Among Children Is Linked To Cartoon Camel in Advertisements
New studies demonstrate that the cartoon camel at the center of an elaborate advertising campaign for Camel cigarettes appeals far more to children than to adults.
Several researchers suggested that this and similar campaigns were such a pernicious influence on the nation's health that cigarette advertising should be totally banned.
The researchers, from universities around the country, singled out the Camel cigarette campaign involving a cartoon character called Old Joe Camel.
Although R. J. Reynolds, the tobacco company that produces Camels, said its advertisements were aimed at adults, the researchers said the campaign had been "far more successful at marketing Camel cigarettes to children than to adults."


Review/Theater; Miller's 'Crucible,' Starring Sheen
A National Actors Theater performing classics at reasonable ticket prices in the beautiful Belasco Theater: is Tony Randall's new company a theatrical fantasy come true or a television star's ego trip?
This is a question that audiences, not interfering board members or drama critics or Broadway's harsh economics, will answer, for Mr.
Randall has attracted full houses of subscribers to his inaugural season of three plays.
If they like what they see, they'll be back for season No. 2.
One assumes that their patience will extend beyond the company's stately opening production, "The Crucible." Like the National Actors Theater itself at this early point, this evening must be applauded in principle.
It brings together nearly two dozen actors, some of them first-rate, for the worthy cause of performing Arthur Miller's evergreen drama, written during the Joseph McCarthy witch hunts of the 1950's, about the Salem witch hunts of 1692.
The cast includes welcome old favorites of the New York stage (Martha Scott, John Beal), popular character actors of more recent seasons (Maryann Plunkett, Madeleine Potter, George N. Martin, Jane Adams) and a trio of stars (Martin Sheen, Michael York, Fritz Weaver).


Intermark Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. WEIGHS PLANS FOR FOES OF IRAQI
The Bush Administration is reviewing military options on how the United States would respond to a coup in Iraq by senior members of the Iraqi armed forces, Administration officials said today.
The Administration has received recent intelligence reports of "serious strains" in the Iraqi leadership and wants to insure that President Bush is not caught without a plan of action, as he was during a coup attempt in Panama in October 1989, a move that preceded the invasion by United States forces two months later.


Optek Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 25


Personal Health
NEWBORN babies are routinely exposed to skin-care products containing chemicals of questionable safety, according to a study by a Loyola University pediatrician.
Studying reports gathered from 45 mothers, Dr.
Frank Cetta, the researcher, concluded that the delicate skin of their newborns was anointed with an average of eight different skin-care products containing 48 different identifiable chemicals, at least 12 percent of which are rated as "moderately" or "very" toxic.


Review/Rock; Guns 'n' Roses Brings New Lineup to the Garden
Guns 'n' Roses has staked its reputation on its volatility.
W.
Axl Rose, its lead singer, is famous for his temper, his onstage tirades and his conviction that self-indulgence plus self-importance equals integrity.
The band's songs, which veer from raging hard-rock to wistful ballads, are a secondary draw.
Yet when Guns 'n' Roses came to Madison Square Garden on Monday night for the first of three sold-out shows -- the final show is Friday night -- the most surprising part of its set was how routine it seemed.
The band has a new lineup for this part of its tour.
Izzy Stradlin, the rhythm guitarist who co-wrote many of the songs on "Use Your Illusion" I and II (Geffen), the band's current best-selling albums, has quit, replaced for the tour by Gilbey Clarke.
The band has also added two backup singers and three horn players, all women dressed in black lingerie.
It's a horn section valued primarily for its G-strings.
The women pouted and posed like Motley Crue's backup singers; also like Motley Crue, Guns 'n' Roses had an electronic display to flash its name between the set and encores, like an "Applause" sign.


Canadian Home Shopping reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Critic's Notebook; Cool Performance in a Heated Legal Melodrama
For people watching on television, the first big difference between the testimony of William K. Smith and his accuser was that you could see his face.
Boyish, open, it turned the memory of CNN's blob or Court Television's sci-fi masks into something almost sinister.
No fault of the accuser, but however winning her features or persuasive her expressions, they were lost outside the courtroom.


Prime Medical Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chaos Looms Over Soviets, Gates Says
Robert M. Gates, the Director of Central Intelligence, warned today that the fragmented Soviet Union faces the most severe instability this winter since the civil war that followed the Bolshevik seizure of power in 1917, including the possibility of a reversion to authoritarian rule in some regions.
Describing the volatile political situation as "dangerously unstable," he cited many internal crises, including the collapse of central authority, continued decay and disintegration of the Soviet Army, uncertainty over the control of the Soviet arsenal of 30,000 nuclear weapons and the potential for conflict between various republics in the next year or two if aggressive, xenophobic regimes emerge from the current political turmoil and economic privation.


Rangers Lose Grip Against Penguins
The scene that summed up this Ranger defeat came with 3 minutes 28 seconds left in the game and the Penguins ahead by 5-3, the eventual final score.
As the Rangers were pressing to come back from earlier mistakes, two of their tough guys, Jeff Beukeboom and Kris King, chased after Pittsburgh's Jaromir Jagr, a stylish forward from Czechoslovakia.


Intelligent Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Market Place; Uncertain Climate For an Offering
WOULD you buy stock in a money-losing textile business, one that is undergoing its second restructuring in two years, just before the crucial period when a depressed fashion industry will place its annual fabric orders?
Forstmann &amp; Company, which says it is the largest American company producing both wool and worsted fabrics, hopes the answer is yes.
It filed an offering this week to go public, hoping to raise as much as $46 million.
The bulk of the cash is likely to go to Odyssey Partners, which will maintain control of the company through a complex transaction.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Walt Disney Co., Burbank, Calif., named two executive vice presidents: Joe Shapiro and Sanford M. Litvack. *
Gannett Co., Arlington, Va., announced five senior management appointments: Thomas L. Chapple, vice president, general counsel and secretary; Mimi A. Feller, senior vice president-public affairs and government relations; John B. Jaske, senior vice president-labor relations and assistant general counsel; Larry F. Miller, senior vice president-financial planning and controller, and Jimmy L. Thomas, senior vice president-financial services and treasurer.


NDL Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shorewood Packaging Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


HIGH COURT UPSETS SEIZING OF PROFITS ON CONVICTS' BOOKS
The Supreme Court today declared unconstitutional a New York law aimed at limiting the ability of criminals to profit from selling their stories to book publishers or movie makers.
Voting 8 to 0, the Court said the 14-year-old "Son of Sam" law, a model for laws now in effect in most states, violated the First Amendment by singling out a criminal's earnings from only one source -- speech or writing about the crime.


Casey's General Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Jersey City Mayor Testifies in His Defense
Just as his two-week criminal fraud trial was about to end in Federal District Court here, Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City decided today to take the stand in his own defense.
Matthew P. Boylan, Mr.
McCann's lawyer, said the Mayor wanted to place a number of documents, especially telephone logs, into evidence.
"He felt they were important to refute Government charges that he tried to hide his business activities," Mr.
Boylan said.


Commtron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Terry Anderson Returns to America and Receives a Hero's Welcome at the Office


Review/Rock; More Technological Than Human
Rush's concert at Madison Square Garden on Friday night was so overwhelming that it was easy to forget there were actually three men onstage.
Before Geddy Lee, Alex Lifeson and Neil Peart even took the stage, a wide-screen projection showed a vaguely Cubist animated cartoon of the three musicians vaulting through the air with their instruments.
Throughout the set, the backdrop intermittently displayed diverse and surreal images of drum kits suspended over water, geometric computer graphics, children gazing at space ships and flying bird's-eye views of landscapes.
The music itself was not so much a collection of songs as a nonstop technological force.
Mr.
Peart, the drummer, seldom played anything as simple as a back beat, instead laying down complex, assaultive patterns with frequent time changes.
Mr.
Lifeson's speedy, baroque guitar solos added the next textural layer, with their counterpoint in Mr.
Lee's florid, melodic bass lines.
But during numbers like "Roll the Bones," the title track from Rush's latest album on Atlantic, most of the music seemed to come from prerecorded backing tapes, anyway.
Combine this with a film of a skeleton in Wayfarer sunglasses doing an electronic rap, and the musicians themselves were practically invisible.


Acklands Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Go-Video Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Smith Tells Rapt Courtroom His Side of Story
After remaining largely mute over the eight months since he was accused of rape, William K. Smith filled a quiet and spellbound courtroom today with his version of what happened at the Kennedy estate in the wee hours of March 30.
Under the gentle prodding of his chief defense counsel, Roy E. Black of Miami, Mr.
Smith told his long-awaited story in 29 minutes -- one-sixth the time the prosecutor in the case, Moira K. Lasch, would then spend trying to shake it.
Mr.
Black wound up his examination by asking Mr.
Smith if he had "at any time" raped his accuser.
"No, I did not," he replied.


Depositors' Yields Slip Even Further
The decline in yields on certificates of deposit and bank money-market accounts steadily gained momentum in the last week, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, the publication in North Palm Beach, Fla., that specializes in covering interest rates.
"The speed and the size of the current decline is intensifying," Robert K. Heady, the publisher of The Monitor, said yesterday.
He said banks had been racing to bring down their cost of funds before the Federal Reserve reduced its discount rate again; however, a high-ranking Fed official suggested yesterday that the Fed's policy makers were unlikely to take urgent action on rates when they meet next week.
Mr.
Heady said he thought the unusually low current yields would move even lower by mid-February, possibly by another 25 or 30 basis points.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.
Sees 4.5% on 6-Month C.D.'s
He said that the nationwide average yield on six-month certificates of deposit probably would be less than 4.50 percent.
New York banks have cut yields by about 14 basis points, to 4.16 percent, he said.


Boutiques San Francisco reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Consolidation Mercantile reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
Readers looking for Christmas presents for their bridge friends have a number of options.
Those in the New York metropolitan area can visit the offices of Bridge World magazine at 39 West 94th Street to arrange a subscription or buy a book.
Or telephone (212) 866-5860.
A second source, for a subscription or a range of books, is Bridge Today magazine, telephone (800) 872-2081.


Top Position Is Filled At Burson-Marsteller
The past few years have been difficult ones for the public relations business, as corporate clients have tightened budgets.
But Larry E. Snoddon, who was named yesterday as the new president and chief executive of Burson-Marsteller, has enjoyed rapid growth as head of the firm's European business since 1987.
Since then, Burson-Marsteller's European business has nearly tripled to $70 million a year in fee income, the equivalent of revenues.
The European business has expanded not only by advising American and European corporations gearing up for the 1992 single European market, but also with more unusual projects like advising the Polish Government on privatization issues and working with the German Ministry of Economics to develop educational programs for the nation's new citizens from eastern Germany.
"We're basically trying to tell them what it's like to live in a free-enterprise system," Mr.
Snoddon, (pronounced Snow-Don), said.


Seton Hall Is Getting Ready for a Lively Rutgers Reception
The gymnasium in Piscataway, N.J., where Rutgers University plays its basketball games is called the Rac, and not only because it is the acronym for the Rutgers Athletic Center.
An acoustic marvel that seems to focus the full sound of 9,000 cheering fans directly into the ears of rival players, the Rac, where Nevada-Las Vegas was hung out to dry (91-85) on Saturday night, has long been associated with pain by visiting teams.
Next on the guest list is Seton Hall, which brings a 3-1 record into tonight's game against a fired-up Rutgers team that has already knocked U.N.L.V. out of the Associated Press Top 25 rankings and is looking to do the same to the 12th-ranked Pirates.


4 Guilty of Murder and Robbery In Utah Tourist's Death in Subway
In a case that crystallized public concern about violent crime, a jury yesterday convicted four young men of the murder of Brian Watkins, a Utah tourist, and the violent robbery of his family on a subway platform in Manhattan last year.
The verdict caused the families of three of the defendants to cry out and run sobbing from the courtroom in State Supreme Court.
It also brought a sense of relief to Sherwin and Karen Watkins, the victim's parents.


I.I.S. Intelligent Information Systems Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Buchanan in '92 Race


Russian Farms Need More Than Privatization
To the Editor:
William Safire states in "Ukraine Marches Out" (column, Nov. 18) that Ukraine will have "food production and economic power" as soon as farmers get "transportation and the incentives of private property and personal gain." "Help Russia; Push Russia" (editorial, Nov. 26) states that privatized agricultural markets are "probably the only way" to stop food from rotting in the fields and letting the black market take the rest.


Wrong Rest Room? Not at All. She Works There.
LAURA BELLE, the supper club at 120 West 43d Street, is one of those ultra-trendy places that define New York City for the fast and famous, not to mention the fatuous.
Entering, you thread through dark corridors, passing 18th-century Georgian antiques.
Finally, you arrive at a vast sunken dance floor, eerily somber and designed to throb with the music.
The idea, said the owner, Michael O'Keeffe, is to create a sense of gangster chic -- "not Al Capone, but maybe Carlo Gambino." Aside from the $4 million makeover of a former pornographic theater, this questionable ambition is furthered by offerings of Champagne and Cuban cigars so extensive that Mr.
O'Keeffe calls them the best in America or the world, one of the two.
The music is
very
loud.


If They Remember How to Be Democrats
To the Editor:
Tom Wicker's right-to-the-point Dec. 1 column, "Where the Ducks Are" -- a reference to the need for the Democrats in 1992 to seek votes in states like California, Michigan and Illinois, rather than the South, to "go hunting where the ducks are" -- gives a sound analysis of what the results might have been if the Democrats had adopted a different number strategy in the 1988 election.
Surprisingly, however, Mr.
Wicker omits any mention of another vital element in the Presidential election fortunes of the Democrats.


Bowie Asks of the Nets: Who's in Charge Here?
Although he stopped short of saying that Bill Fitch should be replaced, Nets center Sam Bowie said the speculation surrounding Fitch's job security has become a distraction for the Nets.
Bowie, the team's second-leading scorer (16.8 a game) and rebounder (8.8), also criticized the team's front office for having too many owners, making it difficult for the franchise to make key decisions.


Unlikely Bedfellows Put New Spin on Trenton Tax Debate
Like a troupe of dismayed and disillusioned Aladdins, Trenton Republicans and their allies in business, who wished for a rollback of the new taxes imposed by the Democrats last year, are trying desperately to coax the genie back into the magic lamp.
Their wish may suddenly be granted, and they don't like it a bit.
To make matters more puzzling, the people trying to grant the Republicans' wish are the Democrats, the very ones who imposed the $2.8 billion increase in the first place.
All this came into sharp if confusing focus Monday, when the Democrats began committee hearings on a package of bills that would repeal every penny of the increase they passed last year with such fervor that the critical vote was cast by an ailing Democratic Senator who checked out of a hospital so he could be present.


Book Notes
Levi's Death
A doctor who was a friend of Primo Levi says that the writer did not commit suicide four and half years ago and that the authorities reached the wrong conclusion when his body was found at the foot of the stairwell in his family home in Turin, Italy.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Aggies Upset the Utes  Todd Gentry made two free throws with 7 seconds remaining in overtime last night to seal Utah State's 74-72 victory over Utah (6-1) in Salt Lake City.
Utah led, 58-51, with 5 minutes left in regulation but the Aggies closed with an 11-4 run to tie it at 62-62 and force overtime.
Malloy Nesmith and Kendall Youngblood scored 13 points each to lead Utah State (2-2). (AP) Indiana 88, Vanderbilt 51: Three of Indiana's usual starters spent the first half on the bench, but Greg Graham and Matt Nover each scored 14 points and the Hoosiers, playing at home in Bloomington, Ind., went on to rout Vanderbilt, 88-51.
Calbert Cheaney, Indiana's leading scorer; Eric Anderson, and Damon Bailey did start in the second half and made their presence known immediately by scoring Indiana's first 9 points. (AP) Temple 92, Illinois 56: Mik Kilgore scored 19 of his 27 points in the first half last night as the Owls (3-0) trounced the Illini, 92-56, in Philadelphia.
It was Illinois' worst defeat since Feb. 9, 1974, when it lost to Indiana, 107-67. (AP) Oklahoma 106, Texas 91: Not having Dexter Cambridge, who was declared ineligible Monday, left a big hole in the middle of the Texas lineup, and the Sooners' Bryan Sallier took advantage.
Sallier scored 24 points and grabbed a career-high 20 rebounds in leading the Sooners (5-0) at home in Norman. (AP) N.B.A.
Pacers Edge Spurs  Reggie Miller scored 25 points, including a key layup in the final moments, as the Indiana Pacers beat the San Antonio Spurs, 109-102, in Indianapolis.
It was the Spurs' fifth consecutive defeat. (AP) Hawks 118, Bucks 104: Dominique Wilkins scored 41 points and Kevin Willis had 24 points and 14 rebounds as Atlanta, playing at home, took control in the second quarter and then raced past Milwaukee.
Moses Malone, returning to Atlanta for the first time since signing with the Bucks, led Milwaukee with a season-high 27 points. (AP) Bulls 108, SuperSonics 103: Centers Stacey King and Will Perdue, averaging a combined 13.8 points, scored a total of 35 points to help Chicago win at home.
Early in the day, Boris Becker of Germany was forced to withdraw because of a virus and Jimmy Connors lost to Jakob Hlasek of Switzerland, 0-6, 6-4, 6-4.
Becker was replaced by Todd Woodbridge.
The event, the richest in the game, was supposed to feature the 16 players with the best results from the four 1991 Grand Slam tournaments, but it now includes only one 1991 Grand Slam champion: the Wimbledon winner, Michael Stich of Germany, who will play Goran Prpic of Yugoslavia today.
Chang easily eliminated the second-ranked Courier, 6-4, 6-2.
Ivan Lendl sailed past Cristiano Caratti of Italy, 6-4, 6-1.
Patrick McEnroe rallied to beat Thierry Champion of France, 4-6, 6-1, 6-4. (AP) SKIING  Victory for Tomba  Alberto Tomba scored his third World Cup victory of the season yesterday, winning a slalom at Sestriere, Italy.
The 24-year-old Italian had the best time in first heat and the third best in the second heat for a winning aggregate time of 2 minutes 49 seconds, 0.91 seconds better than Finn Christian Jagge of Norway. (AP)


Americana Hotels &amp; Realty reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Man Seized After 4 Are Slain by Sniper
A National Guard mechanic apparently stalked and killed four people -- a sheriff, two sheriff's deputies and a sheriff's wife -- overnight, setting off a daylong house-by-house, business-by-business manhunt here that dragged into the evening hours before he surrendered, the authorities said.
The shootings, which also injured another sheriff's deputy, began at the suspect's home Monday night and then took place at three other places.
Two victims were shot at their homes and two were shot outside the Moniteau County Jail.


Democrats File Suit on Rule About Federal Campaign Aid
Charging political discrimination against Democratic Presidential candidates, the Democratic National Committee went to Federal District Court today to challenge Treasury Department regulations that set aside most existing Federal matching funds for the general election and party conventions, at the expense of primary campaigns.
The rules mean, the Democrats argue, that candidates will suffer shortfalls in Federal matching funds in February and March, when successful candidates "break out of the pack."


Republicans in Albany Propose Cuts in Medicaid
The Republican-controlled State Senate released a plan today that it said would slash $1.6 billion in spending on Medicaid and welfare over the next 15 months, largely by cutting services and changing eligibility levels for program recipients.
But in a vivid illustration of the philosophical gulf that has helped stall budget negotiations here, the Democratic-led State Assembly dismissed many of the ideas tonight as an assault on the poor and, in the case of one proposal to cap emergency housing grants, a means of "sentencing people to instant homelessness."


Macy's Lenders Agree To New Deal on Credit
In a move that substantially eases its short-term cash pressure, R. H. Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that it had renegotiated an important credit agreement with its lenders.
Under the amended agreement, Macy's bank lenders agreed to relax the terms of the retailer's revolving credit line.
The Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company and the Bankers Trust Company lead the 40-bank syndicate of Macy's lenders.
Yesterday's amendments mark the 23d time the agreement has been revised.


Talks on Europe 'Decisive,' German Chancellor Asserts
Chancellor Helmut Kohl said today that this week's European Community summit meeting was a "decisive breakthrough" on the way to continental unity, but critics at home said they wished it had been more successful.
"In the wake of this summit, Europe is no longer the same," Mr.
Kohl told a Cabinet meeting.
Mr.
Kohl's chief spokesman, Dieter Vogel, who reported his comments to reporters, said the Government was highly satisfied, though Mr.
Vogel acknowledged that Germany had not won all it had sought.


Council Election Losers Say Winner Doesn't Live There
Some of the losers in the election for the new 18th Council District in the Bronx filed a complaint yesterday in State Supreme Court contending that City Councilwoman-elect Lucy Cruz does not live in the district she is to represent.
In fact, they say, she doesn't live in New York City at all.
They want the court to force the City Council and the State Attorney General to investigate their claims, and they are seeking a temporary restraining order to keep her from being sworn in when the new Council takes office in January.


North Hempstead Aide Charged With Perjury in a Family Feud
A caustic family feud over an Old Westbury, L.I., estate spilled into criminal court today when a North Hempstead official was indicted on charges of perjury and other criminal acts related to his purportedly paying a witness to sign false affidavits.
The Nassau County District Attorney, Denis Dillon, announced today a six-count indictment against the county official, Richard Middlemark, who was recently appointed first deputy to Ben Zwirn, the North Hempstead town Supervisor.
For the last two years, Mr.
Middlemark has been immersed in a battle over the $5 million estate of Marvin Middlemark, quirky inventor of the "rabbit ears" indoor television antenna.


Business, Like the Voters, Is Worrying About the Economy
To the Editor:
If there was one clear message from this year's election results, in New York State and across the country, it is that voters are worried about the sick state of the economy.


Nordson Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 3


Books of The Times; Bats on the Backcast, Life on the Line
Batfishing in the Rainforest  Strange Tales of Travel and Fishing  By Randy Wayne White  250 pages.
Lyons &amp; Burford. $19.95.
What Randy Wayne White means by batfishing is something that can happen to anyone casting for fish with an artificial lure.
It befell Mr.
White's guide, Rudy Dodero, when he hauled his popper off the surface of a river in Costa Rica and backcast into the jungle darkness behind him.


Midwesco Filter Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Zapata Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Audio/Video Affiliates reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


How Water Projects Fall Behind
To alleviate extremely low water pressure in the southern part of Staten Island, the city's Environmental Protection Department planned to replace 50,000 feet of 20-inch water mains last year.
It hasn't happened yet: The city's General Services Department was late in providing street surveys of the area.
A new chlorination system was to be installed at the Hillview Reservior in Yonkers as part of New York City's third-water-tunnel project.
The work has not yet begun.
The agency's engineering department moved to new offices twice in the last year and had difficult finding records.


At North General, Moving a Whole Hospital, One Patient at a Time
This morning, at 5 o'clock, the chief doctors and administrators of North General Hospital will synchronize their watches.
At precisely 7 A.M. their emergency room will close and, simultaneously, re-open up the street.
At 8 A.M. the first of 150 patients, each wearing an oversized name tag, will be rolled through a heated tunnel, past ready resuscitation teams and into the pristine rosewood lobby at the other end.


Romanians Turn From Politics to Economics
Anti-Government graffiti scrawled on building walls have become as much a part of Bucharest residents' lives as skyrocketing prices or daylong lines of cars waiting to buy gasoline.
Yet Romanians have begun to ignore their political discontent in hopes of coping with their economic crisis.
Whether the subject is marketable skills, the inventories of shops or the price of potatoes, economic discussions have replaced the spirited political debates that enlivened street corners and kitchen tables for over a year after the revolution in December 1989 that overthrew the Ceausescu dictatorship.


Tax Issue Stymies Navratilova Case
If death and taxes are life's only certainties, MARTINA NAVRATILOVA and JUDY NELSON, her former companion, may be excused for hoping for the former.
It seems tax concerns have thrown the three-month-long negotiations between them back to square one (or is it 1099?).
Having failed to settle their palimony suit, the two will probably find themselves back in a Fort Worth courtroom early next year.


Gifts: The Outside Story
Wrappings (212) 996-5258.
This year, Joanna-Faith Whitney had Christmas presents for her entire family all wrapped up by Thanksgiving.
Ms.
Whitney is one of those rare people who likes to wrap presents.
Since 1986, she has wrapped gifts professionally for a variety of private and corporate clients.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-21  DISAGREE, DA; FIGHT, NYET
President Gorbachev met privately with President Yeltsin of Russia, who later said they had agreed never to resort to military force to resolve their differences over replacing the vestiges of the Soviet Union with a confederation.
A1


TRW Plans Asset Sales And Cost Cut
TRW Inc., the Cleveland-based automotive, space, defense and information conglomerate, said yesterday that it would sell businesses worth $400 million to $500 million; cut capital spending by more than $100 million next year, or more than 16 percent, and lay off 2,500.
The company's stock jumped nearly 8 percent on the news.
TRW, with a payroll of 72,000, said it would take a $250 million after-tax charge, or $4.09 a share, in the current quarter to pay for the restructuring.
TRW was not specific about all the units to be sold, but said that it would "continue to strongly support its automotive growth businesses, particularly air bags and power rack-and-pinion steering."


Conde Nast Changes
Conde Nast Publications Inc. yesterday announced several top executive changes.
Pamela van Zandt, vice president and corporate secretary, was named executive vice president.
Ms. van Zandt joined Conde Nast in 1977 and was appointed director of personnel administration in 1979.
Eric Anderson, vice president-treasurer, has been named executive vice president.
Before joining Conde Nast in 1981, Mr.
Anderson was controller of Random House.
The appointments are effective immediately.


Century Telephone Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


YELTSIN REPORTED TO GAIN ADVANTAGE ON COMMONWEALTH
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev appeared today to be losing his campaign to block creation of a commonwealth of former Soviet republics as the idea gained ground with additional republics.
Mr.
Gorbachev met privately for two and a half hours with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, who later stressed that the two had agreed that they would never resort to military force to resolve their political differences, sharp as they are, over scrapping the vestiges of the Soviet Union in favor of the Commonwealth of Independent States proclaimed on Sunday by Mr.
Yeltsin and the leaders of Byelorussia and Ukraine.


Shearson Negotiating Sale Of Mortgage Banking Unit
Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. is negotiating to sell its mortgage banking unit for $238 million to a group of Middle Eastern and American investors, Wall Street executives said yesterday.
The unit, the Shearson Lehman Mortgage Corporation, was put on the block last spring, when the securities firm decided to sell the operation to increase its capital position and as part of a broader strategy to focus on its core securities and investment banking businesses.


Mets Give Up McReynolds and Get Saberhagen
Five hours after General Manager Al Harazin conceded temporary defeat by saying "I can't seem to romance" the ace pitcher he had sought all week, the Mets executed a stunning five-player trade tonight.
They acquired Bret Saberhagen, a two-time Cy Young Award winner, and sent Kevin McReynolds, Gregg Jefferies and Keith Miller to the Kansas City Royals.
Saberhagen, a 27-year-old right-hander who was a 20-game winner in 1985 and in 1989, was one of half a dozen or so No. 1 starting-pitcher candidates the Mets thought they needed to bolster the rotation that had become a wisp of its former elegance.
They had failed to entice any of the teams to trade one of the stars for some of the surplus hitters the Mets had on the roster as a result of signing Bobby Bonilla and Eddie Murray.


Yes Clothing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mets Wait For Pieces To Fall In Place
The magnitude of the trade was difficult to digest.
For the players, its ramifications weren't easy to accept, either.
And the future that the trade laid out in front of the Mets wasn't crystal clear.
Herewith, though, an attempt to sort out all of the above in the immediate aftermath of the blockbuster deal that sent left fielder Kevin McReynolds, third baseman Gregg Jefferies and second baseman Keith Miller to the Kansas City Royals for right-hander Bret Saberhagen and infielder Bill Pecota.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Assigned Domingo Mota, second baseman, to Baseball City of the Florida State League.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Extended the contract of Tom Kelly, manager, for two years.
Named Joel Lepel, Brad Wietzel and Scott Groot scouts.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Signed Kent Anderson, infielder; Julian Yan, first baseman; and Butch Davis, outfielder, to minor league contracts.
Named Joe Siers midwest scouting supervisor.
National League  CINCINNATI REDS -- Traded John Wetteland and Bill Risley, pitchers, to the Montreal Expos for Dave Martinez, outfielder; Scott Ruskin, pitcher; and Willie Greene, infielder.
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Reached a one-year player development agreement with Erie of the New York-Penn League for 1992.
Named Fredi Gonzalez manager of Erie.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Traded Chris Gwynn, outfielder, and Domingo Mota, second baseman, to the Kansas City Royals for Todd Benzinger, first baseman-outfielder.
NEW YORK METS -- Acquired Steve Rosenberg, pitcher, from the San Diego Padres for Jeff Gardner, infielder.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Traded Bruce Ruffin, pitcher, to the Milwaukee Brewers for Dale Sveum, infielder.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Traded Kevin Mitchell, outfielder, and Mike Remlinger, pitcher, to the Seattle Mariners for Bill Swift, Mike Jackson and Dave Burba, pitchers.
Designated Rafael Novoa, pitcher, for assignment.
FOOTBALL National Football League  DETROIT LIONS -- Signed David Little, center.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Waived Jerry Evans, tight end.
Signed Randy Austin, tight end, and Doug Lloyd, running back, to the practice squad.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Placed Jeff Hostetler, quarterback, on injured reserve.
Signed Mike Perez, quarterback.
Assigned Anthony Moss, linebacker, to the practice squad.
World League of American Football  NEW YORK-NEW JERSEY KNIGHTS -- Named Gary Croke director of media relations.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Tobacco Co., Stamford, Conn., named Peter Strauss executive director of trade marketing. *
Eddie Bauer, Redmond, Wash., a retailer of outdoor and casual apparel and a unit of Spiegel Inc., named Richard T. Fersch to the newly created position of executive vice president of merchandising and marketing.


When Coslet Says Nothing, Jets Read Between the Silence
Whatever it was that came over Coach Bruce Coslet when he sat down this morning to try to compose some inspirational words for his Jets players, it wasn't writer's block.
What can you say to a 7-7 team that, miraculously, is still assured of a playoff berth if it wins its last two games?


Review/Dance; A Mix of Solos, Rituals and Satire at Dia
The Performance Mix fall series came to an enjoyably rowdy end on Monday night at the Dia Center for the Arts on Mercer Street in SoHo.
The program opened on a relatively serene note with two dance solos by Dennis O'Connor.
In "Low Dance," set to music by Christine Bacyewska, Mr.
O'Connor crashed, rippled and crawled about the stage in a surprisingly unforced and unabrasive fashion, pausing for fleeting moments of stillness.
The solo, a study for a new group work, looked far less finished than "Slake," a recent dance performed nude and in silence, which remains an inspired portrait of an exceptionally crisp and luminous dancer.
Katherine Griffith is clearly a gifted storyteller.
Her "Lost in Utopia" gave her a chance to play a host of different characters, regulars at a neighborhood luncheonette called Utopia.
But the monologue tried to cram too much into a small frame, and the protagonist, a self-described psychic detective named Miss Pretty Hand, was unbelievable.


Democrat Sees a Big '92 Budget Gap in Trenton
A major Senate Democrat says New Jersey will not have to wait until the next fiscal year for its economic picture to grow truly grim.
By his calculations, the state could find itself $700 million in the red before this budget cycle ends.
Senator Laurence S. Weiss of Woodbridge, the Appropriations Committee chairman, who is considered one of Trenton's most astute fiscal analysts, said in an interview today that he expected a lagging economy to cause the state to fall far short of revenue expectations before the fiscal year ends next June 30.


Europe's Pact on Money Seen as Business Boon
The European Community's bold plan to create a common central bank and currency promises large long-term gains, but sharp short-term pains for Europe's economy.
Over the long term, the plan, which community leaders approved in Maastricht, the Netherlands, early today, is expected to cut companies' costs and bolster Europe's economy by reducing the need for currency conversions.


Senator Nunn's Pork Patrol
It's not easy for a member of Congress to say no to a colleague seeking funds for a pet hometown project, however dubious.
All the more reason to salute last month's valiant if unsuccessful effort by Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, to combat pork-barreling by lawmakers in this year's defense budget.
Senator Nunn, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, has long criticized the process that permits powerful members to lard the defense budget with local boondoggles that have no apparent connection to national security.
Hoping to forestall such shenanigans this year, he obtained a written agreement from Appropriations Committee members pledging to finance only projects already authorized by his committee.


On PBS, the Little Engines That Could
FOR a lot of young children, this holiday season is turning into a rather joyless lesson about the blunders of big business.
They are learning how grown-ups, despite the wisdom of their years, can miscalculate and underestimate, leaving store shelves bare of toys at the top of a great many wish lists.
That is the experience of youngsters clamoring for Thomas the Tank Engine and other toys based on "Shining Time Station," the popular television series, now in its third year, that is shown each weekday and on Sunday on more than 250 member stations of the Public Broadcasting Service.
According to PBS, "Shining Time Station," with 1.2 million viewers, has an audience as large as that of "Mr. Rogers' Neighborhood," a favorite that has been on the air since 1967.


Reporter Averts Ceding Interview Tapes
A Puerto Rican journalist has reached an agreement with Government prosecutors that allows her to stay out of prison and avoid surrendering the original videotapes of her interviews with two fugitives who are suspects in a robbery in Connecticut.
The reporter, Daisy Sanchez, signed an affidavit yesterday affirming the veracity of the tapes after a judge had ruled that she did not have to surrender them.
She had been subpoenaed and ordered to turn over tapes of four hours of interviews with two men linked to a militant Puerto Rican independence group who are suspects in the robbery of $7.1 million in 1983 from a Wells Fargo depot in West Hartford.


'Son of Sam' Laws, Rightly Reversed
Alarmed that the accused serial killer David Berkowitz might reap millions for writing about the "Son of Sam" murders, New York State decided in 1977 to seize literary and movie proceeds from accused or convicted criminals.
The Legislature, mindful of the First Amendment problems of penalizing expression, made such seizures part of the state's victim compensation system.
Assets would be held for no more than five years; those that were not claimed by crime victims would be given back.
That was clever, the Supreme Court now rules -- but unconstitutional.
The Court said that New York couldn't single out speech on a particular subject, crime, for an inhibiting government tax.
The Court is right.
New York and more than 40 states with similar laws can now revise them to accomplish their stated purpose.


Devtek Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Corrections
A headline yesterday about the San Damiano friary in the Bronx and The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund misstated the relationship between the friary and the fund.
The friary no longer receives money from the Neediest Cases appeal.
Its yearly grant from Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York, one of seven charities affiliated with the Neediest Cases, was canceled, the charity said, so the money could be used to meet the rising need for food and rent assistance.


Sports of The Times; Needed: Cure for Nightmare
JOE TAUB spoke from his car phone yesterday morning.
I didn't ask where he was going, just assumed that anyone who was part-owner of the last-place New Jersey Nets was either out looking for a coach or some players.
However, I did ask how he was doing.
"Obviously, not that well," Taub said.
"When you have a record like ours you can't be satisfied -- or happy. Especially when you get embarrassed by the team over the river. That really hurts."


Review/Dance; The Ailey Troupe Presents a World Premiere
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater offered a relatively subdued gala benefit on Tuesday night at the City Center.
Moreover, "Rift," the program's world premiere by Judith Jamison, the troupe's artistic director, did not exactly have a festive theme.
It was left to the evergreen Ailey masterpiece, "Revelations," to end the evening on a rousing note.
And it was thanks to Miss Jamison and the soprano Jessye Norman, who served as the gala's honorary chairwoman, that some of the all-embracing warmth of past annual Ailey galas was still felt.


Experts on Rape Back Smith's Acquittal
Some experts on rape and the law said yesterday that the jury in West Palm Beach, Fla., had little choice but to acquit William K. Smith of accusations lodged by a Florida woman, given the evidence it was presented.
They also said women who had been sexually assaulted should not be discouraged from reporting rape because of the verdict or the unusual amount of publicity surrounding the case.


Quotation Of The Day
"Free speech is life itself." -- SALMAN RUSHDIE.  [ A1:4. ]


Cascade's Plans
Cascade International Inc., whose chairman vanished mysteriously last month, said it had concluded talks with its bankers and would announce its future plans after a board meeting on Friday.
Cascade said Victor G. Incendy, the chairman and chief executive until he was reported missing on Nov. 19, had still not been found.
The disappearance of Mr.
Incendy, who owned 51 percent of the retail and fragrances company, prompted an F.B.I. investigation and a halt in Cascade's share trading.
The company, based in Boca Raton, refused to say when it would lift the trading halt in its stock.


Conrail Plans Big Write-Off
Conrail said it would take an after-tax charge of up to $450 million in the current quarter to cover write-offs of rail lines that were underutilized and other assets, a pending labor agreement that would cut the size of train crews and other matters.
Conrail, or the Consolidated Rail Corporation, operates in 14 states, Washington, D.C., and Quebec.


A Growing Choice: Housing or Food
When Harold Coleman, a 23-year-old chef's assistant, sketches his family's budget, two figures command attention.
He brings home $596 a month.
He pays about $480 for rent and utilities for an apartment in Charlotte, N.C.
Those figures make the Colemans part of a large and almost certainly growing number of poor Americans who pay more than half their income for rent and utilities in a condition that is changing the way poor people live.


Xerox Plans to Trim 2,500 From White-Collar Staff
The Xerox Corporation said yesterday that it would eliminate 2,500 white-collar jobs, or more than 20 percent of the total, by the middle of next year and take a $175 million pretax charge against earnings in the current quarter to cover the cost.
Xerox said the reductions in managerial and support staff would cut its costs by $150 million next year and $200 million in 1993.


With Many Out Sick, New Jersey Township Closes Schools


Admar Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Standard Brands Paint reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27


CHRONICLE
RONALD O. PERELMAN, the financier and chairman of Revlon, has donated $10 million to the New York University Medical Center, and the university's medical school has named its dermatology department for him.
Mr.
Perelman, who bought Revlon in 1985 for $1.8 billion, has been a trustee of the medical center, at First Avenue and 32d Street, since 1982.
He donated $1 million to the center's cardiac catheterization unit in 1983.


Foundations Bolster Fund For Neediest
Although most donors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund are individuals who contribute $100 or less, many foundations provide larger sums in joining the effort to help the city's sick, poor and disabled.
Like many individuals and families, these organizations have made donating to the fund a holiday season ritual.
The Starr Foundation in Manhattan, for example, has given money every year since 1983.
This year the foundation, founded in 1955 by the insurance executive Cornelius Vander Starr, gave $150,000.


Experts on Rape Back Smith's Acquittal
Some experts on rape and the law said yesterday that the jury in West Palm Beach, Fla., had little choice but to acquit William K. Smith of accusations lodged by a Florida woman, given the evidence it was presented.
They also said women who had been sexually assaulted should not be discouraged from reporting rape because of the verdict or the unusual amount of publicity surrounding the case.
"This was not a typical he-said, she-said case," said Susan Brownmiller, who wrote "Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape" (Bantam), which is often cited as the first reference of rape between acquaintances or dates.


From the Ashes of the South Bronx, Enterprising Youths Build a Business


Review/Cabaret; In Satiric Revue, the Comic Missiles Proliferate
The Ensemble Studio Theater has made many noteworthy theatrical contributions during its 20-year history, from giving Macaulay Culkin his first professional role to the discovery of short plays by Christopher Durang, Horton Foote, Romulus Linney and other writers.
But until the current In Pursuit of America festival, one area that eluded the company was cabaret comedy.
Enter a new image with "Stars in Bars," an outspoken and impertinent satiric revue.
Lew Black, who is the co-host of the show along with Rusty Magee, gets the evening off with an iconoclastic kick by reminding the audience that cabaret started with "those happy Germans." What follows is a high-octane romp assailing racism, sexism and the politics of negative action.
The show, which plays on weekends, varies from performance to performance, depending on which company members and guest artists are participating.


Santiago Atitlan Journal; Routed by Village's Rage, a Feared Army Retreats
In a country where the army's brutal authority is legendary, the military base just outside this dusty village beside Lake Atitlan is going to seed, its installations unused for the last year.
The peace of Santiago Atitlan is kept by local volunteers, who take turns patrolling the community armed only with sticks and whistles.
They are on the lookout for common criminals, leftist guerrillas and the army, none of whom are welcome.


Crash of Private Plane in Georgia Kills 9
A corporate jet carrying five top executives of a supermarket chain crashed into a rugged mountainside near this northwest Georgia city today, killing all nine people aboard.
The twin-engine Beechcraft BE-400 jet crashed into a wooded area of Lavender Mountain, six and a half miles west of Richard B. Russell Airport, from which it had taken off at 9:37 A.M.
The crash site is two to three minutes flying time from the airport.


No Headline
IT is not a museum, but each of its objects, whether a Napoleonic chair or a clothes brush, is a work of art.
"My philosophy is that objects are jewels," said Masakasu Bokura.
The apartment that Mr.
Bokura and his wife, Eliane, share in the First Arrondissement has evolved over 10 years into a blend of two cultures, two sensibilities and two centuries of design and architecture.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.35
6.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.14
4.18
6.79
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.15
4.19
6.67
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.72
6.70
7.80
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.80
7.78
8.05
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.80
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.86
6.86
7.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Big Board To Consider Foreign Link
Reviving an idea that had appeared dead, the New York Stock Exchange is examining proposals that would allow the stocks of foreign companies to trade on the Big Board, even if the companies do not comply with American accounting standards, the chairman of the exchange said yesterday.
Such trading, which has been championed by William Donaldson, the chairman, appears to face an uphill battle.
Richard C. Breeden, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, dismissed preliminary discussion of the idea in July, calling it "undesirable and unnecessary."


Daily News and Its Unions Start Committee on How to Cut Costs
Representatives of The Daily News management and unions met yesterday to begin work on a reorganization that they hoped would cut the bankrupt newspaper's costs and let it keep operating.
The two-hour meeting left both sides expressing confidence that the paper could be saved.
"I am satisfied there is enough cash on hand or receivable to give us enough time to work out a solution to save The News," said Theodore W. Kheel, a union representative on the committee.
The committee is scheduled to meet next Thursday, after an analysis of financial documents.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Consolidated Limelight
It's hard to disagree with most of the positions taken by the San Francisco-based group Consolidated.
Its members are against sexism, racism, fascism, violence, meat eating, cruelty to small animals and children and on and on.
But spending an hour with them in concert will send the sturdiest leftist running toward arch-conservatism.
Terminally didactic, the band creates an atmosphere in which dissension isn't tolerated, rapping through songs with titles like "The Sexual Politics of Meat," "Typical Male," "Friendly Fascism," "Your Body Belongs to the State" and more.
Cardinal sin No. 1 is that it's boring to assume that leftist political discourse and enjoyment can't, and shouldn't be, taken together.


Insurgent Teamster Seems Headed Toward Toppling the Old Guard
Rank and file members of the long-corrupt teamsters union appeared headed today toward throwing out their top leadership and electing a dissident, who heads a local of United Parcel Service drivers in Queens, to a five-year term as president.
With nearly 40 percent of the votes counted, the dissident, Ronald Carey, had more than half the votes in a three-man race, unofficial results in the federally supervised election show, and had won a majority in important locals across the country.
The two other candidates, R. V. Durham, the union bureaucracy's candidate, and Walter Shea, who is close to the bureaucracy, had been expected to have considerable support in those locals.


U.S. Is Assailed on Bank Regulation
The Government's top auditor told Congress today that the Bush Administration's latest cure for what it calls a credit crunch would instead make the problem worse, hiding the symptoms of sick banks and further draining the fund that protects bank deposits.
Charles A. Bowsher, the comptroller general, said the rules on the treatment of delinquent loans that the Bush Administration proposed in November conflict with the banking bill passed two weeks ago by Congress.
The measure, which makes it possible for the insolvent bank insurance fund to borrow at least $70 billion more and tightens bank regulations, is expected to be signed by President Bush shortly.


Central Sprinkler reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Essay; Gorby Invites the Deluge
Revealing the true colors of a tyrant, Mikhail Gorbachev now seeks to thwart the democratic will of the independent republics of his former empire by bidding for the support of the veteran Red Army generals.
He is responding to the declaration of independence and formation of a commonwealth by Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia by encouraging what amounts to a military coup.


Starks Steps Up; Sonics Fall Back
As it turns out, there is a basketball team on 33d Street. As in T-E-A-M.
With big contributions from starters and reserves alike -- particularly from reserve guard John Starks -- the Knicks put together a collective effort last night and turned it into a 96-87 victory over the Seattle SuperSonics at Madison Square Garden.
The victory gave New York a tie for first place with Boston in the Atlantic Division of the Eastern Conference.
Both teams have 13-6 records.


Cott Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


INSIDE
G.M. Signals Cutbacks; TRW and Xerox Trim Jobs
General Motors, losing huge sums in North America, will make deep cutbacks next week.
Speculation centers on plant closings and layoffs.
Xerox is eliminating 20 percent of its white-collar jobs, and TRW announced broad cutbacks.
Pages D1 and D3.
Mets Get Bret Saberhagen
The Mets acquired the two-time Cy Young Award winner in a deal that sent Kevin McReynolds and Gregg Jefferies to Kansas City.
Page B23.
Infrequent Visit From China
Prime Minister Li Peng arrived in New Delhi on the first trip to India by a Chinese head of government in more than three decades.
Page A3.
Officer Called Spy for Mob
William Peist was a trusted police detective.
He was also, the authorities say, on John Gotti's payroll.
Page B1.
New San Francisco Mayor
A former police chief who campaigned against potholes and panhandlers was elected mayor.
Page B18.


Treasuries Move in Narrow Range
Prices of Treasury securities moved in a narrow range and interest rates were little changed yesterday, as credit market participants positioned themselves in advance of substantive reports on inflation and the economy.
The Government is expected to release today producer price and retail sales data for November.
Those will be followed by consumer price data tomorrow.


HUNTS POINT JOURNAL Ambitious Bronx Youths Find Profit in Vacant Lot
Dusk settled over a windswept South Bronx street as several teen-agers chopped an agricultural product that they will later stash into bags.
The next day these same youths would deliver the goods to chic addresses on the East Side and in Greenwich Village, where their customers would rip open the bags, burn their contents and savor the sweet-smelling smoke.
The bags are burlap, not glassine, and the chopping is done with axes, not razors.


Where Do Giants Turn for a Lift When All Appears to Be Lost?
When the National Football League schedule came out in April, it looked like a dream game: The Giants against the Washington Redskins on the next-to-last Sunday of the season.
Instead, it has become a bad dream for the Giants.
The Redskins have a 13-1 record, the best in the National Football League.
The Super Bowl champion Giants are 7-7 and out of the playoff picture.


A Range Beloved of Pros Can Now Be Everyone's
SINCE 1864 Garland Commercial Industries has successfully flip-flopped from producing ranges for homes through the 1970's, then for restaurants, and now for both.
The Garland commercial range has long been cherished by such food notables as Craig Claiborne and Julia Child for its capacious burners and fine-tuned flame.


Red Cross Worker Wounded As Somali Fighting Goes On
A relief worker with the International Committee of the Red Cross was seriously wounded today when he was shot outside a hospital in the war-ravaged Somali capital, Mogadishu, the Red Cross said.


Quayle Returns Critics' Fire on Conflict of Interest
Vice President Dan Quayle lashed out today at several committee chairmen in Congress for raising accusations of conflict of interest against him and his staff, and said his Council on Competitiveness would carry on with efforts to reduce regulation of American business.
The barbs from the Vice President, who accused critics of pursuing a "negative agenda" against the American people, were the latest in a feud with Congress that has grown more heated by the day.
It began with Congressional criticism last summer of the council, of which Mr.
Quayle is chairman, and of its actions in revising Federal regulations after they had been written by the agencies charged with doing so.


Seoul to Permit Nuclear Inspections
The United States and South Korea said today that they would allow North Korea to inspect any civilian or military sites in the country in return for reciprocal rights in the North and an agreement that neither Seoul nor Pyongyang would produce weapons-grade plutonium.
The decision to allow the North the unusual and remarkably broad inspection rights, reached in the last two weeks and conveyed to North Korea this morning, appears intended to give the Government of President Kim Il Sung a face-saving means of backing away from its nuclear arms development program before it begins producing weapons, a step that could come in one to three years.


Pohang Iron Debt Rating
The Pohang Iron and Steel Company, a Korean steelmaker known as Posco, has been assigned a debt rating of A+ on its implied senior debt previously unrated by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
The rating service said the company had asked to be rated because it expected to enter the world market for the first time with a public debt offering.
It will be the first Korean company to make such a public debt offering and it has the blessing of the South Korean Government, which owns directly and indirectly about a 35 percent interest in the company.


National Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 24


HUNTS POINT JOURNAL Ambitious Bronx Youths Find Profit in Vacant Lot
Dusk settled over a windswept South Bronx street as several teen-agers chopped an agricultural product that they will later stash into bags.
The next day these same youths would deliver the goods to chic addresses on the East Side and in Greenwich Village, where their customers would rip open the bags, burn their contents and savor the sweet-smelling smoke.
The bags are burlap, not glassine, and the chopping is done with axes, not razors.


Home Video
The emphasis on hit movies in video stores tends to obscure thousands of other titles available on tape.
Nowhere is the deluge of material better demonstrated than in catalogues like the one from Movies Unlimited of Philadelphia, a chain of stores in New Jersey and Pennsylvania that also sells videos by mail order.
In 1991, the catalogue, which is one of the most comprehensive listings in the country, carried some 22,000 titles of all kinds.
The 2-pound 1992 edition has an estimated 25,000 entries.
Among its 20 categories are all the major film genres, as well as concerts and music, cult classics, horror, documentaries, martial arts, "soft adult" movies, silents, westerns and the performing arts.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
CDI Corp., Philadelphia, a holding company, said its CDI Temporary Services unit had acquired Today's Business Services Inc., Dallas, a temporary services concern.
No terms were disclosed. *
Esmark Inc., New York, said it had reached an agreement to buy Kidder International Inc., Seattle, a maker of water-sports equipment.


73 Haitians Who Returned Home Were Rapidly Arrested, U.N. Says
A group of 73 Haitian refugees who returned voluntarily to the Haitian capital on Dec. 1 from temporary haven in Venezuela were arrested and interrogated by the police on their arrival, according to officials in the offices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees here and in Geneva.
The refugees were arrested at the airport in Port-au-Prince despite assurances given to the United Nations by the Haitian Red Cross that there would be no retribution.
Initial reports indicate that all were released within 24 hours, but United Nations officials say they have no way of monitoring what happened afterward.


A.M.A. Acts to Curb Profits From Referrals
The American Medical Association has adopted a new policy saying that doctors, in general, should not send patients to clinics, laboratories or other health-care businesses in which the doctors have invested.
The policy was approved Tuesday at a meeting of the group's policy-making body, the house of delegates, in Las Vegas, Nev.
Members of Congress, especially Representative Pete Stark, Democrat of California, and the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services, Richard P. Kusserow, have sharply criticized such investments by doctors.


Missouri Town Is Shaken by Shooting Spree
Slowly this shaken town in the hills of central Missouri began to come out from behind its barred doors and shuttered windows and live free again today as James R. Johnson was led into the red-brick county courthouse.
Mr.
Johnson, a crack shot who honed his eye in Vietnam and later in the National Guard, was arraigned today on four counts of murder and one count of assault in a journey of violence that began Monday night and ended here Tuesday evening, when, trapped and tired, he surrendered.


Colombian Resort Basks in the End of Drug Terror
When drug traffickers unleashed their terror campaign on this Caribbean tourist port in 1989, they wounded both the city's image and its economy.
The tourists who normally flood Cartagena, providing the city with its main source of income, shunned it in favor of less dangerous destinations.
As a result, Cartagena suffered losses of $50 million from August 1989 to July 1990, according to official estimates.


China That Brings Back the Rumble and the Roar
A TRAIN fancier all her life, Kathleen Kindig thought she had the perfect job: Owning the B.&amp;O.
Railroad Museum gift shop in Baltimore.
Then, about 10 years ago, her interest became more specialized.
She began collecting the china used in railroad dining cars in the heyday of rail travel.
In the first half of the 20th century, each railroad carried its own signature china pattern.
The Chesapeake &amp; Ohio, for example, used a gold-rimmed pattern featuring a formal portrait of George Washington.


State Senator Offers Plan To Maintain Transit Fare
A powerful Republican State Senator yesterday proposed a plan to save the $1.15 subway and bus fare.
The proposal would split the Transit Authority's deficit among New York City, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and unspecified state funds.
The Senator, Norman J. Levy, chairman of the Senate Transportation Committee, said in a telephone interview that under his plan, the Transit Authority would have to submit to an independent audit to verify its projected $263 million deficit for 1992.


U.S. ENDORSES PACT ON EUROPEAN UNITY
The United States today welcomed the pact by European Community heads of state to seek greater political and economic union, but President Bush warned against limits on American exports.
"The results of the E.C. summit in Maastricht represent a milestone which we celebrate along with our European partners," the President said in a written statement.
"The United States has long supported European unity because of our strong conviction that it was good for Europe, good for the Atlantic partnership, and good for the world."


Orion Pictures Enters Bankruptcy Court
The Orion Pictures Corporation said today that it had filed for bankruptcy protection from its creditors after long-running negotiations with its bondholders broke down.
Although the studio produced "Dances With Wolves," which won seven Academy Awards this year, and it remains a haven for some of Hollywood's most successful actors and directors, Orion has been battered over the last several years by a series of flops.


Thankful for a Loss
BRAD CULPEPPER, a defensive tackle, is thankful for Florida's only loss, 38-21, at Syracuse.
"We learned that if we're not fired up and if we don't play like an inspired team we're very average," he said.
Since then, Florida (10-1), No. 2 in The New York Times's computer ranking, has won eight in a row, its first Southeastern Conference title and a Sugar Bowl match against Notre Dame.
Culpepper, a history major who wants to be a lawyer, was honored yesterday as the Toyota Leader of the Year for his 3.2 average in graduate school.


For the Needy, a Welcome Helping Hand


Tax-Free Fund Yields Fall After Increase in Demand
Yields on tax-exempt money market funds began to retreat in the week ended yesterday, after rising in the previous seven-day period, according to the latest figures from IBC/Donoghue's, which monitors the funds and publishes The Money Fund Report.
Taxable funds continued their long decline.
"Recent rising yields of the tax exempts attracted investor attention, and the law of supply and demand helps explain the declining yields of the past week," said Walter S. Frank, chief economist at IBC/Donoghue's.


Walking the Tightrope That Is 'Marvin's Room'
There is an emotional land mine subtly buried in the second act of "Marvin's Room," the new drama by Scott McPherson at Playwrights Horizons.
It is triggered by Bessie, the play's heroine, who is provoking laughter from the audience by describing the attention-grabbing antics of a boy named Clarence.
Swimming at a picnic, Clarence is clowning around, splashing in the water and making faces to amuse his family on the shore.
"Laughing and choking looked the same on Clarence," Bessie says.
"He drowned right in front of us." The play's audience, primed to laugh, has suddenly fallen through the trapdoor of tragedy.
This is only one of countless tragicomic moments in "Marvin's Room." To play such incongruous scenes, "You have to be able to turn on a dime," said Laura Esterman, who portrays Bessie.
"The close juxtaposition of humor and tragedy is a real balancing act. So you just go with it and try not to fall off the tightrope."


CHRONICLE
The Robin Hood Foundation presented its second annual heroes' awards yesterday to the directors of three community organizations that fight poverty in New York City.


Tecnol Medical Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Gold Medal Is Awarded To Seaport's Architect
The architect Benjamin C. Thompson has been awarded the 1992 American Institute of Architects Gold Medal, the institute has announced.
He is to be presented with the medal at a ceremony on Jan. 22 at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington.
Mr.
Thompson, who is 73 years old, is the 50th recipient of the medal, one of architecture's highest honors.
It was established in 1917 to recognize outstanding contributions to the profession by an individual, and past winners include Frank Lloyd Wright, Louis Kahn, I. M. Pei, Philip Johnson and Fay Jones.


Reading for the Best Line on Slopes
By almost any measure, skiing cannot be called a user-friendly sport.
Going up and down a mountain is simple compared with the logistics of getting there, tending equipment, taking lessons, eating, sleeping and snatching a bit of nightlife.
That's probably the reason so many books are written about skiing and so many skiers read them.
They are keys to basic survival, or at least a reduction of hassles, and they represent a minimalist route to pleasure.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Milt Jackson  Blue Note
The blues form, simple, economical and endlessly variable, is one of those wonderfully utilitarian American inventions.
The improvisational language developed for it adds realism in almost any context, blues or not.
The three-chord form, known to just about any musician working in the American vernacular, is a forum for musicians to show off their understanding of harmony, to improvise within limits and make them disappear.
And it's a form where personalities become developed, where the tradition of the form is so well known that deviations are instantly recognizable.


First Group of Exiles Returns to South Africa Under U.N. Amnesty
The first group of exiles to return to South Africa under an amnesty negotiated by the United Nations with the South African Government arrived in Johannesburg this morning and were greeted by a jubilant crowd.
The group of 120, who ranged in age from children clutching teddy bears to adults, were among tens of thousands who had fled over the past 15 years.
About 500 more are expected to return before the end of December.
While about 6,000 have already returned to South Africa, 30,000 more are expected to be repatriated before April 1992.


Excerpts From Rushdie's Address: 1,000 Days 'Trapped Inside a Metaphor'
Following are excerpts from a speech at Columbia University last night by Salman Rushdie.
The speech was adapted from a forthcoming essay titled "One Thousand Days in a Balloon":
Copyright $; 1991 Salman Rushdie


Ex-Bookkeeper Is Accused
The former bookkeeper of the Rodgers and Hammerstein Organization, Lea Gilchinsky, was charged yesterday with embezzling $740,000 of the organization's funds.
Ms.
Gilchinsky, 43 years old, was the organization's bookkeeper from 1981 to August 1991.
"She was discharged last August for other reasons," said Bert Fink, a spokesman for the Hammerstein Organization.
The organization was founded by Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d in 1945 and now administers the works of the musical team, including "Oklahoma," "The King and I," "South Pacific" and "The Sound of Music."


Smith Acquitted of Rape Charge After Brief Deliberation by Jury
After deliberating for 77 minutes, a jury acquitted William K. Smith today of charges that he raped a woman at the Kennedy family's Palm Beach estate one moonlit night last Easter weekend.
The jury returned its verdict at 5:10 P.M., giving startlingly short shrift to the pleas they heard from the prosecutor, Moira K. Lasch, in her final argument barely two hours before.
Waiting to hear the jurors' decision, Mr.
Smith clasped his hands and bowed his head, as if in prayer, as Judge Mary E. Lupo warned that she wanted no histrionics or any "public expression" from anyone upon the reading of the verdict.
Grinning Broadly
The judge meant what she said.
When the court clerk, Deborah Allen, announced that the jury had cleared Mr.
Smith on both counts, of sexual battery and battery, the defendant smiled, jumped up, and hugged his chief defense lawyer, Roy E. Black of Miami, and the judge cried: "Excuse me, Mr. Black! Excuse me!"


Huffman Koos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Theater; A Politically Correct 'Two Gentlemen'
Largely because of its ending, "Two Gentlemen of Verona" has always been one of Shakespeare's more problematic comedies.
How can one make psychological sense of the story of two friends, Proteus and Valentine, whose relationship is betrayed when Proteus pursues and sexually assaults his best friend's true love, Sylvia, and is then instantly forgiven?
Finding an answer to that question is a major goal of the Cucaracha Theater's gripping deconstruction of "Two Gentlemen of Verona" at SoHo Rep.
In Mark Milbauer and David Becker's adaptation, the play has been shortened and streamlined into a brutal satire of sexism in society, and directed by the adapters in what might be described as a hip-hop style.


Experts on Rape Back Smith's Acquittal
Some experts on rape and the law said yesterday that the jury in West Palm Beach, Fla., had little choice but to acquit William K. Smith of accusations lodged by a Florida woman, given the evidence it was presented.
They also said women who had been sexually assaulted should not be discouraged from reporting rape because of the verdict or the unusual amount of publicity surrounding the case.


Incinerators: Unwanted and Politically Dangerous
This is where the voters of Monmouth County decided to save the earth.
After months of watching mothers in gas masks and riot gear predict apocalypse for their tranquil community, residents here last month rejected an incinerator that had been planned -- and approved -- for nearly a decade.
It was the first referendum of its kind in the state, and it will soon leave this rapidly growing county with nowhere to put its garbage.


Virco Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


From Fistfights to Fancy Fighting
It was as a grade schooler in Kitchener, Ontario, that Lennox Lewis was expelled from classes for putting his fist through the principal's window.
"There was an argument over a soccer ball," said Lewis, an undefeated (18-0, 16 knockouts) world-ranked heavyweight.
"Just kids will be kids, and out of frustration I hit the window."


Fireman's Fund Chief Suddenly Quits Post
Joseph W. Brown Jr., chief executive of the Fireman's Fund Insurance Company, resigned abruptly on Tuesday for personal reasons, saying only that he and his wife want to be closer to relatives on the East Coast.
He will be replaced by Herbert Hansmeyer, chairman of Allianz of America, the United States unit of Allianz A.G.
Holding of Munich, Germany, which acquired Fireman's a year ago for $3.3 billion in cash.
People close to the company said that Mr.
Brown's resignation had come as a surprise to Fireman's management, and that it was believed he would soon accept a position at a competitor.
Mr.
Brown, who is 42 years old, will leave his post by the end of the month.
He had been president and chief financial officer, and became chief executive shortly after the acquisition.
At that time, Mr.
Hansmeyer, who is 50, became chairman of Fireman's Fund, which is based in Novato, Calif.


Leap to Unity in Europe
A generation from now when schoolchildren study Europe's resurgence after World War II, they may well focus on this week's summit meeting in the Dutch city of Maastricht as a decisive event.
Members of the European Community approved treaties that will forge common economic, foreign and defense policies.
The idea is to propel Europe into the 21st century as a cohesive power able to meet economic and political challenges from North America and Asia.
Agreement didn't come easily.
Bitter disputes, especially between Britain and the rest of the E.C., were only overcome by hard bargaining and compromise.
That allowed each country to leave Maastricht a victor, and Europe to claim the biggest prize of all: enhanced unity.


Agent Says Volek Is Upset And Wants to Be Traded
The agent for David Volek said yesterday the Islanders forward was seeking to be traded because no progress had been made in negotiations for a new contract with General Manager Bill Torrey.
Rich Winter, the Edmonton-based agent, said Torrey had promised to renegotiate with Volek last summer, but was not returning phone calls for further discussion.


Johnson Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Through Loophole In Tax Law, Art Gifts Pour Into Museums
The San Diego Historical Society already knows what it's getting for Christmas: a set of vintage Lionel trains.
A museum in Rhode Island has asked for an exotic 17th-century Turkish towel.
And the Whitney Museum of American Art has its heart set on a self-portrait by Chuck Close.
At the Metropolitan Museum, it's been Christmas all year.
Over the last 11 months, the Met has been given $28.3 million worth of art by donors, almost six times more than it received in 1990, including important works by Degas and Pissaro, and an outstanding collection of pre-Columbian gold.
The reason for this gift-giving bonanza is a loophole in the Federal tax law that permits donors of valuable objects to deduct their full market value on income-tax returns.
The one-year "window" was due to expire at the end of this year -- thus, the last-minute rush of giving -- but has now been extended by Congress for the first six months of 1992.


Jack F. Kincannon, Retired Executive, 72
Jack F. Kincannon, a retired top executive of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, died Dec. 3 at Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas.
He was 72 years old and lived in Dallas.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Bringing In a Wanted Man: Scores of Officers, Nothing in Writing
Early yesterday morning, a plainclothes New York City police officer boarded a plane to Washington on a highly confidential mission: to escort back to Manhattan a writer traveling under an international sentence of death.
And so Salman Rushdie was smuggled into New York for Columbia University's forum on freedom of the press last night.
Bringing in Mr.
Rushdie, the Indian-born British author whose book, "The Satanic Verses," drew him a death contract from Iranian mullahs, was a major security operation.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY SALMAN RUSHDIE EMERGES FROM HIDING
With no advance warning, Salman Rushdie emerged from his life in hiding and implored an audience at Columbia University not to forget that he remains hostage to an Iranian sentence of death.
A1 WATER WORK FALLS BEHIND
New York City's program to upgrade its water mains, sewers and tunnels has fallen behind schedule.
The Environmental Protection Department has failed to let more than $600 million in contracts -- almost half the money budgeted for the purpose.
A1


Analogic Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Students' Trucks Are Carlike
IN the year 2,000, pickup trucks may look sleek, streamlined and sporty, and still be able to carry 4-by-8-foot sheets of plywood.
That is, if students at the Art Center College of Design in Pasadena, Calif., have their way.
Students in transportation design at the college will be presenting their designs today to the two corporate sponsors of the class: the Ford Motor Company and the 3M Company.


Tyson Delay Denied
A judge in Indianapolis yesterday turned down a defense request to delay the rape trial of boxer MIKE TYSON.


Houses the Cows Would Love to Eat
IT takes stamina. It takes commitment. It takes a lot of antihistamines.
Such was life one recent Sunday morning at a festive "wall raising" outside Tucson, when 16 men and women helped Dan Dorsey build his 475-square-foot dream house insulated with straw bales.


Blue Chips Recover From an Early Selloff
In a turbulent session yesterday, the Dow Jones industrial average nudged upward 1.56 points, to 2,865.38.
After dropping sharply at midday, blue-chip stocks rebounded firmly in the afternoon, but smaller issues remained down.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy, as 207.5 million shares were traded, up from 192.9 million on Tuesday.
Losing stocks outnumbered gaining ones, 1,026 to 626.


Twins Extend Kelly
For the second time in three months, the Minnesota Twins have extended the contract of Manager TOM KELLY, this time through the 1994 season.


Sumitomo Bank
The Sumitomo Bank of Japan has agreed to extend its $500 million investment in Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company into the next century, Goldman said.
Sumitomo made the original investment in 1986, with a little-noticed escape clause that allowed either party the option to initiate a withdrawal of the investment in 1996.
Goldman said the companies had agreed to extend the earliest date for a possible withdrawal to "beyond 2001," but did not give further information.
The Sumitomo investment entitles the bank to 12.5 percent of Goldman's profits.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about Samuel K. Skinner, the newly designated White House chief of staff, misidentified the friend whom he has asked to review John H. Sununu's staff operation.
The friend is Eugene R. Croisant, executive vice president for human resources and administration at RJR Nabisco.


Ames Loses $196.3 Million
Ames Department Stores Inc. on Tuesday reported a loss of $196.3 million in the third quarter, largely because of a $147.2 million charge for the closing of 77 stores, the company said.
The results compare with a net loss of $183.2 million in the third quarter last year.


Market Place; Device to Save Infants Lifts Medical Hope, and Investors
A small California medical-equipment company is stirring hopes both in the medical community and on Wall Street.
It is developing a device that could reduce the risk that babies will be born with brain damage because of oxygen deprivation during delivery.
The device, known as a fetal oximeter, would measure the oxygen content in fetal blood during labor and delivery.
It might also allow women to avoid Caesarean sections that are performed because it appears the fetus is suffering from lack of oxygen, although in some cases they are not.


Soviet Writer Wins Dance Book Award
A Soviet writer has, for the first time, won the De la Torre Bueno Prize awarded annually in New York for the most distinguished book of dance scholarship.
Elizabeth Souritz, the head of the dance section of the Moscow Institute for the History of Arts, received the prize for her book, "Soviet Choreographers in the 1920's," published by Duke University Press.
The prize is named after the late J. R. de la Torre Bueno, who initiated the dance book publishing program at Wesleyan Press.
The award was established in 1973 by the Dance Perspectives Foundation, which seeks to promote an "understanding of dance as part of world history."


U.S. Should Take Lead on East Timor
To the Editor:
"Tears for Timor" (editorial, Nov. 21) laudably breaks the silence surrounding the appalling massacre by Indonesian soldiers in East Timor.
You omit to mention, however, several aspects of East Timor's tragedy relevant to American readers.
The United States is one of only two countries worldwide (the other being Australia) to give de jure recognition to Indonesia's illegal annexation, notwithstanding post-invasion United Nations resolutions calling for an immediate withdrawal.


Value Line Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Editor Quits At Harper's Bazaar
Ending perhaps the longest-running rumor in the fashion industry, Anthony T. Mazzola, the editor in chief of Harper's Bazaar, announced yesterday that he was stepping down.
Mr.
Mazzola has held the top editorial position at the magazine since 1972.
But recent drops in circulation and advertising revenue have fueled talk that his tenure was shaky.


New Jersey Panel Clears Officers in 2 Deaths
A statewide grand jury today found no basis for criminal charges against police officers who fatally shot two young Newark residents and wounded four others after a high-speed chase last June.
The Union County Prosecutor, Andrew K. Ruotolo, said the jury found that the failure of the police officers simply to arrest the young people, who were in a stolen van, was "tragic, avoidable and unprofessional."


Robert Maxwell's Shell Game
Robert Maxwell was hailed as a philanthropic savior when he bought New York's strike-torn, dispirited Daily News in March, just as he was when he revived London's languishing Daily Mirror in 1984.
Now, sadly, both The News and The Mirror seem little more than pawns in a vast and duplicitous game that Mr.
Maxwell was playing with other people's money.
Mr.
Maxwell deserves the blame for his financial shenanigans.
But lax British regulation contributed; it's unlikely that he would have succeeded in a country with tough financial disclosure laws, like the U.S.
And he almost certainly would not have succeeded without the complicity or inattentiveness of others, including the lenders who happily ignored his reputation as a financial rogue.
All of them loved the color of Mr.
Maxwell's money as long as he seemed to have plenty of it, and any fair and final reckoning will hold them to task as well.


W.L.A.F. Is Seeking N.F.L. Talent
The National Football League and the World League of American Football are working out a plan to have each N.F.L. team make available four players to W.L.A.F. teams, according to officials from both leagues.
The plan is expected to be approved at an N.F.L. owners' meeting in Dallas next Tuesday and Wednesday.
The stocking plan will work along geographical lines, allowing the seven World League teams in North America to take players from the N.F.L. teams in the same region.
The stocking for the three European teams has not been completely worked out yet.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 8 about several inquiries into persistent but unproven allegations that the Reagan campaign team secretly negotiated with Iran in 1980 to delay the release of American hostages misstated the location of a conference attended by William J. Casey in London that July.
Recent letters from readers point out that the conference was at the Imperial War Museum in London, not at a British air base.


Health-Mor reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Court Papers Link Election Chief to Scheme
The executive director of the New York City Board of Elections backdated campaign records last year that were submitted belatedly by a lawyer for a successful Brooklyn judicial candidate, court papers filed by the Manhattan District Attorney's office contend.
The papers identify Daniel DeFrancesco, who has been the board's director for three years, as one of the unnamed, unindicted co-conspirators mentioned in a felony indictment filed last June against Robert Allan Muir Jr., a prominent lawyer who frequently represents candidates of the Brooklyn and Staten Island Democratic organizations.
Mr.
Muir counts Borough Presidents Howard Golden of Brooklyn and Fernando Ferrer of the Bronx as clients.


It's Magic's Moment Again at the Garden
The telephone calls from his friends on the East Coast swamped Magic Johnson in Los Angeles.
They wanted to know about the rumors.
Magic was supposedly feeling ill.
Magic was having a negative reaction to AZT.
Magic could not travel to Washington to meet with President Bush or to New York for an AIDS function with Donald Trump because he has H.I.V.
What was going on with Magic?
Johnson tried dispelling the rumors yesterday afternoon at Madison Square Garden when he participated in a spirited 45-minute workout with his former coach and current Knicks coach, Pat Riley, and answered about two dozen questions afterward.
Five weeks after announcing he had contracted H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, Johnson made his first appearance in New York City and the Knicks were lucky the Los Angeles Lakers were not with him because he might have recorded a triple-double.


NO PROGRESS SEEN AT MIDEAST TALKS
The second day of Arab-Israeli peace talks in Washington concluded today with no visible progress on any front, but with none of the parties yet walking out and with the United States still leaving them to work out differences on their own.
Israelis, Jordanians and Palestinians continued to argue over who should sit in what room, and after a day of talks in a State Department corridor they failed again to bridge their differences.


Bridge
The luckiest player of 1991 may well be Richard Schwartz of Floral Park, L.I.
The evidence is the diagramed deal from the Blue Ribbon Pair Championship in Indianapolis last month, on which his own skill and a slight defensive misjudgment were needed to supplement the beneficence of the fates.
He arrived in a wildly optimistic contract of three no-trump doubled after a partnership misunderstanding: He intended his double of one no-trump to show general strength, and his partner believed that it was for take-out.
West led the heart king and shifted to the diamond nine, which was allowed to win.
He then cashed the heart ace and ten, and dummy's nine prevented East from overtaking.


PRETORIA'S AIRLINE HIRES FEW BLACKS
Among the benefits South Africa reaped from the lifting of American economic sanctions last July was the restoration of landing rights for South African Airways in the United States.
Yet South Africa's state airline, which now flies three times a week between Johannesburg and New York, lags conspicuously behind the Government of President F. W. de Klerk in the dismantling of apartheid.


Claude Hill, Writer and Professor, 80
Claude Hill, a biographer of Bertolt Brecht who was a retired Rutgers University professor, died on Tuesday at Princeton Medical Center in New Jersey.
He was 80 years old and lived in Princeton.
He had stomach cancer, said a colleague, Ralph Ley.


Estimate on Maxwells' Debts Rise
The Robert Maxwell family's private companies, which are in bankruptcy, may be laboring under far more debt than previously estimated, it was disclosed today, raising the likelihood that the companies' banks, suppliers, employees and other creditors face a loss of at least $1.6 billion.
That conclusion is based on a report prepared for the companies' bank lenders by Coopers &amp; Lybrand Deloitte, the British arm of the American accounting firm.
The report said the 25 to 30 banks were owed $:970 million ($1.75 billion) by the private companies, and the amount owed to creditors of all kinds totaled $:1.86 billion ($3.36 billion).


Islanders Are Staying Home, but Will Get a New Look
It isn't the sale to end all sales, but it has, at least for the foreseeable future, ended speculation that Long Island was on the verge of losing its only professional sports team, the New York Islanders.
The Islanders will remain on the Island, and their absentee owner, John O. Pickett Jr., will continue to hold the majority interest in the club.
But starting in January, the full operating control of the franchise will be ceded to two local investment firms that have joined forces to purchase up to 50 percent of the team.


Old Merchant's House To Reopen in Manhattan
To walk into the Old Merchant's House in Manhattan, which has nearly all its original furniture, bone china, stoneware, and coverlets, is to enter the 19th century.
The house, at 29 East Fourth Street (near the Bowery), will reopen to the public Sunday after nine months of restoration.
From 1835 to 1933, the five-story town house, a mixture of Federal and Greek Revival styles, was home to the family of Seabury Tredwell, a hardware merchant.
In 1933, Gertrude Tredwell, the last surviving daughter, died an impoverished recluse.
"But it was because of her impoverishment, her hoarding of the family's possessions, that nothing has changed," said Margaret Halsey Gardiner, executive director of the house, which has been a museum since 1936.


Smith Acquitted of Rape Charge After Brief Deliberation by Jury
After deliberating for 77 minutes, a jury acquitted William K. Smith today of charges that he raped a woman at the Kennedy family's Palm Beach estate one moonlit night last Easter weekend.
The jury returned its verdict at 5:10 P.M., giving startlingly short shrift to the pleas they heard from the prosecutor, Moira K. Lasch, in her final argument barely two hours before.
Waiting to hear the jurors' decision, Mr.
Smith clasped his hands and bowed his head, as if in prayer, as Judge Mary E. Lupo warned that she wanted no histrionics or any "public expression" from anyone upon the reading of the verdict.
Grinning Broadly
The judge meant what she said.
When the court clerk, Deborah Allen, announced that the jury had cleared Mr.
Smith on both counts, of sexual battery and battery, the defendant smiled, jumped up, and hugged his chief defense lawyer, Roy E. Black of Miami, and the judge cried: "Excuse me, Mr. Black! Excuse me!"


At Guantanamo Camp, Haitians Fret at Delay
As he waited in yet another long line in a dazzling sun, Charmant Wilfred, a lanky 22-year-old, asked a question shared by most of the thousands of Haitian refugees being held here.
"How much more time do we have to spend in this place?" Mr.
Wilfred plaintively asked a visitor.
"Are they going to allow us to go to America? What can you tell me? We know nothing here."


Charter Medical Corp reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


NEW YORK FAILING TO USE $600 MILLION FOR WATER SYSTEM
New York City's program to upgrade its long-neglected water mains, sewers and tunnels has fallen sharply behind schedule in the last year because the city's Environmental Protection Department has failed to let more than $600 million in contracts for the repair work -- almost half of the money budgeted for the purpose.
While the city authorized $1.34 billion for water and waste projects for the fiscal year that ended in July, the Environmental Protection Department spent only $711 million, according to figures obtained from the city's Office of Management and Budget.


Talking Deals; Putting a Value On Office Space
OLYMPIA &amp; YORK, the giant Toronto-based real estate and energy company, set the New York commercial property markets buzzing recently when it announced one of the only large property deals in the city this year.
But the announcement was so short on details that it raised more questions than it answered about the value of lower Manhattan office buildings.
Now, after an examination of the deal in the six weeks since it was announced, the terms of the transaction and the condition of the downtown office market confirm what many property analysts are saying: that there has been a severe and permanent loss of value in the downtown Manhattan office market, particularly among prewar and early postwar buildings.


Jack Tannen, 84, Whose Shop Of Old Books Was a Rarity, Too
Jack Tannen, a retired antiquarian bookseller whose lower Manhattan emporium was a mecca for book lovers, died early Tuesday in Memorial Hospital in Hollywood, Fla.
He was 84 years old and lived in Hollywood.
The cause of his death was not clear but was probably heart failure, his family said.


Measured Steps Toward One Europe: What Was Decided
Economic and Monetary Union
As the culmination of a three-stage process of monetary union, the community agreed to create a single currency and a regional central bank at the latest by 1999.
In a separate "opt out" protocol, Britain reserved the right to make a decision whether or not to take part at a later date.
Denmark, which supports monetary union, was required to "opt out" temporarily pending a referendum on the issue.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
"CUTTING IN" is a term professional installers use for cutting the opening in a countertop for a new kitchen or bathroom sink.
For amateurs, cutting in a sink can be a daunting project; even a small error can ruin an expensive countertop.
If you plan carefully, however, the job can be relatively easy.
Make sure the new sink fits the countertop and base cabinet supporting it.
Finding a sink that will fit between the sides of a base cabinet is seldom a problem, but finding one that will fit easily from front to back requires some work, especially if the cabinet is a European size.
These generally have less depth than American cabinets.


In the Nation; Who's Sorry Now?
Another election year is just around the corner, so here's a piece of advice that candidates for dogcatcher or President would do well to observe: Be careful what you promise.
It could come back to haunt you.
Remember George Bush in 1988, boldly telling the voters, "Read my lips"?
There would be no tax increase while he was President.
But taxes went up after two years, and the Federal deficit never stopped rising.


G.M. Hints Deep Cuts Are Ahead
Leading the latest round of corporate shrinkage, the General Motors Corporation signaled investors and employees today that deep cutbacks were in the works.
Also today, Xerox and TRW announced that they would make substantial trims.  [ Page D3. ]


Pacific Physician Services reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Mental Health Costs Slighted by H.M.O.'s
To the Editor:
The argument is being heard these days that health maintenance organizations, or H.M.O.'s, are less costly than private-sector medicine and thus a choice for businesses concerned about the escalating costs of health care.


Sea Beast Or Office Building?
THE Leviathan in Oakland, Calif., is the appropriately named office building that houses Ace Architects, a 13-year-old firm known for its highly thematic projects.
Ace's founders, David Weingarten and Lucia Howard, designed the building to look like a sea monster.
"The design is contextual," Ms.
Howard said.
"We are two blocks from the water, and six blocks from the Port of Oakland, which is full of mechanical creature-looking things -- like those cranes they use to take the containers off boats -- and huge gray ships."


Agency Advertises For Mercedes Job
In an unusual effort to get into a review, Slater Hanft Martin, New York, is advertising to be considered for the Mercedes-Benz account and its more than $90 million in billings.
The agency is running an advertisement today in The New York Times that appears on this page and page D19.
On the first page, the Mercedes logo is accompanied by text in Japanese.
A translation appears on the second page: "In today's luxury car market, you don't have the luxury of working with anyone else."


Lavalintech reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


New Sunrise for Palace
THE SUN KING has become a logo.
Last month, Jean-Baptiste Blom and Juliette Weisbuch, founders of Polymago, a graphic design agency in Paris, created a stylized blue Apollo -- the emblem of Louis XIV -- for the official logo of the national museum at Versailles.
In April, the museum announced a design competition for a new emblem for the palaces and estate at Versailles that would have instant international recognition.
Polymago was one of three design concerns that competed.


Police Seek Ex-Worker at Attack Site
New York City police officials said yesterday that they wanted to talk with a former employee of a Brooklyn store that was the scene of vandalism and an attack on its Korean-American owner and his wife on Monday.
Deputy Inspector Thomas Green, commander of Brooklyn North detective operations, said at a news conference yesterday that the police want to talk with a former employee of the store, Lee's Fancy Fruit, at 479 Nostrand Avenue, in Bedford-Stuyvesant.


On Calling People by Their Rightful Names; No Conspiracy
To the Editor:
The argument Anna Quindlen makes in "Don't Call Me Ishmael" (column, Nov. 23) is completely wrong.
She claims that women in journalism are addressed by their first names to demean them, while men are referred to by their last names.
That is simply not the case.
Listen to a Sunday morning talk show like "This Week With David Brinkley," and invariably you will hear the guests refer to George Will as "George," Sam Donaldson as "Sam" and even Mr.
Brinkley as "David."


GERMANY RAISING HOPES OF CROATIA
As expectations grow here that Germany will soon recognize Croatia, leaders of the republic say they assume the step will be followed by arms shipments or even Western military intervention to help in their uphill battle against the Yugoslav National Army.
But officers serving with the European Community mission in Croatia said on Tuesday that German recognition could well prompt the Serb-dominated army to take more territory before Croatia imports better weapons.


Camel's Success and Controversy
A ubiquitous advertising campaign that presents an anthropomorphic camel as a "smooth character" has once again come in for rough treatment.
But the latest attacks are being shrugged off by a company thrilled over the campaign's continuing success in replenishing the ranks of customers for a product that loses hundreds of thousands of consumers a year.
The campaign, for the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company's Camel cigarettes, invites consumers to identify with Joe Camel, a cartoon beast with an oversized nose.
He has a penchant for dressing up in stereotypical masculine gear like hard hats, T-shirts, skin-diving wet suits and tuxedos -- all meant to appeal to the male smokers who predominate among Camel customers.


Liberal City Elects a Moderate Mayor
A pragmatic former police chief who promised to get tough with potholes and panhandlers has won the mayor's race here, defeating the incumbent and the city's liberal establishment.
"San Franciscans believed that our city has not been working for them," the Mayor-elect, Frank Jordan, said today, as he named a transition team and promised quick attention to the city's projected $91 million budget gap.
"My priorities will be what people see as everyday problems, which cutacross every neighborhood."


In Major Gain, Alzheimer's Is Cloned in Mice
For the first time, researchers have produced genetically modified mice that develop the brain changes seen in Alzheimer's disease.
Experts predict that the achievement will greatly accelerate the pace of research on this devastating and common degenerative disease.
They say it will allow them to study how and why Alzheimer's disease progresses, to devise precise ways of diagnosing it and to test ways to stop its onslaught on the brain without conducting long experiments with human subjects that can be difficult to interpret.


Robbins &amp; Myers reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Bio-Vascular Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


The U.N. Today
General Assembly  Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Messier Deal Is All Sewn Up
General Manager Neil Smith of the Rangers yesterday announced officially Mark Messier's new five-year, $13 million-plus-incentives contract, and the two also agreed that the struggling Rangers are not playing well enough to win the Stanley Cup in the spring.
"There are still some holes that need to be mended," Smith said.
"Hopefully, they will be mended. Our whole focus is on the playoffs."


In Arizona, a Bright Christmas
IT BEGAN on Halloween, when the trick-or-treaters arrived at Frank Calph's house.
Instead of gap-toothed jack o'lanterns and leering skeletons hanging about, they saw snowmen and snowwomen playing fiddles and trumpets, elves and angels scurrying about, a river cascading down a mountain and 20,000 twinkling lights.
No time warp swept the kids into the wrong holiday.
It was just that Mr.
Calph was a little ahead of schedule with this year's tribute to Christmas.
He is the unofficial king of lights in a city where Christmas decorations have grown to phenomenal proportions in recent years.


Isuzu Signs Up For Super Bowl Spot
CBS has landed the first automotive advertiser for its telecast of Super Bowl XXVI on Jan. 26, American Isuzu Motors Inc.
During the game's second quarter, the company plans to run one 30-second spot, promoting its Rodeo sport-utility vehicle, Richard A. Gillmore, its marketing director, said yesterday.


Willoughby Brazeau, An Exporter, Dies at 87
Willoughby F. Brazeau, a retired business executive who promoted foreign-trade groups and was decorated by five nations for his service in World War II, died on Friday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 87 years old and lived in Garden City, L.I.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Rushdie, Defying Death Threats, Suddenly Appears in New York
Suddenly and with no public warning, Salman Rushdie emerged from his life in hiding last night and implored an electrified assembly at Columbia University not to forget that he remains hostage to an Iranian sentence of death.
"Free speech is the whole thing, the whole ball game," Mr.
Rushdie told the audience, which had gathered for the Graduate School of Journalism's salute to the First Amendment and Justice William J. Brennan Jr.


Ground Round Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Dinkins Aide Quits; May Run for Office
Saying that he wants to "pursue political opportunities," the New York City Personnel Director, Douglas H. White, resigned yesterday.
Mr.
White will join the law firm of Davidoff and Malito.
Sid Davidoff is a tennis partner and friend of Mayor David N. Dinkins and one of the city's most influential lobbyists.
There has been widespread speculation that Mr.
White plans to run for State Attorney General next fall.


Sybil Kooper, 66, Retired Justice Of New York Appellate Division
Sybil Hart Kooper, a retired justice of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in New York, died yesterday at her home in Brooklyn Heights.
She was 66 years old.
She died of breast cancer, a former aide said.


S.&amp; L. Industry Posts Profit For 3d Consecutive Quarter
The nation's savings and loans not under Government control were profitable in the third quarter, the third period in a row in the black and the first time since 1986 that the industry has posted earnings in three consecutive periods.
"We are cautiously optimistic that this will be the first year in a number of years the thrift industry will have a profit," Timothy Ryan, the director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, told reporters today.


Buck Clayton, Jazz Trumpeter In the Basie Orchestra, Dies at 80
Buck Clayton, a jazz trumpeter who was a star of Count Basie's orchestra in the late 1930's and early 40's, died on Sunday at a friend's home in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of natural causes, said the friend, Nancy Miller Elliott, who wrote his biography, "Buck Clayton's Jazz World."


General Mills reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 24


Jury Indicts A Detective In Gotti Leaks
William Peist seemed so dedicated to tracking Mafia secrets that he went to work on crutches, his fellow detectives recall.
But Federal authorities said yesterday that his dedication was to another cause, spying for the mobsters he was supposed to be unmasking.
For three years, according to an indictment that was unsealed yesterday, Detective Peist, a member of the elite intelligence unit in the New York City Police Department, slipped secrets to John Gotti, reputed boss of the Gambino crime family, and other organized-crime figures about undercover investigations, telephone taps and electronic bugs.
He also alerted the mobsters to pending indictments on murder and racketeering charges.


Events: Historic Houses And Holiday-Plant Sale
Orange County History  Wesley Hall, 142 Clinton Street (off Route 211), Montgomery, N.Y.; (914) 457-3457.
A self-guided tour of five houses will be held from 1 to 4 P.M. on Sunday.
Tickets, including refreshments, $10.
Seasonal Greenery  The Horticultural Society of New York, 128 West 58th Street; (212) 757-0915.


Concern About Arms Control
The Administration is confident there is no threat to American security from the Soviet upheaval, but fears that the system of nuclear arms control may be breaking down.
Page A13.


U.S. Should Take Lead on East Timor; Almost 100 Killed
To the Editor:
Congratulations on "Tears for East Timor" (editorial, Nov. 21).
Representatives of Indonesia will undoubtedly claim that news accounts of the Nov. 12 massacre were biased or erroneous.
They will assert that the incident was provoked by a small band of militants who attacked Indonesian soldiers.


Tokyo Stocks Rebound
Japanese stock prices rebounded today, but closed off their midday highs.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues rose 209.67 points, or just under 1 percent, to end the day at 21,712.57.
Earlier in the session, the index traded above 22,000.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei lost 450.16 points.


Hostetler Out for Rest of Season
Jeff Hostetler's season is over.
The Giants placed their starting quarterback on injured reserve today and signed Mike Perez, who had been with them twice previously, as a free-agent backup for the last two games.
Hostetler, a seven-year backup, won the starting job from Phil Simms in training camp.
But when Hostetler broke three bones in his back three weekends ago against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, Simms became the starter again.


Big Bargains In Air Fares Grow Scarce
A year ago the nation's airlines, desperate to increase their winter business, were widely advertising bargains like two tickets for the price of one.
Couples were flying coast to coast for just $214 a person.
This year has been different.
Air fares this winter will probably be higher than a year ago, analysts say.
A couple flying coast to coast today would pay at least $468 a person, or $378 after Jan. 15.
One reason is that three carriers -- including Midway Airlines, which helped begin the two-for-one fare war last year -- have since gone out of business.
And the surviving airlines, which are still losing money, feel more able to resist price cuts now that some competitors are gone.


Rookie Award for Daly
JOHN DALY, who won the P.G.A.
Championship in August of his first year on tour, and MICHELLE ESTILL received rookie-of-the-year awards from Golf Digest/Rolex.
Also honored by Golf Digest were ANDREW MAGEE and MEG MALLON, as the most improved professionals of 1991.
FRED COUPLES, PAT BRADLEY and MIKE HILL were named players of the year on the PGA Tour, L.P.G.A.
Tour and P.G.A.
Senior Tour, respectively, by Golf World magazine.  (AP)


Garden History, Sublime and Ridiculous
MAC GRISWOLD was brought up to believe in the value of the brisk walk, and every day after school, that was her habit. (She also got very cold at night sleeping with the windows open, but that vigorous experience didn't seep into her soul the way the walks did.)
"To me, a garden is all about walking, about the transportation of dreams," Ms.
Griswold said, pouring strong English tea into deep white cups in her West Side apartment one chilly afternoon last week.
Her family lived on the edge of the C. Ledyard Blair estate, called Blairsden, in Peapack, N.J., in what was called The Little White Cottage, even though it had 11 bedrooms.


Israel Braces for Influx From Slavic Regions
Already struggling, and in many instances failing, to cope with the tide of Jewish immigrants from the Soviet Union, Israeli officials warned today that the latest Soviet turmoil could set off a new wave of immigration that would catch this country unprepared.
Officials at the Jewish Agency who supervise the immigration said there was a potential for 400,000 new arrivals next year.
That is about three times the number they had forecast before Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia declared themselves this week to be a new "commonwealth of independent states."


Autopsy Indicates Maxwell Did Not Drown
The long-awaited autopsy report on Robert Maxwell, scheduled to be released this week, says the British publishing tycoon apparently did not die of drowning but probably suffered a heart attack, even though the autopsy found no evidence of such an attack, according to the forensic doctor who prepared the report.
Dr.
Carlos Lopez de Lamela said in a telephone interview today that the Spanish autopsy team had found that Mr.
Maxwell had a chronic lung disease and a heart ailment, including severe narrowing of the arteries.


China's Prime Minister Arrives in India
In a visit that portends major realignments in Asia, China's Prime Minister, Li Peng, arrived here today.
It was the first trip by a Chinese head of Government in more than three decades.
India, long allied with the Soviet Union, has been thrown off balance by the calamitous disintegration of its former ally and has struggled to find a handhold in a changing world order.
Now, presented with overtures from China -- like India an enormous, largely rural, developing country -- India sees the potential in establishing a new structure of international relations involving a newset of alliances.


Utley Is Transferred
MIKE UTLEY, the Detroit Lions' offensive lineman who is paralyzed from the chest down after being injured during a game on Nov. 17, has been transferred to a rehabilitation center near Denver.


Maybe Walls Go Better, Too
FOR those who find the past more comforting than the present, the Coca-Cola Company has created wallpaper that is a collage of nostalgia: Coca Cola signs and advertising campaigns from the 40's and 50's.
"There's such a trend to things well-known and secure," said Elinor Shebar, vice president and director of design for Village, a wallpaper brand made by FSC Wallcoverings in Manhattan, which has the Coke license.


Corrections
A chart on the Credit Markets page of Business Day yesterday, headed "Treasury Yield Curve," mislabeled the two yield curves for Treasury securities.
The black line represented the current yields, which are lower than the yields a month ago, shown on the white line.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
General Motors signaled investors and employees that deep cutbacks were in the works.
Robert Stempel, the chairman, said in a statement that details of the cutbacks, which were endorsed by G.M. directors, would be explained publicly next Wednesday.  [ D1. ]


Panel Urges Big Wetlands Restoration Project
A panel of scientists recommended yesterday that the United States undertake an ambitious long-term program of ecological restoration intended to move the nation beyond the Bush Administration's policy of "no net loss" of wetlands and to make damaged rivers, lakes and streams healthy again.
Failure to do so promptly, the scientists said, will lead to permanent ecological damage that would reduce the quality of American life.


Pennzoil Move On Exploration
The Pennzoil Company said it would shift the focus of its oil and gas exploration to outside the United States.
After a board meeting on Tuesday, the company said it would spend up to $100 million a year for three years on foreign exploration, along with its 1992 domestic exploration budget of about $100 million.
James L. Pate, the president and chief executive, said the increasing number of foreign areas that have become available represented "a major business opportunity."


Boston Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


On Calling People by Their Rightful Names; Hatch's Condescension
To the Editor:
I am grateful to Anna Quindlen for referring to Senator Orrin Hatch's condescension toward Judge Clarence Thomas, as he was then, in "Don't Call Me Ishmael" (column, Nov. 23).
This instance has troubled me as a woman and a lawyer, added to the first-name basis -- or worse, imagined-nickname basis -- many men regard as their due toward me.


On Calling People by Their Rightful Names
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's Nov. 23 column "Don't Call Me Ishmael," in which she talks about references to people, especially women, by first name, certainly rings a bell of sad truth.
Recently, I was in the waiting room of a personnel agency that deals primarily with middle-management positions.
I was seated next to two young men in their early 30's.
Each of us had an appointment with the owner of the agency for a job interview.
There were only the three of us waiting to be interviewed.


Du Pont Says U.S. Cleared Export Of Item Used in Iraqi Bomb Effort
UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 11 --
The American chemical producer E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said today that it had received permission from the United States Government in 1989 to sell Iraq less than 30 gallons of a special lubricant that the United Nations says was used in President Saddam Hussein's secret nuclear weapons program.
In a report issued today, the Vienna-based International Atomic Energy Agency named Du Pont as one of 10 companies whose products were used in the Iraqi nuclear program.
Du Pont was the only American company on the agency's list, although the Pennsylvania-based subsidiary of a German engineering company was also named.


Wiener Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Greta Kempton Dies; A Portrait Painter, 89
Greta Kempton, a painter whose portrait of President Harry S. Truman hangs in the White House, died on Monday at her home in New York City.
She was 89 years old.
She died of heart failure, said her daughter, Daisy Dickson of Norfolk, Va.


Legislature Drops Wage Tax by Vote Weicker Can Veto
The drive to undo Connecticut's new wage tax suffered a major setback tonight when the Senate passed a repeal bill by a majority too weak to survive a certain veto by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.
The 21-to-15 vote, in a chamber that had been viewed by repeal leaders as the legislature's fortress of anti-income tax sentiment, technically keeps the repeal plan alive and sends it back to the House.
But the majority was three short of the 24 votes needed to override a veto.
The House of Representatives approved the plan by 86 to 63 on Monday, 15 votes short of the two-thirds needed to override a veto.


Margaret Eyring Moreland, Psychologist, 76
Margaret Eyring Moreland, a psychologist who practiced in New York for many years, died on Friday at the New England Medical Center in Boston.
She was 76 years old and lived in Yarmouth Port, Mass.
She died after a brief illness, her family said.


Smith Acquitted of Rape Charge After Brief Deliberation by Jury
After deliberating for 77 minutes, a jury acquitted William K. Smith today of charges that he raped a woman at the Kennedy family's Palm Beach estate one moonlit night last Easter weekend.
The jury returned its verdict at 5:10 P.M., giving startlingly short shrift to the pleas they heard from the prosecutor, Moira K. Lasch, in her final argument barely two hours before.
Waiting to hear the jurors' decision, Mr.
Smith clasped his hands and bowed his head, as if in prayer, as Judge Mary E. Lupo warned that she wanted no histrionics or any "public expression" from anyone upon the reading of the verdict.
Grinning Broadly
The judge meant what she said.
When the court clerk, Deborah Allen, announced that the jury had cleared Mr.
Smith on both counts, of sexual battery and battery, the defendant smiled, jumped up, and hugged his chief defense lawyer, Roy E. Black of Miami, and the judge cried: "Excuse me, Mr. Black! Excuse me!"


Seton Hall's Dehere Hurt In Victory Over Rutgers
The Seton Hall Pirates had to face some questions about themselves following an embarrassing 29-point defeat to North Carolina last week.
Tonight, having to cope with the harsh and overwhelming noise of the Rutgers Athletic Center, the Pirates thought they found several solutions in their inspired 77-72 victory over the Scarlet Knights.
But at the end of a late night created by a national cable telecast, Seton Hall was still left with a serious question -- the condition of Terry Dehere's right wrist.


Metro Mobile Cts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On Calling People by Their Rightful Names; Says What He Thinks
To the Editor:
Senator Alan Simpson has been getting a lot of bad press these last few months.
He has even apologized for some of his comments.
Perhaps some of the negative press reports were deserved.
Many were not.
Anna Quindlen's "Don't Call Me Ishmael" (column, Nov. 23), chastising Senator Simpson for referring to her by her first name is a good example of unnecessary, hypersensitive criticism.


Brooklyn College Firsts: Marshall and Rhodes
They are classmates now in Brooklyn, and they will be classmates next fall at Oxford University in England: the first Rhodes Scholar and the first Marshall Scholar in the 61-year history of Brooklyn College.
Lisette Nieves, the Rhodes Scholar, is a campus politician who said she hoped to go into local politics, "and also to do well at Oxford." Toba Friedman, the Marshall Scholar, has a 4.0 grade-point average and is concentrating on English history.
She said she had not planned on going to college at all, much less graduate school.


THE EUROPEAN SUMMIT: Europe at Crossroads; Leaders Return From Meetings Confident That Region Will Move Onward to Union
After the deadlocks, squabbles and veto threats that frequently marred their negotiations, European Community leaders returned home today confident that their two-day summit meeting here would be remembered as a turning-point in the region's decades-old integration process.
At first sight, it might seem more out of political necessity than outright conviction that all 12 leaders cheerfully asserted early today that they had achieved their main objectives, not least because France and Germany were aiming to speed regional unity while Britain was intent on slowing it.


Now It's Pfizer on a Roll In a High-Risk Business
After seven dry years without important new drugs, Pfizer has broken through with a cornucopia of winners.
New products are already generating $1.1 billion this year for the big New York-based health-care company, pushing its pharmaceutical sales to $3.8 billion from $3.2 billion in 1990 and making Pfizer's drug unit one of the largest in the world.
The next few weeks may be especially kind to Pfizer Inc..
The company expects soon to bring out three more drugs -- for depression, heart failure and chlamydia, a common sexually transmitted disease -- that, with adroit marketing and some luck, might each have sales of $500 million by 1995.
And Pfizer is increasing its earnings per share by pulling out of less profitable fields like commodity chemicals and buying back 10 million shares of common stock.
Payoff From Research
Pfizer's successes illustrate the rewards available to drug companies willing to invest heavily in research even when it hurts.
The company quadrupled its research spending in the 1980's.
Pharmaceutical companies rise and fall on the enormous profits from innovative drugs, like Glaxo's Zantac for ulcers and Merck's Mevacor for high cholesterol.
Getting such products to market often takes years, and hundreds of millions of dollars, but the payoff is sometimes counted in billions.


Algerian Opposition Undecided on Elections
Two weeks before Algeria's first free parliamentary elections are scheduled to take place, it is still unclear whether the largest opposition group, controlled by Islamic fundamentalists, will take part.
Algerian experts say a decision by the fundamentalists to stay out of the elections would seriously dilute what is being viewed as a significant advance for democracy in the Arab world, even given Algeria's constraints on political activity.
A fundamentalist boycott would raise the prospect of new strikes and renewed clashes between the army and Muslim militants of the opposition group, the Islamic Salvation Front.


ARMS ISSUE DRIVES U.S. SOVIET POLICY
While confident that there is no threat to American security from the Soviet upheaval, the Bush Administration believes the system of control over Soviet nuclear weapons is in danger of breaking down and that the breakaway republics have not yet worked out a way to replace it, officials said today.
As Washington watched a growing number of republics support the commonwealth formed by Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia, the safety of Soviet nuclear weapons has become the driving force behind American policy on the rapid changes in what Margaret D. Tutwiler, the State Department spokeswoman, has taken to calling "the former Soviet Union."


Computer Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Washington at Work; Dole, Bush's Point Man in the Senate, Is Considering Life Behind the Lines
Bob Dole did more with less in the last session of Congress, extricating his party from White House-made difficulties on civil rights and unemployment benefits.
But the Republican leader of the Senate sounds tired of keeping the increasingly fractious, dwindling Republican minority together.
And if his party lost still more seats, the senior Senator from Kansas said in a recent interview, "about all you could do is frustrate the majority. You couldn't deal with them. You could frustrate them, drag things along, irritate people, which you'd have to do."


Mariners Obtain Mitchell From Giants for 3 Pitchers
Kevin Mitchell, his big bat and his big salary were shipped north from San Francisco to Seattle today.
The Mariners had sought a big bat, but their willingness to accept a big salary surprised executives of other clubs.
"The conversation we had with them was such that I didn't think they were interested in anyone's $3 million player," said Al Harazin, the Mets' general manager, who earlier in the week was rebuffed in his offer of Kevin McReynolds for one of the Mariners' top two pitchers, Erik Hanson or Randy Johnson.
Late tonight, Harazin sent McReynolds to Kansas City in a five-player deal that brought Bret Saberhagen to New York.


It Sounds Radical, But It Makes Sense
With expansion to Tampa and Ottawa almost a certainty for next season, the National Hockey League faces a major political problem with divisional realignment.
Despite hours of log-rolling last week at the Board of Governors meeting, the executives couldn't divide the 24 teams into four groups of six in a way that would please the necessary two-thirds majority.
They will try again in January.
The solution, which seems radical at first but makes sense on further thought, is to form a division based partly on proximity and partly on the lack of it, while keeping three other divisions based predominately on geography.
The last would be the Bicoastal Division, linking the Atlantic and the Pacific.


Kleinman To Pursue Suit Against Vincent
A suddenly defiant Leonard Kleinman, the Yankees' chief operating officer, said today that he had no intention of dropping a lawsuit against Commissioner Fay Vincent.
By taking the stance, Kleinman has not only refused to remove a roadblock that would prevent him from receiving any support from major league baseball in his attempt to succeed Robert Nederlander as the team's general partner.
He has also left in place the same sort of obstacle that Vincent himself placed before deposed Yankees owner George Steinbrenner.
The commissioner has said Steinbrenner cannot apply for reinstatement as long as any of the lawsuits filed against Vincent in wake of his banishment remain alive.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
CHILDREN, and adults for that matter, tend to receive mixed messages about when and how they should touch each other.
While certain types of touch are clearly off limits, the publicity surrounding the sexual abuse and exploitation of children over the last few years has made parents and teachers -- especially male teachers -- question the appropriateness of many expressions of physical affection.
"A lot of men are scared that if they hug a child or pat a head or rub a shoulder that they'll be accused of sexual abuse," said Dr.
Alice Sterling Honig, a professor of child development at Syracuse University.
In some child-care centers, she said, those fears are so strong that men are not allowed to change girls' diapers.


CHRONICLE
A furor has erupted in South Africa over a remark attributed to the country's contender for the 1991 Miss World crown.
Miss Nigeria, ABENIKE OSHINOWO, said Miss South Africa, DIANA TILDEN-DAVIS, told her that few blacks entered her country's pageant because most black women "fall pregnant by the age of 15."


Diner's Journal
Goodbye, Prunelle, Hello, San Pietro
The family that owns Sistina, the northern Italian restaurant at 1555 Second Avenue, near 80th Street, has taken over the former Prunelle, 18 East 54th Street, with plans for another Italian restaurant there.


Volek Says He's Looking for Fairness
In what seems to be the latest Islander tradition, David Volek, the forward who defected from Czechoslovakia in 1988 to join the club, has expressed his dissatisfaction with the Islanders' handling of his contract and has requested a trade as his last resort.
Volek, a 25-year-old native of Prague, was second in team scoring last season with 56 points.
"They make promises, promises and now I start losing my belief that anything will get done," Volek said yesterday from his home in Huntington, L.I.
"I don't really want to be traded. I like the players, and I think we have a good team now. I just want them to be fair with me and I'm disappointed."


Smith Juror Says First Vote Made 'Not Guilty' Obvious
One of the six jurors in the William K. Smith rape trial said today that the jury had taken a secret ballot at the start of deliberations and that all jurors voted either "not guilty" or "undecided."
"We walked in and everyone was very nervous, very insecure," said the juror, Lea Haller, in an interview at her home in the nearby town of Lake Worth.
"Nobody had any idea what anybody else thought." But after the first ballot, she said, "it was easier from there on out."


Kasler Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Visions of Sugarplums And Puns
WHAT is it about the holiday season that inspires advertising agencies to play with words so freely?
Commercials and advertisements bursting with puns and other wordplays are inundating consumers this month, for products from cameras and soft drinks to cereal and underwear.
Even ads for so-called sin products, like cigarettes and liquor, are joining in.


Moscow Misery: The Planes Don't Fly and That's Not All
The Soviet state is not the only thing falling apart in Moscow these days.
On any day on any half-mile stretch of the Ring Road, the city's main artery, chances are that one or two, even three, cars, trucks or buses will break down, run out of gas, burst into flames or cause an accident.


Esterline Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


BRIEFS
*
Chiron Corp. and Cetus Corp., both of Emeryville, Calif., completed their $660 million merger.
The new organization, which will bear the Chiron name, becomes the nation's third-largest biotechnology company. *
Corning Asahi Video, a maker of glass for television picture tubes and unit of Corning Inc., Corning, N.Y., said it had sold its Corning Asahi de Mexico unit to two Mexican investors for an undisclosed price.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


What's in a Name? It's Not Quite Clear
In all the debate about the new Commonwealth of Independent States proclaimed by the three Slavic Presidents, one question often posed, and as often evaded, is what the name really means.
The word in Russian is "sodruzhestvo," which can mean either community or commonwealth.
In the context of the proclamation, it was evidently meant to mean something resembling the European Community, though the documents allowed a wide leeway in interpretation.


Disney Picks California Theme Park Site
The Walt Disney Company said today that it had chosen a site adjacent to Disneyland in Anaheim, Calif., for its next theme park, ending consideration of a competing site in Long Beach, Calif.
Disney executives stopped short of guaranteeing that the project would be built.
They said the company must still deal with a number of environmental, regulatory and economic issues related to building in an increasingly congested urban area.


The Spoken Word
READING, Columbia University, Altschul Auditorium, 420 West 118th Street, Manhattan.
Roger Rosenblatt will perform his "Free Speech in America," today at 4 P.M.
Admission is free.
Information: (212) 854-4150.
LECTURES AND GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
"Virtue and Power in Renaissance Portraiture," by Andrew Butterfield, today at 11 A.M.; "Neo-Impressionism: Friends and Followers of Georges Seurat," by Patrick McGrady, today at 6 P.M.; "The Totem in Art," by Barbara Larsen, tomorrow at 11 A.M.; "Understanding 20th-Century Art: Abstract Expressionism," by Gail Stavitsky, tomorrow at 7 P.M.; "Poetic Motifs in Chinese Painting," by Richard Pegg, Sunday at 11 A.M.; All free with museum admission of $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3764.
WALKING TOURS AND LECTURE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Family Matters: An Immigrant Memoir," a dramatization of the lives of immigrant children, Sunday at noon, followed at 1 P.M. by "The Streets Where We Lived," a walking tour of the Lower East Side, and at 2 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a lecture on the history of the Tenement Museum building.
Fee: $12 for each walking tour ($10 for the elderly and students); lecture, $4.
Information: (212) 431-0233.


Mackovic Goes to Texas But Will Miss El Paso
Illinois Coach JOHN MACKOVIC is going to Texas, but not with his team for the John Hancock Bowl game in El Paso.
Mackovic's destination is Austin, where he will take over the Longhorn program.
Mackovic, who had coached the Kansas City Chiefs in the 1980's and compiled a 30-16-1 record and earned four bowl appearances in four years at Illinois, replaces DAVID MCWILLIAMS, who was forced out after posting a 5-6 record just a year after winning the Southwest Conference championship.
Mackovic will reportedly earn $600,000 a year for five years.


CPI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 9


Books of The Times; Haunted by Death and a Sense That the Past Lives On
Edgar A. Poe Mournful and Never-Ending Remembrance By Kenneth Silverman 564 pages.
HarperCollins. $27.50.
Death, loss and the persistence of the past: these are the themes that animate the poetry and tales of Edgar Allan Poe.
In "Ligeia," a mysterious woman dies of a lingering illness but continues to haunt her husband's memories; when his second wife dies, she appears to take possession of the corpse's body.
In "The Fall of the House of Usher," a man becomes convinced that his twin sister, who's buried in the family vault, is still alive.
In "The Narrative of A. Gordon Pym," the hero stows away on a whaler, enduring all manner of adventures before meeting the ghostly figure of Death near the South Pole.
And in "The Mask of the Red Death," Death haunts the countryside, putting in an unexpected appearance at a party of revelers, who had always believed it was "folly to grieve, or to think."


U.S. Seeks Way To Redistribute Vaccine for Flu
With many Government clinics running out of influenza vaccine, Federal health officials said today that they were joining with manufacturers to find ways to redistribute the vaccine to areas with shortages.
Distributers of influenza vaccine reported two weeks ago that they were running out of vaccine because of unexpectedly heavy demand after the health officials warned that the predominant flu virus this year, Type A, would be unusually widespread and deadly.


EXECUTIVES
*
Chevron Resources Co., San Francisco, the minerals subsidiary of Chevron Corp., announced that Bob Daniel, president, would retire at the end of the year. *
Kellogg Co., Battle Creek, Mich., promoted Donna J. Banks, Ph.D., to the position of vice president-research, from director-cereal product development in the research department.


Verdicts in West Palm Beach
The swiftness of William Kennedy Smith's acquittal strongly suggests that the jury had far more than the reasonable doubt required to find him not guilty in his famous rape case.
During the hour and a quarter they took to elect a foreman and fill out a verdict form, the jurors placed the burden on the state, where it belongs, and quickly recognized that the prosecution had failed to meet it.
Does this mean that it was unjust and a waste of judicial resources even to put Mr.
Smith on trial?
Not by any means.


How White House Is Pushing Congress Aside; The New Rules
To the Editor:
Tom Wicker is indignant in "Bypassing Congress" (column, Nov. 28) about the Bush Administration's behavior on the "gag rule," the Civil Rights Act of 1991, and the Council on Competitiveness.
These cases suggest a new legislative process:


Quotation of the Day
"It's goodbye to the mafia." -- RONALD CAREY, who has apparently been elected president of the teamsters union.  [ A29:1. ]


3 Democrats Lay Out School Agendas
Seeking the endorsement of a national teachers' union, three Democratic Presidential candidates today unveiled education plans in an effort to seize the mantle of "education president" that President Bush has been claimed but struggled to own.
The candidates -- Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, and former Senator Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts -- spoke in separate 15 minute segments at the National Education Association and used the opportunity to talk about their domestic agendas as well.
The audience of about 400 included the 100-member board of directors of the National Education Association, and the organization's 50 state presidents.


Interpoint Corp. reports earnings for Year to Oct 31


Associated Natural Gas reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Review/Theater; Bah, Humbug May Never Be the Same
Broadway ticket prices are up and many theaters are dark, but "Forbidden Broadway" is wishing everyone a merry Christmas, or rather "Merry Bah, Humbug." For a seasonal offering, Gerard Alessandrini, the author and impresario behind this long-running revue, has gift-wrapped a "Forbidden Christmas."
The new show at Theater East starts jauntily with two of the actors pretending to be boorish latecomers arriving with big brown shopping bags and shoving their way into occupied seats.
In other words, "Forbidden Christmas" begins on a note of stark reality.


New Reebok Line Begins a Campaign
Toth Design, one of several agencies for Reebok International Ltd., has begun a campaign for a new line of Reebok casual footwear to be called Boks.
The agency, in Carlisle, Mass., has been running advertisements for the line, minus the Boks name, in such magazines as Rolling Stone and GQ.
The name will be introduced next fall as part of a campaign budgeted at $8 million.


Parking Meters Will Only Drive Away the Loyal Theatergoers
To the Editor:
As a Broadway theatergoer for more than 30 years, I find the reasons given by New York City's Transportation Department for metered parking in the theater district after 7 P.M. absurd (news article, Nov. 25).
If the department said it was putting in meters as a source of revenue, I would believe it.
To declare that parking for the theater is otherwise impossible is a lie, weekends excepted.


How White House Is Pushing Congress Aside
To the Editor:
Re "Making Law Backward" (editorial, Nov. 27), on the "gag rule," which prohibits discussion of the abortion alternative in Title X-funded clinics: The gag rule reflects a shift in authority from Congress to the President that has vested the executive branch with the power to legislate by drafting rules and regulations having the force of law.


Don't Paint Killer With Such Sympathy
To the Editor:
It is appalling that you compare Daniel Doyle, who stabbed a man to death in a gay-bashing attack in July 1990, to Julio Rivera, his victim (news article, Nov. 18), and even worse, that you present the killer as a good boy.


Long-Term Rates Fall on Reports
Long-term interest rates moved lower yesterday, helped by an inflation report that was better than expected, as well as by declines in gold and commodity prices, two inflation indicators that are monitored closely by private analysts, as well as by Government officials.
In addition, bond prices benefited from a Commerce Department report that showed the Christmas buying season got off to a slow start in November, as well as from comments by Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady, who once again said he was favorably disposed to issuing more short-term Government securities to help push down long-term bond yields.


At Last, a Balm to Soviet Pain
The news that the Bush Administration will begin airlifting food to stricken Soviet cities next week is heartening on two counts.
The Soviet people need the food, and the reassurance, desperately.
And President Bush's willingness to provide it suggests that Washington may finally be waking up to Moscow's terrible plight.
There is more to be done, and soon.
The Central Intelligence Agency warns of imminent "civil disorder" on a scale not seen since the Bolsheviks consolidated power.
The republics will need help as they begin to decontrol prices.
They will also need assistance to cushion the shock of demobilizing much of the Soviet military machine.


Getty Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Legal Aid Lawyers Stop Work to Protest Judge's Treatment of One of Their Own
More than 100 Legal Aid Society lawyers staged a wildcat walkout and a demonstration at the Brooklyn Criminal Courts yesterday afternoon to protest what they called the outrageous treatment of a tardy Legal Aid lawyer who was held in contempt, removed from court and handcuffed to a chair for 20 minutes last week in a contretemps with a Criminal Court judge.
The lawyers also accused the judge, Bernadette Bayne, of inviting them into her courtroom for an apology yesterday and then using the occasion to restate her position and to make what they called "malicious and false allegations" against the Legal Aid lawyer, Michelle Myers.


Bush Signs S.&amp; L. Bill
President Bush today signed a bill providing $25 billion for four months to cover savings and loan failures, but he urged Congress to provide more when it returns next month.
The bill "provides only a part of the funds requested by the Administration, which are urgently needed to protect depositors' accounts," Mr.
Bush said in a statement.


Goodmark Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 24


Heyward Is Suspended
Injured fullback CRAIG HEYWARD was suspended without pay for the rest of the season on Thursday by New Orleans Coach JIM MORA, who said the move had nothing to do with pending assault charges brought by two women.
"He has been suspended for the rest of this season for a series of violations of club policy," Mora said, without elaborating.
The suspension would include the playoffs if the Saints qualify, Mora said.


GTC Transcontinental reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


S. I. Cable Deal Is Set
Time Warner Cable, which runs cable systems in three of the five boroughs of New York City, will take over the operation of the cable system in a fourth borough, Staten Island, under an agreement announced yesterday.
The agreement between Cox Cable Communications and the Gilbert Communications Company calls for Time Warner Cable to join the partnership that owns Staten Island Cable, which has 63 channels and 70,000 customers.
Cox and Time Warner plan to buy out Gilbert's interest for a price the companies did not disclose.
Cox will take over the operation of a Time Warner's system in Florida.


People
*
Robert Horne has been named senior vice president and group director at Griffin Bacal Inc., New York.
He had previously held a similar position at Hill, Holiday, Connors, cosmopulos, New York.


For Children
Bloomingdale's *
1000 Third Avenue, at 59th Street, second floor; (212) 705-2000.
SETTING: The store has pushed aside a few hundred square feet of teen-age fashions to create a pint-size toy department and a niche for Santa.
The squalling of tail-wagging windup dogs nearly drowns out the gentleman's kind words.
His throne stands at the back of a faux forest made of twigs studded with iridescent plastic snow.
Twig barricades and mirrored columns encourage his fans to form an S-shaped line, although waits are rarely long.
APPEARANCE: Instead of boots, he wears cheap black spats over black shoes; his fake-fur cuffs show signs of dirt, and in the case of the afternoon and evening Santa, gray makeup smeared on his eyebrows does not hide his extreme youth.
BELIEVABILITY: His voice is reedy and unenthusiastic.
He peruses a newspaper when no children are waiting.
He almost never emits ho, ho, ho's, and he takes breaks in mid-shift, complaining of an overheated head.
PHILOSOPHY: "Whether the kids get their pictures taken or not, I treat them the same."
LAP COMFORT: Usually not called into play because his twig bench with a white cushion accommodates two.
SOUVENIRS: Coloring books, buttons that verify "I Saw Santa at Bloomingdale's" and magic pads whose plastic top sheets lift and erase their scratched-on contents are free.
Packages of instant pictures start at $9.99.
BEST SCENE: Four teen-age boys were tossing a basketball into a hoop whose computerized backboard kept score; Santa tried to join them and was ignored.
BEST STORY: "One kid asked for a gun that shoots real spider webs. When we get requests like that, we say, 'We don't make that at the North Pole.' " Saks **  611 Fifth Avenue, at 49th Street, eighth floor, (212) 753-4000.
SETTING: The Ralph Lauren approach to Santa Land.
In a corner of the boys' department, flanked by shelves full of Babars and Gund dogs, he poses in front of a Colonial-style white staircase crowded with more stuffed toys.
A red flowered carpet lies at his feet, and in front of him a table covered with luxurious paisley cloth supports a Polaroid camera like the ones used at the motor vehicle bureau.
The lines are always short, mainly because the store's chic atmosphere and dearth of toys discourages parents from lugging children in.
APPEARANCE: The plush suit with fake-fur trim is inoffensive, as is the white makeup on the eyebrows.
A stray smear of blush on the hat's trim spoils the effect slightly, and the beard is even worse.
Suitably long but absurdly well-groomed, it snakes to his lap like tresses in a Vidal Sassoon ad.
BELIEVABILITY: Warm but not quite jolly, he softly hums along with the piped-in Christmas carols during lulls and advises frightened toddlers clinging to their parents to return next year.
PHILOSOPHY: "I'd like to do this year after year unless something in my line of work" -- that is, acting -- "comes up. It sure helps me get into the spirit of the season."
LAP COMFORT: Slightly bony and slippery.
SOUVENIRS: Pins that read "I Saw Santa at Saks" are free.
Instant photos in paper frames cost $9.
BEST SCENE: Adhering to the Christmas spirit of honesty over employer loyalty, Santa tells an 11-year-old in search of a good Nintendo, "You're better off at F. A. O. Schwarz."
BEST STORY: "A little girl asked for books, just books, and I said, 'A random selection?' and she said, 'Yes, a random selection.' " Macy's *  34th Street and Broadway, eighth floor, (212) 695-4400.
SETTING: The store attracts such crowds at Christmastime that it has mounted a large-scale Santa production.
Dozens of perky elves guide visitors through a maze that meanders past toy trains circling hills, wooden elves laboring over dolls and Mrs.
Claus emptying the mailbox.
Two options are available: you can merely glimpse the big-bellied celebrity through a murky cabin window, or you can actually meet the jolly old gent.
Lines for the former are brief, since an elf at the window keeps gazers moving smartly; lines for the latter can last up to an hour.
At the entrance to the inner sanctum, an elf asks "How many in your party?" and then leads you to a Santa in a stuffy, toy-filled cubicle.
Only when you exit does the illusion of the single Santa shatter; the cubicle you have left adjoins a row of identical structures, and jolly laughs and camera flashes emanate from all of them.
At least four Santas are working the crowds in there. (Macy's Santa policies were in the news recently when the store refused to rehire a Santa who has tested positive for H.I.V. Macy's said that the decision not to hire the worker this season was based on medical advice, and that he rejected a better job at a higher salary.)
APPEARANCE: A leather bracelet studded with reindeer bells adds an unusual twist to the typical red suit and black boots.
The fake eyebrows are overdone, however; they are so long and stringy that they look like bleached versions of Liza Minnelli's eyelashes.
The mustache's curled ends are too tight to seem natural.
BELIEVABILITY: His manner is so sweet and cheerful that it verges on cloying.
PHILOSOPHY: "I've got the best job on earth," Santa said with a straight face, apparently unwilling to step out of character even for an instant.
LAP COMFORT: Warm and well padded.
SOUVENIRS: Free paper antlers promise, "We're a part of your life." Photos start at $9.50 and are mailed several weeks after they are snapped, so they'll arrive too late for Christmas giving.
BEST SCENE: Santa managing to wave with enthusiasm at the constant stream of faces peering through the window.
BEST STORY: "Peace on earth -- that's the weirdest thing I've been asked for so far." A&amp;S Plaza ***  100 West 33d Street, seventh floor, (212) 465-0500.
SETTING: Befitting the mall's garishness, a white canopy 20 feet overhead hangs golden spheres, pine bowers and light bulbs over Santa.
Trees mummified with gold ribbon surround his gilded throne, and at his feet Mrs.
Claus (this Santa's real-life wife) works a Polaroid camera.
Lines are never long, partly because few signposts downstairs mention his presence.
APPEARANCE: Norman Rockwell would be pleased.
Santa's chest-length beard and straggly white locks are real, and so is the jiggly belly that protrudes far into his lap.
And the fur on his stretchy red suit is so genuine it even sheds.
BELIEVABILITY: His voice is suitably gruff, and deep crinkles form at the corner of his twinkling eyes when he smiles.
What he lacks in ebullience -- only rarely does he venture past a chuckle -- he counteracts with visual verisimilitude and appeal to the young.
Most of the children he lifts to his lap then must be wrenched away.
PHILOSOPHY: "I've had teen-age kids come up to me and say that because of the way I look, they believe again, and that makes it all worthwhile."
LAP COMFORT: Superior.
The belly is warmer than any padding, and the knees bend at the perfect angle, thanks to a carpeted footrest that Santa engineered for just that purpose.
SOUVENIRS: A set of four crayons and a white paper bag with a Santa sketch to color are free.
Instant photos start at $7.39.
BEST SCENE: Santa letting the pleasingly plump Mrs.
Claus leap into his lap several times an hour to demonstrate its sturdiness.
BEST STORY: A man brought his 8-year-old daughter to Santa's lap and then disappeared for several hours, causing the Clauses great anxiety.
Still, said Mrs.
Claus, "most New Yorkers we've met couldn't be nicer."
South Street Seaport ****
At Pier 17 and the second floor of the Fulton Market Building, (212) 732-7678.
SETTING: Santa strolls through his two haunts, pausing occasionally at Christmas tree-shaped benches for photo sessions.
APPEARANCE: In a rustic, old-fashioned take on Santa's style, he sports a green wool cape, a green-and-red lumberjack shirt, calf-high black boots, a dangling leather strip of bells, a red velvet sack of goodies and a red apron with pockets full of candy canes.
The flesh-colored tape that attaches his beard and mustache is visible but not obtrusive.
BELIEVABILITY: This is a Santa who loves his work.
He can tell the same joke a dozen times an hour, cheering one shopkeeper after another; gracefully escape from giggling gangs of teen-age mall loafers intent on pulling his beard, and hand candy canes to little girls while solemnly reminding them to eat lunch first.
The sparkle in his blue eyes seems sincere, and his mellifluous voice carries traces of an upper-crust British accent that befits a longtime resident of the North Pole.
PHILOSOPHY: "I never promise anything."
LAP COMFORT: Rarely called for, since he almost never sits still.
SOUVENIRS: Candy canes and instant photographs are free.
BEST SCENE: Santa trying out an exercise machine on view in the atrium at Pier 17 and laughing off passers-by' jibes at his unyielding belly.
BEST STORY: "A little boy told me, 'I know why Santa is fat: because that's where the elves come from.' And I said, 'You mean, Mrs. Claus has the elves?' and he said, 'No, she has babies. It's Santa who has the elves.' "
What the candy canes  [ stars ]  mean:
(None) Poor to satisfactory
* Good
** Very good
*** Excellent
**** Extraordinary


Some Offbeat Offerings
Here is a sampling of holiday celebrations in New York City.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted.
Today
SYMPHONY SPACE, Broadway at 95th Street, Manhattan.
A celebration of the winter solstice with Celtic music and dance, featuring the Straw Boys Mummers; the singers Margaret Bennett and Norman Kennedy; the piper and fiddler Martyn Bennett; the dancer Karen Campbell, and the Greenwich Morris Men, a dance ensemble; Henry Chapin, director; Jerome Epstein, music director. 8 P.M.
Also tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 1 and 5 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $30 ($7.50 to $15 for children).
Information: (212) 864-5400.
CHURCH OF ST.
IGNATIUS LOYOLA (Roman Catholic), 980 Park Avenue, at 84th Street, Manhattan.
"Herod and the Innocents," a 12th-century musical drama with staging by Phillip Burton.
Ensemble for Early Music; Frederick Renz, director. 8 P.M.
Also tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 and $25.
Information: (212) 749-6600.
Sunday
ST.
PETER'S CHURCH (Episcopal), Eighth Avenue at 20th Street, Manhattan.
A reading of Clement Clarke Moore's "Visit From St. Nicholas," and a service of lessons and carols.
Combined choirs of the Chelsea Community Church and St.
Peter's Church; Susie Mee, reader; John Eggleston, organist and director. 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 691-7288 or (212) 929-2390.
Thursday
THE CATHEDRAL OF ST.
JOHN THE DIVINE (Episcopal), Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street, Manhattan.
Paul Winter Consort Winter Solstice Whole Earth Christmas Celebration.
The Paul Winter Consort, Dimitri Pokrovsky Singers, a Russian ensemble; Noirin Ni Riain, singer. 8 P.M.
Also Dec. 20, same time, and Dec. 21 at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18 and $25.
Information: (212) 662-2133.
Dec. 22
ST.
BARTHOLOMEW'S CHURCH (Episcopal), Park Avenue and 50th Street, Manhattan.
Pageant of the Holy Nativity, with music by David McK.
Williams; choir and members of the parish; James Litton, director, 4 P.M.
Information: (212) 751-1616, extension 226.
CATHEDRAL OF ST.
JOHN THE DIVINE (Episcopal), Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Manhattan.
Dramatic reading of Clement Clarke Moore's "Visit From St. Nicholas" and carol sing-along.
Cathedral Choristers; Johnson Flucker, conductor; Dorothy Papadakos, organist; John McDonough, narrator. 3:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10 ($5 for the elderly and children).
Information: (212) 662-2133.
Dec. 24
CHURCH OF THE HEAVENLY REST (Episcopal), 2 East 90th Street, Manhattan.
Children's Christmas pageant with tumblers, live animals, angels and shepherds. 3:30 and 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 289-3400.
Dec. 31
CATHEDRAL OF ST.
JOHN THE DIVINE (Episcopal), Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street, Manhattan.
Ninth New Year's Eve Concert for Peace, featuring the Brooklyn Philharmonia Orchestra; Lukas Foss, conductor. 7:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 662-2133.


A Hospital on the Move


Palm Beach Journal; Verdict Leaves Society Free to Play
At Au Bar, it was back to business as usual early this morning.
Around a noisy bar, middle-age men in silk shirts open just enough to offer a glimpse of chest hair and gold chains raised their glasses to fashionably dressed women half their ages.


Times and Drivers Reach 9-Year No-Strike Accord
The New York Times yesterday reached a settlement extending to the year 2000 with the union for its drivers.
The paper's publisher expressed hope that the agreement would set a pattern for other union contracts and speed the opening of The Times's new printing plant in Edison, N.J., early next year.
In the agreement, the Newspaper Mail and Deliverers' Union of New York and Vicinity effectively won job security and various financial incentives in exchange for concessions intended to reduce The Times's costs significantly, and for a pledge not to strike.


Review/Photography; Documentarian and His Descendants
By the time of his death in 1978, W. Eugene Smith had become a kind of patron saint of documentary photography.
In the photographic essays he produced for Life and Parade magazines, he pioneered a way of working in which he would spend weeks and even months on a story to produce a detailed, behind-the-scenes record of a social situation.
For many, Smith's brand of photojournalism remains an ideal of what can be done with the medium.
After Smith's death, a group of friends established an award that is given each year to a photographer working in his tradition.
"The Legacy of W. Eugene Smith: 12 Photographers in the Humanistic Tradition," now on view at the International Center of Photography Midtown, offers an extensive selection of Smith's own photographs, as well as work by each of the winners of the award.
The result throws into sharp relief the scope and nature of Smith's achievement, while raising troubling questions about the continuing viability of the style he pioneered.


Worthington Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Dow Up 29.75, to 2,895.13, After Retail Report
Stocks rose smartly yesterday, as the Dow Jones industrial average climbed 29.75 points, to 2,895.13.
The Dow jumped in the morning in reaction to an unexpectedly upbeat retail sales report, then wavered somewhat at midday and rose gradually through the afternoon to close near the session high.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy, at 193 million shares, and gaining issues outnumbered losing ones by 1,044 to 603.


A Capital Tradition


Market Place; The Zero-Coupon Question Mark
WHEN interest rates fall, there is no better investment than a zero-coupon bond, Wall Street used to believe.
For the last several months, however, the prices of zero-coupon bonds have badly underperformed the prices of the similar Treasury bonds, particularly for the longest maturities.


Handley Schools Rookies on How They Can Become Giants Veterans
The Giants, according to Coach Ray Handley, have no more rookies.
Handley met today with his first-year players and told them their rookie seasons were over, that the two remaining games were a forerunner to next year.
The Super Bowl champions go into Sunday's game against the Redskins in Washington with a 7-7 record, and they have been eliminated from playoff contention.


Yeltsin and Gorbachev: So Far Apart
Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Boris N. Yeltsin, rival Presidents in a desperate process, could find agreement today only in a grim metaphor.
They debated separately exactly when the graveyard marker should be judged as firmly affixed above the corpse of the Soviet Union.
Not quite yet, advised Mr.
Gorbachev, the Soviet President, insisting that he must remain in office a little longer to keep watch for more certain evidence of the union's death.


At the Bar; But for the 14th Amendment, the Bill of Rights might not guarantee very much.
First came Caroline Kennedy on all the talk shows, promoting "In Our Defense: The Bill of Rights in Action," (Morrow) the best-seller she and a law school classmate wrote to dramatize issues like the death penalty and freedom of the press.
Then there was Life magazine's special issue on the Bill of Rights, complete with analysis of each of the constitutional amendments, 1 through 10.


Clemens Acquitted
Chalk up another victory for ROGER CLEMENS, this time in a Texas courtroom.
The three-time Cy Young Award winner, who had been charged with hindering the arrest of his brother, GARY CLEMENS, during an incident at a Houston bar in January, was acquitted yesterday after the judge directed the jury to return a verdict of not guilty on the misdemeanor charge.


Skylink America Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Clean Harbors reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Alberta and California at Odds on Natural Gas
A natural-gas war has broken out between Alberta and California, which could undermine some of the energy trade gains made by Canada and the United States under their epochal free-trade agreement.
A United States official said energy officials of the two Governments had held "frank and open" discussions about the conflict in Ottawa last Thursday and Friday under a special free-trade consultative mechanism.


Presenting the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, Again
In an devilish plan to make sure that Bill Parcells sees the team he is rumored to be coaching next season, the National Football League has scheduled the Tampa Bay Buccaneers for national exposure twice within a week: last Sunday night on ESPN against the Minnesota Vikings and tomorrow at 12:30 P.M. on CBS against the Chicago Bears.
"I agree that it's a little anomalous," said Val Pinchbeck, the N.F.L.'s imperial schedule maker and director of broadcasting.
"But only after the fact can you say that it didn't work out."


U.S. Urges Court's Approval To Resume Haitians' Return
Government lawyers urged a Federal appeals court today to strike down an injunction barring the forced return of United States-bound Haitians seized on the high seas while fleeing their country.
They said the order amounted to "extraordinary" court interference in the exclusive right of Congress and the executive branch to conduct the nation's foreign policy.
In arguing to sustain the injunction, advocates for the Haitian refugees contended that the repatriation process as conducted by "low-level Government officials" aboard Coast Guard vessels involved an improper screening procedure that could not reasonably deal with what they said were legitimate requests for political asylum.


Lebanon Says French Aide's Visit Opens a New Era of Cooperation
Lebanon and France began today what officials here called a new era of close cooperation as the French Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas, began a two-day visit, the first by a senior French official in six years.
"The visit reflects the special relationship between the two countries and heralds a new era of cooperation between them," the Lebanese Foreign Minister, Faris Bouez, told reporters after talks with his guest, who will also be going to Syria and Jordan.
A French diplomat said Mr.
Dumas would explore possibilities for French help in promoting the Middle East peace process, which is co-sponsored by the United States and the Soviet Union.


Super Valu Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


GORBACHEV IS READY TO RESIGN AS POST-SOVIET PLAN ADVANCES
Mikhail S. Gorbachev said today that he was prepared to resign as Soviet President as momentum toward acceptance of the newly proclaimed commonwealth of former Soviet republics built rapidly.
The Russian Parliament gave the commonwealth an overwhelming endorsement, and the Asian republics moved toward joining.
Mr.
Gorbachev continued to argue forcefully against the commonwealth abruptly proclaimed by Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia on Sunday.
But in a three-hour session with Soviet journalists in which he was alternately angry, proud and troubled, he appeared to be steeling himself for a resignation that seemed increasingly inevitable.


Parking Meters Will Only Drive Away the Loyal Theatergoers; Another Fan's Lament
To the Editor:
"Where, Oh Where, Have the Fans Gone?" you ask (Sports pages, Dec. 4).
As a New York Islander fan for almost 15 years, I find it almost impossible to attend games anymore.
It's not the play of the team that's keeping me away, but the price it costs to attend.


A Maxwell Newspaper Closes


Ideal Metal reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Why Jury in Smith Case Never Heard From 3 Other Women
The rape trial of William K. Smith has come to an abrupt end, with Mr.
Smith resoundingly exonerated.
But anyone wanting to learn another facet of the case,one that the jurors did not hear but that is likely to linger, need walk only from the Palm Beach County Courthouse to Sir Speedy, the photocopying store nearby.
There, for $48.34, one can buy the nearly 600 newly unsealed pages of sworn depositions given in October by three women -- a doctor, medical student and law student -- who said that between 1983 and 1988 Mr.
Smith either raped them or tried to.
Twice, Judge Mary E. Lupo barred their testimony, rejecting arguments by the prosecutor, Moira K. Lasch.


Mexicans Head North Despite Rules on Jobs
For months, as the United States has raised a heavy metal barricade along its border with Mexico here, officials of the two countries have argued over the symbolism.
The Mexicans call it a wall, like the Berlin wall; the Americans say it is just a strong fence.
But each night around midnight, hundreds of men and women clamber over the 10-foot-high structure to offer another definition: It has become a monument, their numbers suggest, to the impossibility of keeping poor foreign workers from better-paid jobs.


Program Stands on Its Own After Help From Neediest
Damon A. smiled sweetly and talked in a tumble of words, explaining how, while trying to solve one of his problems, he ran into another.
The 30-year-old Brooklyn man, who described himself as "a pot addict and a manic-depressive," said he had joined Narcotics Anonymous several times but always quit.
He thought "people were laughing at me because I had to see a shrink"; his prescription medicine sometimes made him drowsy "and people would point and say 'see, he's back using.' "


In Perpetual Candidacy, Duke Raises the Stakes
Like a traveling road show that folds its tent in one town and opens it in the next, the David Duke campaign is back, this time as an aside to Presidential politics.
The question is whether Mr.
Duke, whose disaffected blue-collar base is made up more of traditional Democrats than Republicans, can make much of an impact in primaries where the constituency and the rules may work against him.


Review/Music; As in Plato's Cave, a Shadow of the Real
The setting is Europe in the 1930's.
A kosher wine store with the name Naboth and Family bears a prominent mezuza on its doorpost.
Its proprietor is clad in the long black robe of East European Orthodox Jews and wears a black yarmulke.
Achab and Jezebel are rich Jews living next door.
Achab tries to buy Naboth's store, brandishing a large sum of cash; Naboth refuses and Jezebel asks the village elders to eliminate him.
The elders are also devout -- one wears a prayer shawl -- but they take out a contract.
Two thugs kill Naboth with a crowbar.


Leno Finds the Right Lines
Have you heard the one about the traveling comedian and the White House press secretary?
It goes like this: The Presidential spokesman, Marlin Fitzwater, is in the White House briefing room answering questions.
He calls on a new face in the crowd.
"Mr. Leno," he says, nodding at Jay Leno, the host-designate of the "Tonight" show on NBC, who had raised his hand.


Verdicts in West Palm Beach
The swiftness of William Kennedy Smith's acquittal strongly suggests that the jury had far more than the reasonable doubt required to find him not guilty in his famous rape case.
During the hour and a quarter they took to elect a foreman and fill out a verdict form, the jurors placed the burden on the state, where it belongs, and quickly recognized that the prosecution had failed to meet it.
Does this mean that it was unjust and a waste of judicial resources even to put Mr.
Smith on trial?
Not by any means.


Casey Had Time to Meet Iranians in '80
To the Editor:
"When Casey Could Have Met Iranians in '80," Jonathan Chadwick's Dec. 5 letter, still does not solve the mystery of William Casey's whereabouts in late July 1980.
The question is of vital historic importance in light of the allegations in Gary Sick's book "October Surprise: America's Hostages in Iran and the Election of Ronald Reagan" that Mr.
Casey attended meetings in Madrid at that time during which he negotiated a deal that may have sabotaged an American Presidential election.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Agreed to terms with Otis Nixon, outfielder, on a two-year contract.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Named Ralph Avila vice president with duties in the Dominican Republic.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Agreed to terms with Steve Buechele, third baseman, on a four-year contract.
International League
SYRACUSE CHIEFS -- Signed Eric Plunk, pitcher, to a one-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
SACRAMENTO KINGS -- Signed Spud Webb, guard, to a four-year contract extension through the 1995-96 season.
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Signed Vinnie Johnson, guard.
Waived Tom Garrick, guard.
Continental Basketball Association
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Traded Michael Anderson, guard, to the Tri-City Chinook for the rights to Morlon Wiley, guard, and a 1992 third-round draft pick.
SIOUX FALLS SKYFORCE -- Waived Brett Szabo, forward-center.
TRI-CITY CHINOOK -- Activated Alan Pollard, forward.
Waived Harold Wright, guard.
Global Basketball Association
RALEIGH BULLFROGS -- Named Michael Cox general manager.
Football  National Football League
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Announced that Dexter Manley, defensive end, tested positive for drugs and retired, effective immediately.
Professional Spring Football League
PSFL -- Named Jim Popp director of player personnel, Chad Bolen director of Licensing, David Healy eastern franchise coordinator, and Joanne King western franchise coordinator.
World League of American Football
SACRAMENTO SURGE -- Named Jim Haslett defensive coordintor.
Hockey  National Hockey League
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Signed Mark Hardy, defenseman. College
ILLINOIS -- Announced that John Mackovic, football coach and athletic director, resigned both posts to become the football coach at Texas.
Named Lou Tepper interim football coach and Robert Todd interim athletic director.
JACKSON STATE -- Announced the resignation of Howard Davis, athletic director.
Named W.C.
Gorden interim athletic director.
JACKSONVILLE -- Announced that guard Jerome McDuffie has been suspended indefinitely for violating its academic policy.
KENTUCKY -- Suspended Aminu Timberlake, forward, indefinitely due to academic problems.
MANCHESTER -- Announced the resignation of Ron DeCarli, men's basketball coach.
STEPHEN F. AUSTIN -- Named Eddie Brister offensive football coordinator.


Library for the Blind and Handicapped Is Opened


Schiller Meeting Today With Special Investigator
Harvey Schiller, the executive director of the United States Olympic Committee, plans to meet today in New York with the special investigator who is looking into allegations that Schiller used his office for material advantage.
The investigation by Arnold Burns, a former Deputy Attorney General of the United States, is expected to be completed before Christmas.


Bush Welcomes Freed Hostages to the White House


Teamsters' New Chief Vows to Put Members First
Bristling with the passion of the wronged and rejoicing in his victory, Ronald Carey, the presumed new president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, proclaimed today, "It's goodbye to the mafia."
"This union will now work in the interests of its members," Mr.
Carey said at a news conference here.
"It's the members that will come first."


Japan, Courting Israel, Joins Move To Scrap U.N.'s Stand on Zionism
In a step reflecting Japan's desire to improve relations with Israel, Japanese officials said tonight that Tokyo would join the growing list of nations seeking to repeal the 1975 United Nations resolution equating Zionism with racism.
A Foreign Ministry spokesman said that Japan, which has long angered Israel because of its pro-Arab tilt, had decided to co-sponsor a repeal resolution after 56 countries had already joined, and also as a gesture to support the Middle East peace process.


CHRONICLE
Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS appointed NADINE B. HACK yesterday to be New York City's Commissioner to the United Nations and the Consular Corps.
Ms.
Hack, a political fund-raiser who has headed the city's Sister City Program since last January, will replace PAUL O'DWYER, who announced his resignation this week.
Ms.
Hack, a 39-year-old Brooklyn native who is married to GERALD F. DUNFEY, whose family founded the hotel company of the same name, has raised funds for liberal and feminist causes and Democratic candidates.


Settling Into Winter's Stillness


Critic's Choice/Film; Experimenting Together
Elliot Caplan's "Cage/Cunningham," a 100-minute film being shown at Anthology Film Archives through Dec. 29, is a knowing -- and indispensable -- exploration of the lives and work of the composer John Cage and the choreographer Merce Cunningham.
Mr.
Caplan, resident film maker at the Cunningham Studio, draws on extensive archival material, filmed rehearsals and performances, and recent interviews with Mr.
Cage, Mr.
Cunningham and their colleagues.
The film, written by David Vaughan, assumes some prior knowledge of these two important experimentalists.
There are gimmicks and some fatuous anecdotes, although, oddly, both enhance the film's gentle, even rhythm.
What is important in this handsome collage is the sum, but what parts there are!


Wells Fargo to Set Aside $700 Million for Losses
Wells Fargo &amp; Company, the big California bank, said today that it would set aside about $700 million for loan losses, an action that reflects the deepening weakness of California's commercial real estate market.
The San Francisco-based bank, which has an unusually large portfolio of real estate loans, said the action was expected to result in a fourth-quarter loss of more than $200 million.
Wells Fargo also announced that it was halving the dividend on its common stock, to 50 cents a share, joining a growing list of banks that have reduced payments to shareholders to conserve capital.


Israelis in East Jerusalem Occupy 6 Houses and Oust Arab Owners
A group of Israeli nationalists and a sizable police escort burst into Fatmeh Ahmad Karaim's house in one of East Jerusalem's larger Arab neighborhoods at dawn today and told her and her family of six that they did not live there anymore.
For the rest of the day, Mrs.
Karaim stood outside the house in a punishing rain while the Israelis moved equipment in and out, thereby beginning the process of rearranging her furnishings and her life.


Ruling in Slayings Draws Mother's Ire
The mother of a pregnant teen-ager killed in June when the police fired as many as 37 shots into a stolen van condemned a state grand jury's inquiry into the shooting today and appealed for a Federal investigation.
"We're totally outraged," Sharon Mayse said of the grand jury's failure to return criminal charges against four Newark and Hillside police officers for their involvement in the shooting.
"We don't feel there's a justice system in New Jersey. It seems to me like it was a grand jury for the prosecutor and the cops and not for us."


Sizing Up Santas: A Shopper's Guide
TETHERED to a throne all day, smiling at toddlers even when they're greedy or wailing, convincing skeptical pre-teen-agers that yes, you do exist -- the life of a department-store Santa Claus can be exasperating.
Only a gifted few can pull off the act with flair, fulfilling youthful expectations of a reassuring hug, a booming but always kindly voice, a patient inquiry into the year's transgressions and a flawless knowledge of the reindeer's names.


Nixon to Remain With Braves
The California Angels let another one get away today.
Otis Nixon, who in September was suspended for 60 days for cocaine use, joined Bobby Bonilla and Wally Joyner as free agents who didn't sign with the Angels in the last 10 days.
Nixon remained with the Atlanta Braves, agreeing to a three-year contract worth $8.1 million.
In other free-agent talks, Steve Buechele, the third baseman who went from Texas to Pittsburgh in a late-season trade, re-signed with the Pirates for three years and $11 million.
Pitchers Jack Morris and Frank Viola were approaching the point where one may sign with the Toronto Blue Jays and the other with the Boston Red Sox, likely in that order.


Smith Juror Says First Vote Made 'Not Guilty' Obvious
One of the six jurors in the William K. Smith rape trial said today that the jury had taken a secret ballot at the start of deliberations and that all jurors voted either "not guilty" or "undecided."
"We walked in and everyone was very nervous, very insecure," said the juror, Lea Haller, in an interview at her home in the nearby town of Lake Worth.
"Nobody had any idea what anybody else thought." But after the first ballot, she said, "it was easier from there on out."


Producer Prices Rise 0.2%, Easing Fears on Inflation
Prices at the producer level rose a slim two-tenths of a percent in November, the Labor Department said today, adding to evidence that the faltering economy continued to evade any inflationary pressures.
The new data suggest the Federal Reserve could move again to cut interest rates without having to fear it would be setting the stage for higher inflation, economists said.


Review/Film; Sure, He Had His Faults, but the Man Had Vision!
Benjamin (Bugsy) Siegel, a true gangster Gatsby, arrived in Hollywood with a heart full of promise and a gleam in his eye.
Recklessly romantic, he brought with him the first glimmer of "a Garden of Eden in the desert": a brand-new resort that would provide organized crime with a political toehold, as well as a place that would outdo even the movie capital in terms of glitter, garishness and license to indulge any whim.
Some regard the American Dream as an expression of our best vision of ourselves.
Others, like the makers of the sleek, funny, vastly entertaining "Bugsy," take a less sentimental view.
This film, directed by Barry Levinson and written by James Toback, regards the man who dreamed up Las Vegas as a star-struck pragmatist, a mixture of glamour and cynicism, a visionary who saw the chance to create something very like himself only much, much bigger.
"Bugsy" is a smart, seductive portrait of both the man and his monument.
The debonair Ben Siegel (who greatly resented any comparison to an insect) would have loved everything about it except its name.


Zapata Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CONGO EXPELLING ZAIRIAN CITIZENS
Tens of thousands of Zairians have been expelled from neighboring Congo in recent weeks as the Government here has ordered them out as illegal aliens.
The expulsions represent one of the largest forced migrations in Africa since the early 1980's, when Nigeria, ensnared in economic crisis, ordered several million foreigners living illegally within its boundaries to leave.


Zakho Journal; In the Kurdish Zone, It's the Time of the Vulture
In every conflict, it seems, there comes a time when the refuse of war is for sale, larceny and intrigue are in the air and it is good business to traffic in human misery.
Northern Iraq, much of it largely devoid of Iraqi troops and ruled by a collection of cantankerous Kurdish guerrilla groups, has seen the sleepy frontier town of Zakho evolve into a smuggler's paradise.


Prism Entertainment reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


New Capital Rules Proposed For Investments of Insurers
Top state insurance regulators released a rough draft of a proposal yesterday that would require insurers that take above-average risks to have capital, or cushion against loss, commensurate with those risks.
The proposal, which is similar to a regulation already in place for banks, could benefit policyholders who are concerned about their insurers' financial positions.


Senate Leader in Philippines Is Removed From Top Post
Jovito R. Salonga, who as president of the Philippine Senate led its rejection of a treaty extending the United States' lease on its military bases in the Philippines, was ousted from his Senate post today.
Mr.
Salonga, who has headed the 23-member Senate for five years and clashed frequently with President Corazon C. Aquino, was removed by a vote of 14 to 9 and replaced by Senator Neptali Gonzales.


4 at Newspaper Charged After Publishing Recorded Remarks
The publisher, two top editors and a columnist from a local newspaper here were charged today with publishing the contents of an illegally taped telephone conversation.
The columnist was also charged with violating a state law that prohibits the taping of a phone conversation without the consent of both parties.
Pennsylvania is one of 10 states with such a law.
An unusual aspect of the Pennsylvania law prohibits publishing material gathered through such taping.


Robert Q. Lewis, 71, Comedian And TV Host and Panelist, Dies
Robert Q. Lewis, a radio comedian, television host and panelist who was known as much for his fey wit as his trademark horn-rimmed glasses, died on Wednesday at Century City Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 71 years old.
He died of emphysema, said Peggy Bigelow, a friend.


Ultimate Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


School Voucher Plan Stalls in Pennsylvania
Amid some of the most intense lobbying ever seen in this state, the Pennsylvania House of Representatives has defeated a bill that would have provided a $900 education voucher to the parents of every school child and the right to spend it at the public, private or religious school of their choice.
The bill had become such a hot potato that legislators in Harrisburg avoided debating it or even voting on it directly.
Instead they took the highly unusual step on Wednesday of voting, 114 to 89, to table the measure on the grounds that it would have violated state constitutional prohibitions against providing public money for religious institutions.


Hardy Finally Signed
The Rangers yesterday put an end to one of their more embarrassing salary stalemates, finally signing 32-year-old defenseman MARK HARDY to a relatively modest $375,000 contract this season, with an option at the same figure next season.
Hardy appeared at a hearing on Oct. 28 before an arbitrator, MONTY HARRIS, seeking a contract for $450,000, while General Manager NEIL SMITH offered just $293,000.
Harris inexplicably stalled on his decision for seven weeks, until Hardy compromised with the Rangers on his own.


The Jets' Give and Take Is Getting Them Nowhere
The Jets can look back at their last game with the Patriots, on Nov. 17, with a mixture of fondness and loathing.
On the one hand, it was the last time they scored touchdowns each time they got inside the opponent's 20-yard line, getting three touchdown passes from Ken O'Brien.
On the other hand, fullback Brad Baxter's two fumbles led to two Patriot touchdowns, and the Jets, who had jumped out to a 21-0 third-quarter lead, had to hold off New England to take a 28-21 victory.


Yes Clothing Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Boston Five Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Why Jury in Smith Case Never Heard From 3 Other Women
The rape trial of William K. Smith has come to an abrupt end, with Mr.
Smith resoundingly exonerated.
But anyone wanting to learn another facet of the case, one that the jurors did not hear but that is likely to linger, need walk only from the Palm Beach County Courthouse to Sir Speedy, the photocopying store nearby.
There, for $48.34, one can buy the nearly 600 newly unsealed pages of sworn depositions given in October by three women -- a doctor, medical student and law student -- who said that between 1983 and 1988 Mr.
Smith either raped them or tried to.
Twice, Judge Mary E. Lupo barred their testimony, rejecting arguments by the prosecutor, Moira K. Lasch.


Review/Opera; Melodrama Of 'Vanessa' At Juilliard
Anyone who has heard the Elizabethan tinge of speech along the barrier islands of North Carolina or the mountains of Virginia can tell you this: it is in the land of its emigrants that an old country's past is most likely to survive.
In much the same way, Samuel Barber's "Vanessa" is a European opera that could only have been written by an American.
First produced by the Metropolitan Opera in 1958, "Vanessa" follows Virgil Thomson's iconoclastic editorial comments in operatic form but precedes the experiments of Philip Glass and Robert Wilson by a number of years.


Special Newsweek Editions Will Be Sold to Subscribers
Starting in the spring, Newsweek will offer its subscribers customized editions with additional editorial pages tailored to their interests.
A subscriber can have a nonfiction book excerpt bound into the magazine once a month.
Or eight pages of expanded international coverage.
Or a section on money management or science.
A number of magazines have the technology, known as selective binding, to produce customized editions.
These have generally featured special advertising sections, with the cost historically borne by advertisers.
Newsweek's effort will mark the first time that a customized section will be paid for by subscribers instead.


Palm Beach Journal; Verdict Leaves Society Free to Play
At Au Bar, it was back to business as usual early this morning.
Around a noisy bar, middle-age men in silk shirts open just enough to offer a glimpse of chest hair and gold chains raised their glasses to fashionably dressed women half their ages.


Corrections
Maps on Nov. 12 and Dec. 10 showing the location of Soviet armed forces omitted the identity of one Soviet republic.
The republic, in the southern part of the country to the east of Turkmenia, is Uzbekistan.


Sybil Kooper, 66, Former Justice In New York Appellate Division
Sybil Hart Kooper, a retired justice of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in New York, died on Wednesday at her home in Brooklyn Heights.
She was 66 years old.
She died of breast cancer, a former aide said.


U.S. Files Keating Charges
Charles H. Keating Jr. and four associates were charged today by Federal prosecutors in a scheme to loot the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association and its parent company.
The criminal racketeering and fraud charges are the first brought by the Justice Department in the collapse of Lincoln Savings, the Irvine, Calif., institution that has become a metaphor for all that went wrong in the savings and loan industry.


Art in Review
Georg Baselitz  Mary Boone Gallery 417 West Broadway (near Spring Street) SoHo Through Dec. 21
These nine Neo-Expressionist canvases date from 1982, the year of Georg Baselitz's first New York exhibition.
They were painted for "Zeitgeist," the big international show in Berlin that year, and have never before been exhibited in the United States.


On Stage, and Off
The Hellinger Sale
"It's a sign of the times," says James N. Nederlander, chairman of the Nederlander Organization, on the recent sale of its Mark Hellinger Theater, considered a prime musical theater on Broadway, to its longtime tenant, the Times Square Church.


Tax Repeal May Be Dead, But Resurrection Is Expected
With the effort to repeal the new state wage tax considered all but dead for this year, leaders of factions on both sides of the issue began today to sketch scenarios for the future of a fight that is certain to permeate state politics again next year.
After five hours of late-night debate, the Senate voted 21 to 15 on Wednesday to repeal the tax.
While it was enough to pass the bill, the vote was three votes short of the two-thirds margin of 24 votes needed to override a veto promised by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.
The House of Representatives approved the repeal bill on Monday by a vote of 86 to 63, a full 15 votes short of that needed to override a veto.
Both chambers are meeting in special session.


Verdicts in West Palm Beach
The swiftness of William Kennedy Smith's acquittal strongly suggests that the jury had far more than the reasonable doubt required to find him not guilty in his famous rape case.
During the hour and a quarter they took to elect a foreman and fill out a verdict form, the jurors placed the burden on the state, where it belongs, and quickly recognized that the prosecution had failed to meet it.
Does this mean that it was unjust and a waste of judicial resources even to put Mr.
Smith on trial?
Not by any means.


No More Willie Hortons
Even before Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York has announced any decision to run for President, Republicans are gloating over Arthur Shawcross.
If the Governor decides to run, the Rochester serial murderer could become the Willie Horton of 1992.
In truth, however, that's no reason for gloating, by Republicans or anyone else.
During the 1988 campaign George Bush's handlers discovered Willie Horton, a murderer who escaped from a life sentence in Massachusetts while on a prison furlough.
He fled to Maryland, where he invaded a couple's home, stabbing the man and raping the woman.
Mr.
Bush's opponent, Michael Dukakis, was Governor of Massachusetts at the time, ultimately responsible for prison policy.
Bush supporters used the Horton case to brand Mr.
Dukakis as soft on criminals.


Changes Begun in Water Works Projects, Dinkins Says
Acknowledging that the New York City Department of Environmental Protection was remiss in not letting $600 million in contracts for water mains and sewers last year, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that the city had begun making changes to insure that the agency's rebuilding projects were not delayed.
While Mr.
Dinkins said he was disappointed, he declined to criticize Albert F. Appleton, the Environmental Protection Commissioner.


Airlines Plan To Itemize Ticket Taxes
Asserting that its passengers are being "taxed to death," the airline industry and travel agents will begin inserting a flier in ticket jackets this week saying that the taxes and fees imposed by the Government "may represent a significant portion of the cost of air travel."
Carriers and travel agents are encouraged to itemize the taxes and fees on the insert.
They will be itemized automatically when the computers that issue tickets are programmed to do so.


Tokyo Stocks Advance 4.8%
A day that many here had dreaded turned into an explosive rally in the stock market today, lifting share prices from their recent doldrums.
The 225-issue Nikkei average shot up 1,042.33 points, to 22,754.90, in heavy trading.
That represented a 4.8 percent jump.


Economic Scene; Worrying Over Weakened Unions
GEORGE P. SHULTZ, who was Secretary of State in the Reagan Administration, is concerned about the possible harm to American industry and society stemming from the declining American labor movement.
Now the recession is further weakening the trade union movement, as always happens in slumps, with layoffs and employers' demands for givebacks undermining the bargaining power and organizing appeal of the unions.


Evidence of Maxwell Stock Ploy
New evidence was disclosed today that Robert Maxwell may have illegally tried to prop up the stock price of the Maxwell Communication Corporation earlier this year.
The court-appointed administrators overseeing the bankrupt companies at the heart of the late Mr.
Maxwell's empire announced tonight that evidence supporting this suspicion had been uncovered.
John Talbot, the chief administrator, said three private Maxwell companies had paid about $:130 million, or about $235.2 million, to "meet the obligations of various overseas entities" after they had bought the shares in April and July.


ULTRASOUND SKEWS INDIA'S BIRTH RATIO
Jagmati Sangwan, her daughter at her side, leafed through the ledger at a sidewalk clinic in this dusty, rundown town in Haryana state the other day.
A sign clinging to a lamppost read, "Ultrasound. Healthy Boy or Girl." The word "healthy," though, is painted so minutely that the sign appears to read, "Boy or Girl."
"These are the names of the women who come here to make sure they aren't pregnant with daughters," said Mrs.
Sangwan, closing the ledger and emerging from the clinic into a harsh sunlit afternoon.
"If the test says girl, then she will have an abortion."


Guatemalans Irked by U.S. Pressure in Killing
Pressure by the Bush Administration for the prosecution of army officers for the killing of an American innkeeper in rural Guatemala 18 months ago has raised resentments in the Guatemalan Army leadership.
Gen.
Luis Enrique Mendoza Garcia, who was Defense Minister until his dismissal today, recently said, "We don't have any reason to plead guilty to the United States."


T Cell Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Restaurants
San Domenico wasn't the first restaurant to open with a much-publicized celebrity chef; nor was it the first to have its luminary quietly slip away once all the hoopla had died down.
Valentino Marcattilii, whose restaurant in Imola in northern Italy held a two-star Michelin rating at the time, came to New York City in 1988 to help open San Domenico, and he did a splendid job.
His consultancy ended two years later, about the same time his Imola establishment lost a star.
Since then, things have never been quite the same at San Domenico.


Jack F. Kincannon, Retired Executive, 72
Jack F. Kincannon, a retired top executive of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, died Dec. 3 at Presbyterian Hospital in Dallas.
He was 72 years old and lived in Dallas.
He died of cancer, his family said.


President of Italy Is Making Political Waves
As it casts an uneasy eye over the approach of an integrated Europe, Italy is in the grips of a peculiar political maelstrom swirling about one man, President Francesco Cossiga, whose power is titular yet whose ability to coax out fury, controversy and headlines is legend.
One weekly magazine has asked whether the myriad disputes surrounding the Italian President will lead to "farce or tragedy."


Jail for 2 in Chernobyl Case
Bulgaria's Supreme Court sentenced two former Communist officials to prison terms today for failing to protect the population against fallout from the Soviet nuclear disaster at Chernobyl in 1986.
Grigor Stoichkov, former Deputy Prime Minister and head of the Government commission for civil defense, was sentenced to three years.
Lubomir Shindarov, former Deputy Health Minister, received a two-year sentence.Both said they were not guilty.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Administration might favor a tax credit for business investments in plants and machinery to stimulate the economy, Bush's economic advisers said for the first time.  [ Page A1. ]


For Fortunate Few, Tribal Casino Promises Jobs
The shell of the first casino in New England is rising from the rock-strewn earth at the edge of the Mashantucket Pequot reservation here.
Already one can see where the poker room, the blackjack tables and what management calls "three different restaurant experiences" will be when the yet-unnamed casino opens for business in February.
These days Joe Bonmer, a bespectacled Atlantic City veteran, teaches the fine points of the game of craps in a community-college gymnasium in nearby Norwich to a crowd of wide-eyed students.


Robert Q. Lewis, 71, Comedian And TV Host and Panelist, Dies
Robert Q. Lewis, a radio comedian, television host and panelist who was known as much for his fey wit as his trademark horn-rimmed glasses, died on Wednesday at Century City Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 71 years old.
He died of emphysema, said Peggy Bigelow, a friend.


CFCF reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


U.N. PEACEKEEPERS SEEN FOR CROATIA
The United Nations Secretary General said today that he was ready to recommend sending a peacekeeping force of 10,000 soldiers and police officers to maintain order in Yugoslavia if the warring factions would abide by a cease-fire.
But the Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, also made clear that in his view the principal obstacle to a lasting cease-fire is not the Croatian nationalist forces but the Serbian-led Yugoslav Army and the Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic.


Maxwell Weekly Ceases Publication
The European, the 19-month-old pan-European newspaper, closed its offices today and laid off its 145 employees -- a casualty of the collapse of the Maxwell publishing empire.
Although there appear to be some possible buyers for The European, unless a deal is struck quickly the issue that comes out on Friday will be the last.


Art in Review
Diane Arbus Robert Miller Gallery 41 East 57th Street Through Dec. 28
In the year before her death in 1971, Diane Arbus made a deeply moving series of photographs of women at a home for the retarded.
Presented here in prints by Neil Selkirk, her longtime associate, the pictures lack the stylistic hallmarks of Arbus's earlier work: the harsh flash, tight cropping, unusual angles and other devices she used to turn her subjects into strange and even monstrous creatures.
Instead, Arbus softened her style to a tone of almost lyrical tenderness, using virtually no stylistic tricks in depicting the patients.
No doubt she regarded them as sufficiently outside the normal just as they were.


Sounds Around Town
Righteous Folk-Rock
Bruce Cockburn, Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-2824.
At his best, Bruce Cockburn, the Canadian folk-rocker, Christian mystic and advocate for leftist causes, projects a convincingly right eous fervor.
That stubborn passion animates his recent Columbia album, "Nothing but a Burning Light." The songs, some of which touch on American Indian history and environmental issues, are among the most lyrical Mr.
Cockburn has written in years.
Show time is tomorrow at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $20 and $22.50.
Baker's Blues
LaVern Baker, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
The seminal rhythm-and-blues singer LaVern Baker appeared in the Broadway musical "Black and Blue" and has completed an album to be released next month on DRG Records, on which she branches out and sings everything from "Body and Soul" to "St. Louis Blues." When she appeared at the Village Gate last spring, the singer, who moved back to the United States after living in the Philippines for many years, was in fine voice.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9:15 and 11:15.
There is a $25 cover charge, plus a two-drink minimum.
Christmas Comedy
Wiseguys, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Manhattan, (212) 244-3005.
Wiseguys, the musical comedy trio made up of Jim Caruso, Campbell Martin and Fred Wells, has a polished 1940's-style vocal blend that is matched in sophistication by witty patter and horseplay.
The Christmas show includes little-known holiday songs like Marshall Barer's "Christmas Is an Island," as well as traditional carols.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow at 9, with a late show tomorrow at 11:15 P.M.
There is $15 cover charge ($25 ringside), plus a two-drink minimum.


The Mammoth Multiplexes of the Suburbs: How They Rate
Only suburbia could have invented a moviegoing system that is as easy as flipping the channel on a remote control.
Suburban multiplexes are movie vending machines.
Choice is king.
A self-respecting multiplex will always offer at least 4 or 10 or 12 selections, and if there isn't something there for the whole family, you mustn't be from America.
Since multiplexes are designed to accommodate as many people and choices as possible, the theaters are often small, although it's a myth that the average multiplex screen is the area of a postage stamp; there are big theaters for the big opening weekends of major releases, small theaters for the hopeful hits whose receipts aren't living up to expectation.
Multiplex theaters have parking lots the size of some Middle East countries.
They have carpets with colors that reinvent the word clash.


Algonquin Mercantile Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27


Canadian Health System Continues to Do Well
To the Editor:
A Nov. 24 news article wrongly implies that the Canadian Government is stuck with a politically popular health-care program that the nation cannot afford.
Hospital bed closings do not necessarily imply reduction of service.
Hospital treatment has represented a much higher proportion of the health-care budget because universal medical coverage began with hospitals: services performed in them were insured, while the same procedure in a doctor's office was not.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  LAWYERS PROTEST JUDGE'S ACTIONS
More than 100 Legal Aid Society lawyers staged a wildcat walkout and a demonstration at the Brooklyn Criminal Courts to protest what they called the outrageous treatment of a Legal Aid lawyer who was held in contempt, removed from court and handcuffed to a chair last week in a contretemps with a Criminal Court judge.
B3.
CHANGES ON CONTRACTS
Admitting that the city had been remiss in not letting $600 million in contracts for water mains and sewers last year, Mayor Dinkins said the city had begun making changes at the Department of Environmental Protection to insure that its projects are not delayed.
While expressing disappointment with the environmental department's inability to let contracts on time, the Mayor declined to make a public criticism of its Commissioner, Albert F. Appleton.
B3.
TIMES AND DRIVERS IN ACCORD
The New York Times reached a negotiated settlement extending to the year 2000 with the union representing its drivers.
The paper's publisher expressed hope that the agreement would set a pattern for other union contracts and speed the opening of The Times's new printing plant in Edison, N.J., early next year.
B3.
BOY AND MOTHER HELD IN KILLINGS
A 15-year-old boy and his mother have been arrested on charges that they robbed three men of crack and money on Saturday in a Brooklyn apartment and then killed them.
B3.
Rushdie at Columbia: a moving experience. B4.
Child removed from home and returned to mother. B4. REGION  PROGRESS, BUT HOW MUCH?
Governor Cuomo announced that he and the Assembly Speaker have reached broad agreement on a budget plan.
But does that make the fiscal glass two-thirds full or leave it nearly empty?
Especially because the Senate majority leader is no closer to agreeing than he was before.
B5.
TAX ROLLBACK MOVES AHEAD
With angry Republicans still boycotting the proceedings, the New Jersey Senate Appropriations Committee approved a five-bill package that would roll back the $2.8 billion tax increase the same committee helped write and push through the Legislature 18 months ago.
B7.
A CASE OF DIVIDED LOYALTIES
An allegation of police brutality, with the incident captured on videotape, has divided the loyalties of black Trenton residents.
On one side is a father, Thomas Downing, who says he was beaten without cause when he asked a police officer about the arrest of his stepson.
On the other side is the policeman, Earl Hill, an officer with a drug-busting hero image now blurred by the charges against him.
B7.
WAIT 'TILL NEXT YEAR
With the effort to repeal the new Connecticut income tax now considered all but dead for this year, repeal leaders and defenders of the tax began sketching out scenarios for the future.
And some of them are dismal indeed.
B7.
Mother of slain girl condemns grand jury.
B10.
Our Towns B7  Neediest Cases B11  Obituaries B15


INSIDE
Arabs Evicted in Jerusalem
Israeli nationalists and a police escort burst into a house in East Jerusalem and told the Arab family they did not live there anymore.
Page A3.
Progress in Mideast Talks
The parties to the Middle East talks reported progress and said the talks would be extended.
Page A3.
Times Settles With Drivers
The Times and the drivers union negotiated a no-strike contract through the year 2000, a step toward opening the paper's new plant.
Page B3.
A Cause and a Columnist
When a jailed Irish republican criticized an I.R.A. bombing, he angered many of the Irish-Americans who had called him a hero.
Page B1.
Disney Picks Anaheim Site
A site near Disneyland won out over competing Long Beach, Calif., for a $3 billion theme park.
Page D1.


New F.C.C. Rule Aims At Phone Fees Abroad
The Federal Communications Commission adopted new rules today intended to prod foreign telephone companies to lower the high prices they charge to connect international calls from the United States.
In a separate action, the commission passed rules intended to prevent long-distance companies from switching customers to their services without obtaining proper consent.


Comrades in Arms
To start building a lasting peace, Washington should work with Moscow to create an American-Russian Defense Community.
This arrangement could take its inspiration from the economic communities formed in Western Europe in the 1950's that made French-German reconciliation irreversible.
The U.S. and Soviet defense establishments have grown unusually warm toward each other; the Soviet military in particular is becoming more open as it undergoes internal stress and upheaval.
Military leaders in Russia and the other republics seem eager to reduce nuclear weapons quickly, and they welcome American assistance to make that possible.
Many senior officers are showing keen interest in the American principle of civilian control of the military, in U.S. help to prevent nuclear proliferation and in a cooperative approach to creating defenses against missiles from third world countries


G-III Apparel Group reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 30


Governor Reports Progress On Multiyear Budget Plan
On the prospects of a state budget agreement, the glass today was either two-thirds full or essentially empty.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo summoned reporters to his office today to tell them that he believed significant progress had been made on his plan for an unusual, stretched-out budget that could, among other things, free him to hit the Presidential campaign trail.
He said that he and his fellow Democrat, Assembly Speaker Mel Miller, now agreed in broad outline on a package of spending cuts that would be spread over the next 15 months and would get rid of the combined $4.5 billion in potential deficits the state faces in that time.


Where to Hear the Music of Christmas
Here are some of the musical presentations planned for the holiday season in New York City.
All are free unless otherwise noted.


Vinnie Johnson Signed
Former Pistons guard VINNIE JOHNSON signed with the San Antonio Spurs yesterday and is expected to be in uniform for tonight's game against the Phoenix Suns.


Robert W. Brooks, Bank Executive, 56
Robert W. Brooks, a managing director at Chemical Bank, died Tuesday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J.
He was 56 years old and lived in Chatham, N.J.
He died of Hodgkin's disease, said Charles Salmans, a spokesman for the bank.


Why Jury in Smith Case Never Heard From 3 Other Women
The rape trial of William K. Smith has come to an abrupt end, with Mr.
Smith resoundingly exonerated.
But anyone wanting to learn another facet of the case,one that the jurors did not hear but that is likely to linger, need walk only from the Palm Beach County Courthouse to Sir Speedy, the photocopying store nearby.
There, for $48.34, one can buy the nearly 600 newly unsealed pages of sworn depositions given in October by three women -- a doctor, medical student and law student -- who said that between 1983 and 1988 Mr.
Smith either raped them or tried to.
Twice, Judge Mary E. Lupo barred their testimony, rejecting arguments by the prosecutor, Moira K. Lasch.


Memorabilia Fail to Sell
One of the largest collections of Presidential material in private hands went unsold yesterday at Sotheby's in New York at its first auction of such collectibles.
Assembled in the 1970's by Paul Perlin, a Chicago wheat trader, the 20,000 buttons, banners, posters and autographs span the period from George Washington to Jimmy Carter.
They were offered as one lot that was estimated by Sotheby's to bring $2.5 million to $3.5 million.
No bids were visible at the sale, which ended in less than two minutes.


Stock Swindle Bill Could Hurt Victims
To the Editor:
"Stop the Clock on Swindlers" by Barbara Roper (Op-Ed, Nov. 19) addresses only part of the proposed stock-swindle legislation.
Senators Mitch McConnell and Pete V. Domenici have proposed legislation to make it virtually impossible for shareholders to maintain litigation under the securities laws.


Top 3Com Officer Adds Storm Technology Post
L.
William Krause, who stepped down as president and chief executive of the 3Com Corporation last year but remains chairman, said Wednesday that he had joined Storm Technology Inc., a start-up company involved in color computer-imaging, as president and chief executive.
Storm, based in Mountain View, Calif., is developing image-compression technology for producing high-quality color computer images; it has raised $3 million in venture financing.


Hauser Chemical Research reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-25 GORBACHEV SAYS HE'D RESIGN
As the newly proclaimed commonwealth of former Soviet republics gained momentum, President Gorbachev warned that he was prepared to resign.
Russian lawmakers gave the commonwealth an overwhelming endorsement and the Asian republics moved toward joining.
A1  BAKER CALLS FOR A RESCUE
Secretary of State Baker laid out a plan for dealing with the collapse of the Soviet Union, including a conference in January to divide up responsibilities among nations to help a "disoriented" Soviet people.
A1  STRANDED SOVIET TRAVELERS
Poor service, a shortage of spare parts and a growing disrespect for rules of any kind are causing Soviet airports to close, cars to break down and buses to run out of gas.
A1  Once again, Boris Yeltsin has rallied the republics toward hope.
A23  2 KOREAS SIGN TREATY
Leaders of North and South Korea signed a treaty of reconciliation, renouncing armed aggression against each other and saying that they would formally bring the Korean War to an end 38 years after the fighting ceased.
A1  MIDEAST TALKS EXTENDED
The parties to the Middle East peace talks agreed that they were making some progress in Washington and decided to continue their negotiations next week.
A3  Israeli settlers seized six houses in Arab East Jerusalem.
A3  JAPAN BACKS ISRAELI EFFORT
Signaling a desire to improve relations with Israel, Japanese officials said their Government would join the growing list of nations seeking to repeal a United Nations resolution equating Zionism with racism.
A5  U.N.
CHIEF FAULTS THE SERBS
The United Nations Secretary General said he was ready to recommend sending a peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia if the warring factions would abide by a cease-fire.
He made it clear that he blames Serbia and the national army -- not Croatia -- for blocking the truce.
A6  CONGO EXPELLING ZAIRIANS
Tens of thousands of Zairians have been expelled from neighboring Congo in recent weeks as illegal aliens.
The expulsions represent one of the largest forced migrations in Africa since the early 1980's.
A9  GIVING THE AMAZON ITS DUE
The earliest pottery ever found in the Western Hemisphere has been excavated in the Amazon basin of Brazil.
The evidence refutes the standard assumption that the region was too poor in resources to have supported a complex prehistoric culture.
A12  NATIONAL A26-37, B12  TAX BREAK SUPPORTED
President Bush's top economic advisers said for the first time that to stimulate the economy the Administration might favor a tax credit for business investments in plants and machinery.
A1  POROUS BORDER WITH MEXICO
Illegal immigration from Mexico has rebounded sharply in the past few years, and despite stepped-up efforts to halt the flow, American officials said it would continue to be high for years.
A1  GOODBYE, COURT; HELLO, AU BAR
With the Smith trial over, Palm Beach was eager to return to its normal swirl of galas, dinners and nights at the bar.
A26  A juror described how the brief deliberations went.
A26  FLU VACCINE SCARCE
Federal health officials said they were joining with drug companies to redistribute flu vaccine to areas plagued with shortages.
A26  RULING FOR OBSERVATORY
A Federal appeals court ruled that a threat to an endangered squirrel was not enough to halt work on an observatory in Arizona.A28  NEW BROOM AT TEAMSTERS UNION
Ronald Carey, the apparent winner of the teamsters' presidency, announced that from now on the union would work in the interest of its rank and file members and not that of organized crime.
A29  SCHOOL VOUCHER PLAN STALLS
The Pennsylvania House defeated a measure to provide parents with money to apply to private school tuition for their children.
A30  TAPE RELEASE IS DENIED
A Federal judge refused to order the public release of the audio tape of the final moments of the Challenge astronauts.
A32  TROUBLES MOUNT FOR HICKEL
Politicial problems mount for Gov.
Hickel of Alaska, who was accused this week of violating the state's ethics laws.
A34  ABORTION LAW REVIEW
Politics and principle blend in requests that the Supreme Court quickly review Pennsylvania's restrictive abortion law.
B12  POLIO VIRUS IS SYNTHESIZED
Scientists have synthesized the entire virus that causes polio in a test tube, a breakthrough that could help combat other diseases.
A37  ROCKY ROAD FOR DUKE
David Duke is back on the campaign trail, this time challenging President Bush, but formidable obstacles lie ahead.
B12  The first televised debate of Presidential candidates nears.
B12  Three Presidential candidates unveil their plans for education.
B12  Hughes Aircraft is charged with falsifying tests of weapons parts.
A36  Law Page B14  Law students who want to serve the poor but can't afford to.
At the Bar.
METROPOLITANDigest, B1 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Weekend C1-38  The music of the season.
C1  Sizing up Santas around town.
C1  Multiplexes, the mad maximum in movies.
C1  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  "Forbidden Broadway/Forbidden Christmas." C3  Film: At the Movies C16  "Bugsy." C12  Restaurants C26  Art: At the Galleries.
C22  Word and Image: A life of Poe.
C33  Sports B16-22  Baseball: Harazin's list of Mets things to do is done.
B17  A week of disappointment for the Yankees.
B17  Basketball: Knicks ready for weekend challenge.
B19  Nets rout Nuggets, 121-81.
B19  Columns: Vecsey on the Mets.
B17  Lipsyte on the Special Olympics.
B21  Obituaries B15  Sybil Kooper, ex-Justice in New York Appellate Division  Robert Q. Lewis, radio comedian and television host  Editorials/Op-Ed A38-39  Editorials A38  At last, a balm to Soviet pain.
No more Willie Hortons.
Verdicts in West Palm Beach.
Letters A38  Anthony Lewis: If Madison were here.
A39  A. M. Rosenthal: Just one prisoner.
A39  Fred C. Ikle: Comrades in arms.
A39  Jonathan Tasini: Can it be morning in teamsterland?
A39  Flora Lewis: A union is born, a union dies.
A39  Neediest Cases B11


Chairman of Laura Ashley Is Giving Up Daily Duties
Laura Ashley Holdings P.L.C., the international fashion and home furnishings group, has announced that Sir Bernard Ashley will relinquish his title as chairman and that Jim Maxmin, group chief executive, will take over day-to-day operations.
Sir Bernard, who is 65, will become non-executive chairman and is expected to concentrate on developing his hotel interests.
Laura Ashley, for whom the company was named and who was Sir Bernard's wife, died in 1985.


The Art Market
Suspended: Journal of Art
There seems to be a lot more activity in art publishing right now than in the art market itself.
The biggest news is Rizzoli's announcement that it has suspended publication of The Journal of Art.
It was not a gradual slowdown: At 4 P.M. the day before Thanksgiving, the entire staff was dismissed with a week's severance pay.
"They told us they didn't need to give us the two weeks' pay we were entitled to because the journal had just suspended publication, not folded," said the circulation director, Helen Ryan.
"Then, in the same breath, they told us to file for unemployment and to look for another job."


New York Newsday Turns to Time's Ad
Time magazine's new trade advertising campaign has inspired a look-alike page 1 at New York Newsday.
On its front page Wednesday, New York Newsday presented excerpts from the testimony of William Kennedy Smith.
They appeared in the same question-and-answer format and boldface-and-italics typography that Time has used in an ad in its campaign focusing on the subject of date rape.


Clearing House Revamps Account
Publishers Clearing House, Port Washington, L.I., is looking for a second agency to handle the creative portion of its advertising account, said David Sayer, executive director for advertising and public relations.
Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York, will remain the agency of record on the $13.5 million account, with responsibilities for all media buying, Mr.
Sayer said, adding that the company may restructure how it assigns creative work.
For the last three years, the creative portion of the account has been divided between Ogilvy and an in-house ad staff.


Amcast Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


Mets Could Be Whistling at Work
It was a disturbing and disheartening dance away from responsibility the Mets performed in their clubhouse the last several seasons.
Certain players avoided each other before the games.
Certain players avoided reporters after games.
And almost every player avoided blame before and after the games.
"People didn't want to come to the games, and then people couldn't wait to beat traffic after the game," said John Franco, the left-handed closer for the Mets.
"I was almost always one of the last to leave, and I usually hadn't even been in the game.


Woman's Throat Slashed
The body of a 65-year-old woman whose throat had been slashed was found last night in her Upper West Side apartment, the police said.
Christina Payamps, who lived with her two sisters at 60 West 75th Street, was discovered at 6:40 P.M. when the sisters returned home from work, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Edward J. Burns.
"The body was in the dining room, with the throat slashed," Sergeant Burns said.
He said investigators had no signs of forced entry into the apartment, had recovered no weapons at the scene and had not determined a motive.


Datametrics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 27


Enjoying the 'Messiah'
Here is a sampling of performances and sing-ins of Handel's "Messiah" in New York City.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted.
Today
THE CATHEDRAL OF ST.
JOHN THE DIVINE (Episcopal), Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Manhattan.
Combined choirs of the cathedral and Elaine Russell, soprano; Katie Geissinger, mezzo-soprano; Johnson Flucker, countertenor; William Joyner and James Bassi, tenors; David Ludwig and Philip Cutlip, baritones, and Wilbur Pauley, bass; Stephen Sturk, conductor, 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $18 and $12.
Information: (212) 662-2133.
Sunday
FLATBUSH-TOMPKINS CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, Dorchester Road and East 19th Street, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Christmas portion, by candlelight, followed by a carol sing-along.
The Chancel Choir with orchestra; Victoria Sokoloff and Alice Wagner, sopranos; Kimberly Hughes, mezzo-soprano; Brian McGovern, tenor; Gilbert High, bass; Cynthia Powell, director, 4 P.M.
Donations accepted.
Information: (718) 282-5353.
GRACE CHURCH (Episcopal), Broadway at 10th Street, Manhattan.
Christmas portion; Grace Church Choral Society with orchestra and soloists; Frank Cedric Smith, director, 3:30 P.M.
Also on Dec. 17, at 7:30 P.M.
Donation, $12.
Information: (212) 254-2000.
Monday
CHURCH OF ST.
LUKE-IN-THE-FIELDS (Episcopal), 487 Hudson Street, Manhattan.
Sing-In; West Village Chorale; Gwen Gould, conductor, 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $12.
Information: (718) 499-6313.
Tuesday
ALL SOULS UNITARIAN CHURCH, Lexington Avenue at 80th Street, Manhattan.
Sing-along; choir, soloists from the Musica Viva Chorus and orchestra; Walter Klauss, conductor, 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $12.50 ($8 for the elderly and students).
Information: (212) 535-5530.
CARNEGIE HALL.
Musica Sacra, Richard Westenburg, music director, 8 P.M.
Also on Dec. 23, same time.
Tickets, $12 to $60.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
ST.
THOMAS CHURCH (Episcopal), Fifth Avenue at 53d Street, Manhattan.
Choir of men and boys, Concert Royal and Kathryn Domoney, soprano; Christopher Trueblood, countertenor; Jeffrey Thomas, tenor; Nathaniel Watson, bass ; Dr.
Gerre Hancock, conductor, 7:30 P.M.
Also on Dec. 19, same time.
Tickets, $20 and $50.
Information: (212) 757-7013.
Dec. 22
THE CHURCH OF OUR SAVIOUR (Roman Catholic), Park Avenue at 38th Street, Manhattan.
Advent and Christmas portions; choir, the Morgan Strings; Jan Bishop and Patricia Cantrell, sopranos; Nancy Deneger and Mary Ann Whitesides, contraltos; Rodne Brown and Jeff Gardner, tenors; Julian Long and Tom Sandry, baritones, 3 P.M.; Will Carter, conductor.
Donation, $10; proceeds benefit a citywide AIDS outreach program.
Information: (212) 679-8166.
Christmas Eve
BRICK PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, Park Avenue at 91st Street, Manhattan.
Christmas portion; choir; David A. Weadon, organist and choirmaster, 10 P.M.
Information: (212) 289-4400.
Dec. 27
AVERY FISHER HALL.
Sing-In; the National Choral Council; Beverly Myers, soprano; Jeffrey Dooley, alto; Robert Guarino, tenor; Thomas Sandri, bass; the guest conductors David Amram, Joseph Flummerfelt, Fenno Heath, Martin Josman, Sherrill Milnes, David Randolph, Johannes Somary and Lyndon Woodside, 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $17 to $45.
Information: (212) 875-5030.
Dec. 29
CONVENT AVENUE BAPTIST CHURCH, 145th Street at Convent Avenue, Manhattan.
Sing-In; choir; Gregory Hopkins, director, 5 P.M. (rehearsal is at 2:30 P.M.) Donations accepted; scores will not be provided.
Information: (212) 234-6767.


The Joyful Noises Of a Festive Season
THE music of Christmas makes only one demand on listeners: that they turn their attention either to the Christmas story itself or to the universal ideals of hope, peace and open-heartedness that the story is meant to convey.
Yet if the focus of the music is singular, the wealth of the literature composed over the centuries to celebrate the season is remarkably varied.
New York City's musical organizations, which include the music departments at churches this time of year, take two distinct approaches to their holiday programming.
One is to stay close to tradition, with carols and candelight services, for example, or with performances of Handel's "Messiah" and Bach's "Christmas Oratorio." The other is to find music slightly off the beaten path and show how flexible the tradition's evolution has been.


I.R.A. Supporters Fight Over One Man's Opinion
After being convicted of killing a British commando, escaping from an Irish jail and spending eight years in American prisons, Joe Doherty -- a folk hero to many Irish-Americans -- has suddenly been shunned by some of his most ardent supporters.
His heresy was writing in a newspaper column that a decision by the Irish Republican Army to plant a bomb near a hospital was wrong.
The paper, The Irish People, then dropped Mr.
Doherty's column, repudiating him as a spokesman for the movement, bewildering those Irish-Americans who revere him and exposing seldom-glimpsed tensions among the clannish supporters of Irish republicanism.


Nets, Sultans of Swat, Get 22 Blocked Shots
New Jersey, on the strength of a National Basketball Association record-setting 22 blocked shots, crushed the Denver Nuggets, 121-81, tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Nets, who were blown out by the Knicks here Tuesday night, stormed back tonight, handing Denver its worst defeat in eight years.
On Nov. 11, 1983, the Nuggets were clubbed at Portland by 40 points, 156-116.


TV Weekend; When Home Is Where the Street Is
Television's Christmas movies flow on, assuring us, one and all, that beneath the hard crust of life these days there beats a compassionate heart.
Convincing?
Not entirely, but the efforts, no matter how sentimental, surely provide a clue as to how we would really like to think of ourselves.
On Sunday at 9 P.M., for instance, CBS's "Christmas on Division Street" looks at the homeless, and inevitably finds what a press release describes as "the true meaning of sharing." Well, its heart is certainly in the right place.
Earlier this week, Jessica Tandy shone brightly in the NBC Christmas movie "The Story Lady." In "Christmas on Division Street," Hume Cronyn, her husband of almost 50 years, gets his turn to dazzle.
One of television's more admirable habits is to employ older actors who can still turn out a distinguished performance with aplomb.
That's just smart business.


6 Democrats to Meet Sunday For First Presidential Debate
The six major candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination will gather in Washington on Sunday night for their first debate and their first sustained exposure on national television.
The Democrats will debate domestic and foreign policy for an hour and a half in a studio of NBC News, which is sponsoring and broadcasting the event.
It is the first of seven prime-time debates that will be held by national broadcast outlets in the primary season.


Macy Bonds
Moody's Investors Service said yesterday that it had reduced the rating of some R. H. Macy &amp; Company bonds.
The move, which caused Macy bond prices to slip in trading, came a day after the retailer announced it had negotiated changes in its bank credit agreement.
The bonds downgraded include the senior subordinated debentures issued by R. H. Macy and by the Macy Credit Corporation, a subsidiary, which were reduced from B-3 to Caa.


Sluggish Retail Sales


Marrow-Tech Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


ALASKA GOVERNOR FACING CHALLENGE
A year after taking office, Gov.
Walter J. Hickel is facing a growing storm of political and legal crises that threaten to cut short his administration.
Mr.
Hickel, a 72-year-old self-made millionaire businessman and real estate developer, was accused of seven violations of the state's ethics law in a complaint unsealed Tuesday.


Study Set On Cable Ownership
The Federal Communications Commission signaled its interest today in eliminating or relaxing a longstanding rule that bars television networks from owning cable systems.
The move comes as the three leading networks have lost their former dominance, with many viewers migrating to cable.


Corrections
A drawing on Wednesday with an article about The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund carried an erroneous credit.
The artist was Lloyd Stevens.


Bush Considers Tax-Credit Plan To Aid Business
President Bush's top economic advisers said today for the first time that to stimulate the economy, the Administration might favor a tax credit for business investments in plants and machinery.
"The history of investment tax credits is that they are somewhat effective, and maybe for that reason we ought to do it at this time," Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady told the Senate Finance Committee.


Multiplexes, the Mad Maximum in Movies
IT was an evening of encroaching fog, but still the ticket lines formed.
In moments of unornamented reality, patrons were fencing over their choices.
About 20 people deep, a teen-age girl with gluey eyes, kicking one shoe against the toe of the other, said, "Listen, what's wrong with seeing 'Curly Sue'? So what if it's about a kid."
Her stony-faced boyfriend, busily scratching his forehead, responded curtly, "Look, I came here to see 'Hitman.' I am not leaving here until I see 'Hitman.' I would rather see 'Snow White' than 'Curly Sue.' "


Dehere Not Badly Hurt
Seton Hall guard TERRY DEHERE injured a tendon in his right wrist at the end of his team's 77-72 victory over Rutgers on Wednesday night.
But after the player was examined by the team orthopedist, Dr.
GREG GALLICK, yesterday, the trainer, JOHN LEVITT, said Dehere might be able to play in the next Seton Hall game, tomorrow against St.
Peter's.


In Police Brutality Case, One Videotape but 2 Ways to View It
A police brutality case has divided the loyalties of black Trenton residents.
On one side is Thomas Downing, who says he was beaten without cause when he asked a police officer about the arrest of his stepson.


On My Mind; Just One Prisoner
In the Middle East, families of hostages swallowed by dark and silence do not put out yellow ribbons; it is not their way.
But they remember their men every day as achingly as do Westerners, hope as passionately for signs of life from them, mourn as deeply when hope is gone.
In Israel, a whole country longs for word of Capt.
Ron Arad, taken prisoner in October 1986.
Israeli officials believe there is a chance he is alive.


Our Towns; It's Pay-for-Play: When Cost Equals Privilege
WHEN the girls' basketball team warms up here tomorrow noon against the dread Danbury Hatters, the Ridgefield Tigers will have one invisible distinction: they'll be the only players in the gym who have paid for the privilege of representing their school in athletic competition.
The infiltration of high school sports by user fees is spreading, especially in the Northeast.
To compete against another school, every Ridgefield athlete must pay $75 a sport, considerably more than the spectators pay.


Review/Film; Private Eye On the Skids, Still Trying
The best thing about Tony Scott's "Last Boy Scout" is the title, which refers to Joe Hallenbeck (Bruce Willis), a once-exemplary Secret Service agent who wore black suits, white shirts and narrow ties, who shaved each morning and who, in his finest moment, saved the life of a United States President.
Today Joe is history.
He's a burned-out case.
He is a shabby Los Angeles private eye who sleeps off his hangovers in his beat-up car.
In addition to nicotine, he is hopelessly addicted to one-liners.
When Mr.
Big, who is about to sic his goons on Joe, says that he would like, just once, to hear Joe scream, the response is a fast, "Play some rap music."


Officers Face Perjury Case
Two New York City police officers were charged yesterday with perjury in connection with their arrest of a man on gun-possession charges.
The officers, who were suspended, were accused of lying about where they found the gun they said was in his possession.
The man was a three-time convicted felon, and another conviction would bring a mandatory life sentence under Federal sentencing rules.
The United States Attorney's office in Manhattan brought the case against the two officers from the 43d Precinct -- James Gribben, 24 years old, and Carlos Maldonado, 28.


A Union Is Born, a Union Dies
There will be a new European union, just as the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and its aborted heir, the Union of Sovereign Republics, are disappearing.
The treaty is to be signed in February, after the lawyers work on it, but the decision made here by the 12 members of the European Community is definitive.
Each state will have to secure ratification by its own parliament.
Prime Minister John Major of Britain will face the toughest fight, which is why he held out on certain points at the summit despite being isolated.


Smith Juror Says First Vote Made 'Not Guilty' Obvious
One of the six jurors in the William K. Smith rape trial said today that the jury had taken a secret ballot at the start of deliberations and that all jurors voted either "not guilty" or "undecided."
"We walked in and everyone was very nervous, very insecure," said the juror, Lea Haller, in an interview at her home in the nearby town of Lake Worth.
"Nobody had any idea what anybody else thought." But after the first ballot, she said, "it was easier from there on out."


Sounds Around Town
Week's Pop Album
Bob Stewart-Hank Jones: "Welcome to the Club" (VWC Records, Post Office Box 428, Westchester Square Station, New York, N.Y. 10461).
When the arrival of rock-and-roll closed the market for straight-ahead pop ballad singing in the 1950's, Bob Stewart, who was just working his way into the field, found himself unknown with nowhere to go.
He stopped singing and made his living as the captain of a fishing party boat until he was lured back to performing a few years ago.
He got in deep enough to make a couple of albums that could not quite buck the contemporary trend.
But "Welcome to the Club," his third comeback effort, gives him surroundings -- Hank Jones on piano, Frank Wess on tenor saxophone and flute, Michael Moore on bass, Mel Lewis on drums and some unobtrusive strings -- that coax him into easy, open singing with no warped exaggerations.
There is still a thin veneer of Sinatra in Mr.
Stewart's singing, which is sometimes distracting, but his unaffected approach to pop hits of the 30's and 40's is given unexpected color and lift by the instrumental solos, especially the thoughtful depth of Mr.
Jones's piano and the commanding tension in Mr.
Wess's flute and tenor sax.


Woman and Her Son, 15, Are Held in a Triple Killing in Brooklyn
The police say the woman wanted her 15-year-old boy just to hold up the drug dealers.
But once he and his friend got inside the Brooklyn apartment Saturday night, something went wrong, and the three intended robbery victims ended up dead, each shot once in the head, investigators said yesterday in announcing the arrest of both the mother and son.
The 15-year-old, Mack Moton, has been in trouble before.
He was arrested in 1989 and charged with killing a man who had stabbed his grandfather, the police said.
He was later convicted of a gun-possession charge and sentenced to 18 months in prison.


Art in Review
'Circle and Square:  Geometric Abstraction and Constructivism in the Americas, 1934-1950' Kouros Gallery 23 East 73d Street Through tomorrow
This lively and informative exhibition of 60 works by nearly 30 artists surveys the influence of various styles of European abstraction, but especially those of Mondrian, Malevich and Klee, on 15 years of art in North and South America.
It is noteworthy for introducing completely unknown artists or unfamiliar works by little-known artists.
Either way, it is a fair amount of new information.


BASEBALL: A Deal That Looks Unbeatable; Mets Welcome Saberhagen to the Lineup With Goosebumps All Around
The scouting report on Bret Saberhagen, ordered by the Mets late in the 1991 season, was full of objective data.
Saberhagen's fastball was clocked at 97 miles an hour.
His slider, rated on a scale of 2 to 8, was assigned a 7.
His ratio of walks to innings pitched was as exemplary as ever.
For the Mets, though, the clincher was the report's subjective conclusion: "Don't know how he ever gets beat."


Adm. Edward J. O'Donnell, 84, Commander of Guantanamo Base
Adm.
Edward J. O'Donnell, who commanded the United States Navy base at Guantanamo, Cuba, during the Cuban missile crisis and the Bay of Pigs invasion, died Monday at his home in Monterey, Calif.
He was 84 years old.
Admiral O'Donnell, who retired in 1967, died of a heart attack, his family said.


At the Movies
"I love the challenge," said Louis Gossett Jr.
The 55-year-old star of such films as "An Officer and a Gentleman," "Enemy Mine" and "Iron Eagle" was getting ready to assume his role as Honey Roy Palmer, a con artist and boxer in "Diggstown."
"I've dropped 35 pounds with diet and 2 workout sesssions a day: stretching, aerobic cardiovascular sessions, the basics of boxing, taught by the people who did 'Raging Bull' and 'Rocky,' " he said.
"I take a break, a carbohydrate lunch, and then I go to Gold's Gym, to a former Mr. Olympia, a student of Arnold Schwarzenegger.


Odell E. Powers, Executive, 63
Odell E. Powers, the chairman of the Nicolet Instrument Corporation, died Wednesday at his home in Minneapolis.
He was 63 years old.
He died of stomach cancer, said George Birch, a spokesman for the company, which is based in Madison, Wis.


Cutting Back in Lebanon, Iran Is Shifting to Sudan
As it diminishes its presence in Lebanon, Iran appears to be shifting its operations to the Sudan.
That is causing growing concern in moderate Arab countries like Egypt, Tunisia and Saudi Arabia as well as among Western security officials.
Saudi, Egyptian and American officials have said in interviews that over the last few months Iran has sent between 1,000 and 2,000 of its Revolutionary Guards to train Sudanese Army and security personnel in the Sudan, even as Teheran continues to reduce the Revolutionary Guards contingent in the Bekaa region of Lebanon.


Knicks Ready for Weekend Challenge
This weekend has been circled on the Knicks' calendar for weeks.
Tonight, they visit Chicago to play the Bulls.
Tomorrow, they play host to the Boston Celtics.
No more needs to be said.
With a 13-6 start, the Knicks have shown they are better than last season.
But are they good enough to contend with the elite teams in the Eastern Conference?
By Sunday, they'll have a much better idea.


Aid for Law Graduates Who Want to Aid the Poor
Becky Jones had long imagined herself a lawyer, but never one of television's "L.A. Law" types: pin-striped legal leopards stalking grand offices and courthouses for their corporate clients.
She wanted to help regular Joes and Joans, people too poor to afford to pay for the services of the law but who could hardly afford to live without them.
A job in a public defender's office or working as a legal aid lawyer would be ideal, she thought.


Rivals See Progress in Mideast Talks
After a week of exploratory skirmishes and procedural disputes, the parties to the Middle East peace talks agreed today that they were making some progress, and that the talks would be extended for another week.
Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister and spokesman for his delegation, told reporters this afternoon that the Israelis had canceled plans to return home this afternoon in the hope of getting into "substantive negotiations" with three Arab delegations next week.


Burmese Universities Are Closed As Military Acts to Block Protests
The ruling military junta of Myanmar, formerly Burma, shut down universities in the capital today and sent army troops into the streets to break up demonstrations and arrest protesting students, the state radio reported.
Estimates of the number of those arrested ranged from 40 to 500 but the Government remained silent about detentions.
The military rulers acted to end protests by students demanding freedom for Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the Burmese Nobel Peace Prize winner who is under house arrest.


Pratt Decides To End School For Engineers
Pratt Institute, the Brooklyn-based institution known for its programs in fine arts, architecture and design, will close its engineering school in 1993 because of declining enrollment, institute officials announced yesterday.
The move comes as many of the nation's colleges and universities, facing drops in applications and financing, have considered scaling back their engineering programs because they cost more per student than traditional liberal arts programs.


Brazil and Argentina Join Up To Open Their Nuclear Sites
Brazil and Argentina are to sign an agreement on Friday that would put all their nuclear sites under full international safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The agreement is subject to ratification by Parliaments of both nations, but in a demonstration of political commitment, Presidents Fernando Collor de Mello of Brazil and Carlos Saul Menem of Argentina are to attend the signing ceremony at the Vienna headquarters of the United Nations body.


Moscow Signs Aid Accord With Community
The Soviet Prime Minister, Ivan S. Silayev, signed an agreement with the European Community today for a technical aid package worth $520 million.
"The E.C. has declared its willingness to finace work connected with reforms," Mr.
Silayev told reporters after the signing ceremony.


President of GTE Is Named Chairman
The GTE Corporation yesterday named Charles R. Lee, its longtime president, as its new chairman and chief executive, effective May 1.
Mr.
Lee has also been a senior officer in the steel, real estate and motion picture businesses.
Mr.
Lee, 51 years old, will replace James L. (Rocky) Johnson, GTE's chairman, who retires in May, when he turns 65, the company's mandatory retirement age.
Mr.
Johnson, who has served with GTE for 43 years, will remain on the board as chairman emeritus.


Judge Says NASA Can Withhold Challenger Tape
A Federal judge today refused to order the public release of the audio tape of the last moments of the seven astronauts who died aboard the space shuttle Challenger in 1986, saying it would violate the privacy of the victims' families.
"Exposure to the voice of a beloved family member immediately prior to that family member's death is what would cause the Challenger families pain," Federal District Judge Norma Holloway Johnson said in a 10-page ruling.


At Last, Harold Connolly Raises Both Arms
AT what should have been a supreme moment of his life, Harold Connolly was embarrassed.
He was standing on the winner's platform at the 1956 Olympics in Melbourne.
Photographers were screaming at him to raise his arms above his head in the traditional gesture of victory.
They grumbled when he raised only his right arm.
Harold was stubborn, cranky, uncooperative, they thought, which was true.
He also didn't want the world to see his left arm, damaged at birth, a twisted, dysfunctional arm four inches shorter than the arm that had just flung the hammer to an Olympic record.
"The thought of being patronized made me sick," says Harold Connolly now.
"I wanted to play by the rules, not rules adapted for me because I was disabled. My coming to the Special Olympics three years ago was strictly a quirk of fate, but now I think it was my calling all the time."


BASEBALL: Speaking of the Yanks, How About Those Mets?; Definition of Joke: Michael Seeking Money to Maneuver
Hours before the Mets made their bold move to acquire Bret Saberhagen in a five-player deal Wednesday night, 11 team officials, from owners to super scouts, sat in a smallish suite and kicked around the pros and cons of the swap.
Watching his people work out the equation, the Mets' co-owner, Fred Wilpon turned to his general manager, Al Harazin, and said, "I'm proud of this organization."


Sports of The Times; Numbers Guy Recognizes Good Karma
THEY are another team now, Al Harazin's team.
The man has been the Mets' top dealer for a few months, and he has already made radical moves that only conservatives can make.
Nixon went to China.
Reagan made friends with Gorby.
And Al Harazin remade the Mets in one stunning autumn.
This is a man who freely admits he has never owned a pair of blue jeans, a blue-blazer type guy who makes trades like a 1967 flower child talking peace and love, passing around cookies in People's Park.


RESULTS PLUS
PRO BASKETBALL  Cavaliers Beat Hawks  Larry Nance scored 26 points and Brad Daugherty had 20 points and 15 rebounds as the Cleveland Cavaliers kept their home record perfect by beating the Atlanta Hawks, 134-107, last night in Richfield, Ohio.
Cleveland is 9-0 at home. (AP) Bucks 109, Bullets 97: Moses Malone had 24 points and a season-high 19 rebounds as Milwaukee ended a road losing streak at eight games with a victory over Washington in Landover, Md.
The Bucks, whose last victory away from home was on Nov. 8 at Charlotte, N.C., got 21 points from Larry Krystkowiak and 15 from Dale Ellis. (AP) Rockers 99, Warriors 96: Rookie Matt Bullard hit a dunk shot with 16 seconds left to lift Houston over Golden State in Oakland.
Bullard's shot gave the Rockets a 97-96 lead.
Golden State's Sarunas Marciulionis missed a jumper from the lane with two seconds left and Houston's Kenny Smith then made two free throws. (AP) Kings 106, Magic 100: Lionel Simmons scored 28 points and Wayman Tisdale had 26 points and 11 rebounds as Sacramento handed Orlando its fifth consecutive loss. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Michigan Rolls  Chris Webber, a freshman, scored 19 points as Michigan cruised to a 91-77 victory over Eastern Michigan last night in Ann Arbor.
The Wolverines (4-0) thought they would have a tougher time against Eastern (3-4), which advanced to the final 16 of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament last year. (AP) Kentucky 101, Morehead State 84: Richie Farmer hit a 3-pointer to spark a 12-2 run in the final 2 minutes 54 seconds, lifting Kentucky to a victory over Morehead State in Louisville.
The Wildcats are 5-1. (AP) Utah 84, Lewis-Clark College 62: Antoine Davision and Phil Dixon each scored 14 points as Utah, playing without star forward Josh Grant, led from start to finish against the outmanned Warriors. (AP) HOCKEY  Bruins Beat Canadiens  Barry Pederson scored his first goal as a reclaimed Bruin to climax a 12-shot barrage at 3 minutes 33 seconds of the first period, and beleaguered Boston went on to a 5-2 home-ice victory last night over the Montreal Canadiens.
The ended the Bruins' streak without a victory at four games. (AP) Red Wings 4, Nordiques 1: Nicklas Lidstrom and Sergei Fedorov each had a goal and an assist as the Detroit Red Wings defeated the Quebec Nordiques for their ninth successive victory at home.
Chang defeated Patrick McEnroe, 6-2, 6-4.
Lendl beat Jakob Hlasek, 7-6 (9-7) 6-3. (AP)


Pop/Jazz; Folk Music As Ultimate Sing-Along
Folk music has a long tradition of organized togetherness that is still symbolized by hootenannies, group sing-alongs introduced by Pete Seeger and Woody Guthrie and later popularized on television during the 1960's folk boom.
The folk craze may have faded and the hootenanny become as anachronistic as the Edsel, but among folk musicians the need for togetherness still prevails.
What cohesion exists today is largely owed to performers like Christine Lavin, who is to perform with the singers John Gorka, Patty Larkin and Cliff Eberhardt tonight and tomorrow night at the Bottom Line in Manhattan in a folk-pop concert titled "On a Winter's Night."


Yeltsin vs. Gorbachev: Soviet Leader Slipping
The long political rivalry between Boris N. Yeltsin, the Russian President, and Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet President, appeared to have been decisively altered in Mr.
Yeltsin's favor by the failed coup attempt against Mr.
Gorbachev in August.
But the Soviet leader counterattacked strongly, hoping to repair the damage to the concept of union, on which he had staked his political existence.


Intrawest Development reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Palm Beach Journal; Verdict Leaves Society Free to Play
At Au Bar, it was back to business as usual early this morning.
Around a noisy bar, middle-age men in silk shirts open just enough to offer a glimpse of chest hair and gold chains raised their glasses to fashionably dressed women half their ages.


New Plan Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


In Rushdie Speech, Writers See Freedom Come 'Alive'
Salman Rushdie's unannounced appearance at Columbia University on Wednesday night profoundly moved people who had come to the Graduate School of Journalism to celebrate freedom of speech but had not expected to hear from a modern-day martyr to its cause.
Most of those at the dinner are involved professionally in the First Amendment -- using it, promoting it and defending it.


Ennisteel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


POLIO SYNTHESIZED IN THE TEST TUBE
Scientists have synthesized polio virus in the test tube, the first time that an entire virus has been created outside of living cells.
The achievement may make it easier to analyze the various steps by which a virus is assembled from its individual components, knowledge that may lead to methods of blocking the replication of viruses that cause disease.


Biomet reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


CRI Insured Mortgage Association reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.62
4.00
7.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.16
4.14
6.84
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.17
4.15
6.70
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.69
6.72
7.87
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
7.75
7.80
8.11
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.78
8.80
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.84
6.86
7.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


BASEBALL: Speaking of the Yanks, How About Those Mets?; Harazin Made List And Got Almost All He Wanted
Al Harazin sat on the sofa in room 1506 of the Fontainebleau Hilton Hotel, the Atlantic Ocean glistening below in the morning sun beyond the window behind him.
He looked at the months-old sheet of paper in his hand and smiled.
He had good reason to smile.
On the paper, he had written his off-season plan of attack.
"I was concerned about the perception of the people who buy our tickets," the Mets' general manager said.
"I feel the perception after last season was not only that it wasn't a good team but that it wasn't an interesting team."


How White House Is Pushing Congress Aside; Quayle's Deregulators
To the Editor:
"Questions on Role of Quayle Council" (news article, Nov. 19), describing activities of the White House Council on Competitiveness, a regulatory review panel headed by Vice President Dan Quayle, is particularly disturbing to one who labors under the delusion that we live in a representative democracy.


Walter Brewster Wolfe, Physician, 66
Dr.
Walter Brewster Wolfe, an internist in the mid-Hudson Valley for 35 years, died Saturday at Naples (Fla.) Community Hospital.
He was 66 years old and lived in Newburgh, N.Y., with a winter home in Marco Island, Fla.
His family said he died of pneumonia.


Accounts
*
Payless Drug Stores, Wilsonville, Ore., to J. Walter Thompson, Detroit.
Billings were not disclosed.
Advertising for the company had previously been handled by its in-house advertising staff. *
Biotel Inc. to Ally &amp; Gargano, New York, for a line of home health-testing products.
Ally's health-care subsidiary, Dugan/Farley Communications, will handle campaigns directed to medical professionals, while Ally will create consumer advertising.
The account has a $5 million budget, an agency spokeswoman said.


Baker Presents Steps to Aid Transition by Soviets
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d laid out an American plan today for dealing with the collapse of the Soviet Union, including a call for an international conference in Washington in January to divide responsibilities between different nations to deal with the needs of a "disoriented and confused" Soviet people.
In a 50-minute address at Princeton University, Mr.
Baker outlined a series of steps that Washington would take to help dismantle Soviet nuclear weapons, stabilize the economy, establish democratic institutions and overcome food and medical shortages.
But there was no call for a significant increase in United States funds for the former Soviet Union.


KOREAS SIGN PACT RENOUNCING FORCE IN A STEP TO UNITY
Leaders of North and South Korea signed a treaty of reconciliation and nonaggression this morning, renouncing armed force against each other and saying that they would formally bring the Korean War to an end 38 years after the fighting ceased.
The agreement would also re-establish some measure of regular communication between the two countries, including telephone lines, mail, some economic exchanges and the reunion of some families who have been separated since war broke out in 1950.
It would also commit the countries to rebuilding railway and road links across the heavily guarded border, known as the Demilitarized Zone, which has been the symbol of the armed division of the country for almost four decades.


CHRONICLE
To hear ROGER AILES tell it, his two decades as a political consultant, including his campaign for President Bush in 1988, were a mere diversion.
After helping elect three Presidents, Mr.
Ailes, the president of Ailes Communication Inc. in Manhattan, has, in a way, given up politics.


U.S. Growth Figures Seen As Lower
For the second time in a month, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development has reportedly revised downward its projection for economic growth in the United States.
According to Agence France-Presse, the O.E.C.D.'s latest economic report -- which is embargoed for release until next Friday -- says that the American economy will grow by 2.2 percent in 1992.
That figure is down from the forecast of a 2.5 percent American growth rate in 1992 that the Paris-based organization made just one month ago.
And last month's prediction was significantly lower than the 3.1 percent growth rate for 1992 that the O.E.C.D. had projected six weeks earlier.


Washington Talk; Abortion: Something Two Sides Agree On
In the polarized world of abortion politics, the swirl of competing agendas has produced an odd moment of unanimity.
Both sides want a quick review by the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania's restrictive abortion law, even though that could bring an early test of Roe v.
Wade, the precedent that established the constitutional right to abortion.
That prospect was heightened on Monday when, six weeks before a filing deadline, Ernie D. Preate Jr., the Attorney General of Pennsylvania and an opponent of abortion, surprised advocates of the right to choose an abortion by seeking a review of the state law.
Last month, the American Civil Liberties Union and Planned Parenthood petitioned the Court to consider the case.


Panel Votes For Rollback Of Tax Rise
With angry Republicans still boycotting the proceedings, the Senate Appropriations Committee approved today a five-bill package that would roll back the $2.8 billion tax increase the committee helped to write and push through the Legislature 18 months ago.
The "sunset" package, which would repeal the sales and income tax increases at the end of the fiscal year next June 30, was approved by a 5-to-1 vote, with all three Republican members staying home to protest the Democratic repeal effort.


Oldest Pottery in Americas Is Found in Amazon Basin
The earliest pottery ever found in the Western Hemisphere has been excavated in the Amazon basin of Brazil, providing strong evidence to overturn the standard assumption that the vast tropical forest region was too poor in resources to have supported a complex prehistoric culture.
The discovery was seen by archeologists as strengthening the emerging view that the people of the Amazon, far from being held back by their environment, managed their limited resources so well that they achieved technological and esthetic advances long before other American cultures.
This is leading to a new understanding of the ecology of cultural development.


Data Show Poor Start For Sales
Reflecting a desultory start to the holiday shopping season, retail sales rose three-tenths of 1 percent in November, to $153.1 billion, the Commerce Department reported today.
Such transactions cover a wide variety of outlets from department stores to fast-food restaurants and account for half of all consumer spending and a third of all economic activity


Toney, His Title on Line, Wants Fans in His Corner
He was virtually unknown last May 10 when he challenged Michael Nunn, the International Boxing Federation middleweight champion, in Nunn's hometown of Davenport, Iowa.
In fact, James Toney was so obscure that when he knocked out Nunn in the 11th round, reporters asked Toney to set up a special session, after the formal post-fight news conference, to give them biographical background.


U.S. Shipbuilding Withers as Japan's Thrives
To the Editor:
To the families of the 50,000 American shipyard workers who have lost their jobs in the last decade, the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor will be a harsh reminder that the United States shipbuilding industry, which helped bring victory over Japan in World War II, is on the verge of collapse, while Japan has emerged as the strongest shipbuilding country in the world.


Messier Hangs Hat Trick on Capitals
Under his new contract, Mark Messier earned $21,875 for this one night's work; for this hat trick, and for this desperately needed 5-3 victory by the Rangers over the Washington Capitals.
But standing at his locker tonight after the game, with his 4-year-old son, Lion, wide-eyed by his side, it was clear that Messier had performed his three-goal feat for less mercenary reasons.
The Capitals, those ice-rink bullies, simply had to be beaten.


Knicks Stand Taller but Jordan Jumps Higher
The Knicks are an improving team.
The Chicago Bulls are a championship team.
Tonight, that difference was reinforced.
Leading from start to finish, Chicago raised its record to 17-3, the best in the National Basketball Association, with a 99-89 victory over the Knicks at Chicago Stadium.


Handwritten Notes Sealed Case, Jurors Say
Handwritten notes by Assembly Speaker Mel Miller's former legislative aide and a $5,000 down payment were the crucial pieces of evidence in convicting Mr.
Miller and his co-defendant in connection with one fraudulent scheme, members of the jury said last night.
And the jurors said they found the defendants guilty in that single scheme -- and not in two others -- even though several victims testified that they did not feel cheated.


A Developer for Disney Is Focusing on Anaheim
After splitting his time in recent years between Paris, where the Walt Disney Company is building Euro Disneyland, and Orlando, Fla., where it has been expanding Walt Disney World, Peter Rummell moved with his family to California last week to prepare for the company's next big theme-park project.
As president of the Disney Development Company, the subsidiary that handles the design and planning for the company's biggest projects, Mr.
Rummell will now focus on a new 470-acre, $3 billion theme park adjacent to Disneyland in Anaheim, south of Los Angeles.


A Soviet (Russian) Academy Is Adrift
The Soviet Academy of Sciences has died a quiet death, ending an era for one of the world's scientific powerhouses and one of the Soviet Union's most august institutions.
To no one's great surprise, in keeping with a trend that has picked up dizzying speed lately, the old academy simply gave way to a new one, different only in name.
Even the name change is part of a continuum, said officials at the academy's grandiose headquarters off Lenin Avenue.


CHRONICLE
MARGARET THATCHER, the former British Prime Minister, who is 66 years old, and her husband, DENIS THATCHER, 76, celebrated their 40th wedding anniversary Thursday at a party at Claridge's in London.
JOHN MAJOR, who succeeded Mrs.
Thatcher as Prime Minister a year ago, joined 275 other guests, quelling, for the moment at least, rumors that they were quarreling.
There have been numerous reports that they disagreed over Mr.
Major's negotiations at the European summit this week in Maastricht, the Netherlands.


Tokyo Stocks Advance 4.8% On Buying Tied to Futures
A day that many had feared would produce a rout in the stock market turned into an explosive rally today, giving share prices a big -- if possibly temporary -- lift from their recent doldrums.
The closely watched 225-issue Nikkei stock average took off from the start of trading and then caught a second wind in the afternoon to post a 1,042.33-point rise, to 22,754.90.
That represented a 4.8 percent jump -- comparable to a 140-point rise in the Dow Jones industrial average -- and was one of the sharpest one-day rallies in recent years.


Deficit Grows $333 Million In New York
The State Financial Control Board said yesterday that New York City was facing an additional $333 million shortfall in its current budget only a month after the Dinkins administration moved to cut $210 million in spending to close an earlier gap.
Much of the new problem, the state analysts said, is the result of the state's own severe budget difficulties, which are likely to lead to steep reductions in state aid.


Bush Walks Tightrope: Soviet Aid, Risks at Home
The Bush Administration created its plan to aid the Soviet economy in about five days.
The plan for American economic recovery will have taken about five months by the time the President offers his promised growth proposals late in January.
This contrast in timing defines the problem Mr.
Bush faces as he tries to fulfill the international obligations that are central to his duties as President, while at the same time preparing for an election that could turn on domestic problems.


Ithaca and Dayton to Play Today for Title
The Amos Alonzo Stagg Bowl, named after the college football pioneer who coached for 60 years, will be played this afternoon in Bradenton, Fla., matching Dayton University and Ithaca College for the Division III national championship.
Division III is the small-college grouping of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
Athletic scholarships are forbidden, as is spring practice and a maximum of regular-season games is set at 10.


House Report Faults F.C.C.
A Congressional report released today accuses the Federal Communications Commission of being "asleep at the switch" in responding to a growing threat of widespread breakdowns in the nation's telephone networks.
Prepared by the House Government Operations Committee after recent breakdowns involving the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and local telephone companies in several cities, the report contends that the F.C.C. has been unwilling to recognize the magnitude of new technical problems or the Government's responsibility in setting standards and monitoring quality.


Battling in Court to Stay on Court
Conrad McRae fully expected this to be his year.
After spending two seasons as a key reserve for Syracuse University's basketball team, the 6-foot-10-inch junior was looking forward to playing a pivotal role as the Orangemen's starting center.
Instead, McRae finds himself at the center of a convoluted, two-pronged fight with Syracuse and the National Collegiate Athletic Association over his eligibility.


Schiller Faces Inquiry
HARVEY SCHILLER, the executive director of the United States Olympic Committee, met yesterday with a special investigator, and MIKE MORAN, a U.S.O.C. spokesman, said no results of the inquiry would be announced before next week.
ARNOLD BURNS, a former United States Deputy Attorney General, is investigating at least five allegations that Schiller asked for free equipment or clothing. (AP)


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a supporter of Boris N. Yeltsin, the President of the Russian republic, mistranslated a sign she held.
It said, "Fight, you are right." The first word was a pun on Mr.
Yeltsin's first name, which in Russian differs by one letter from a form of the verb "fight."


Ken Keltner, 75, Indians Infielder Who Helped End DiMaggio Streak
Ken Keltner, the Cleveland third baseman whose backhanded stops of two hard grounders helped end Joe DiMaggio's 56-game hitting streak in 1941, was found dead in his Milwaukee apartment on Thursday.
Mr.
Keltner, who was 75 years old, apparently died of a heart attack, his family said.
His body was discovered when he failed to show up at a nursing home for a regular visit with his wife, Evelyn, who suffered a stroke recently.


NORIEGA'S DEFENSE DENIES DRUG BRIBES
Defense lawyers assailed Government attempts to show a paper trail from Colombia's cocaine lords to the bank accounts of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega after a week of testimony by financial analysts in the ousted Panamanian leader's drug trial.
They claimed in a counterattack on Thursday that he got his money from the Central Intelligence Agency, Israeli arms deals and his wife's income, and not drug barons.


Editorial Notebook; Why Cheer for William K. Smith?
Every day during the celebrated rape trial in Palm Beach, the television cameras recorded a crowd of people cheering William Kennedy Smith as he entered and left the courthouse.
Not only after he told his story, or after he was acquitted, but before he even took the stand.
He was an accused rapist, yet people cheered.
Mr.
Smith's testimony left the jury with more than reasonable doubt that he had committed rape.
But did he merit cheers?


U.N. Urges Nations to Begin Restoring Ties to South Africa
The General Assembly called unanimously today on all nations to start restoring sports, cultural, scientific and academic ties with South Africa in recognition of the progress it has made toward abolishing apartheid.
The Assembly also said that nations should prepare to phase out remaining economic and other sanctions against South Africa as the country moves toward a democratic non-racial system.


Student Invents Device for Giving Skis a Lift
A student at the New York University School of Business has invented a device for carrying downhill skis.
It is designed to fit in your jacket pocket once you reach the slopes.
Arnon Rosan, 22 years old, of New York, calls his product the Ski Valet.
Made of molded plastic, the palm-sized carrier secures the tails of skis to a wheel with rubber treads.
The Ski Valet works like a miniature dolly.
Rather than carrying your alpine skis, you pull them along behind you.


Corrections
A sports article on Thursday about the World League of American Football referred incorrectly to a meeting to be held in Dallas this month on a plan to have National Football League players participate in the W.L.A.F.
The meeting participants will be World League owners and officials, not N.F.L. owners.


Warming Up for the Primary Primary
New Hampshire is the grim winnower of Presidential politics, its first-in-the-nation primary making some candidates and breaking others, slapping down Presidents and creating instant stars.
On Feb. 18, 1992, New Hampshire voters will have the chance to exercise that power with a vengeance on a fresh and vulnerable Democratic field, and on a nervous President faced with a "send 'em a message" challenger.


Conviction Adds New Troubles for Cuomo and the Budget
The conviction of Assembly Speaker Mel Miller on Federal fraud charges today threw the state's already chaotic budget negotiations into deeper disarray and raised serious new questions about whether Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo would be able to run for President.
When the jury's guilty verdict was read in a Brooklyn courtroom late this afternoon, Mr.
Miller immediately lost both his 44th Assembly District seat and the Speaker's office.
His expulsion from the Assembly, which occurs automatically when a legislator is convicted of a felony, raised the curtain on a backstage succession fight that began months before the start of Mr.
Miller's trial.


U.S. Restarting Nuclear Arms Reactor
After billions of dollars in repairs and years of retraining operators and modernizing procedures, the Energy Department said today that it had begun the process of restarting a nuclear reactor in South Carolina that produces radioactive fuel for the nuclear arsenal.
The order to restart the K reactor at the Savannah River nuclear weapons plant near Aiken, S.C., was made this afternoon by Energy Secretary James D. Watkins.
The reactor is expected to achieve a sustained nuclear chain reaction, from which the nuclear bomb fuel is produced, either on Saturday or Sunday, the department said.


California's Credit Lowered in Face of Deficit
Citing California's multibillion-dollar budget deficit, Standard &amp; Poor's, one of the nation's top debt rating agencies, today lowered the state's credit rating from the highest rating of AAA.
In a sign of decreasing confidence in the state's ability to solve its fiscal problems, at least in the short term, the downgrading, to AA, means that the state will have to pay higher interest for the bonds that it sells to raise capital.
Long-Term Growth Expected
The lowered rating comes at a time when California is facing an economic crisis that includes a projected $2.2 billion budget deficit, when some big companies are slashing jobs and others are moving out of state.


H.I.V. Could Cut Haitian Entry to U.S.
Federal officials involved in the handling of thousands of Haitian refugees in United States custody at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba say that a high incidence of the virus that causes AIDS among Haitians who have been cleared to apply for political asylum here may indefinitely delay or prevent their entry into this country.
A senior official involved in shaping policy on the Haitians said today that a debate over what to do with refugees who test positive for H.I.V., the AIDS virus, has not been resolved, but added that "if the numbers are large enough, public-health concerns begin to trump refugee concerns."


Paris Urges Lebanon Reform
The French Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas, winding up a two-day visit to Lebanon, pressed Government leaders here today on applying democratic procedure now that the civil war is over, and called for withdrawal of all foreign forces.
Mr.
Dumas told a news conference before he left for talks with Syrian officials in Damascus that his Government supported a United Nations Security Council resolution calling for withdrawl of the Israel Army from an enclave it occupies in southern Lebanon.


Classical Music in Review
Barbara Held, Flutist Merkin Concert Hall


Lauda Airline In Boeing Deal
The Boeing Company said today that Lauda Air of Austria had become the seventh customer for the new 777 wide-bodied twin jet.
Lauda ordered four 777's plus one 767-300 extended-range twin jet, for a total value of about $670 million, including spares and training, based on first deliveries occurring in 1997.
Lauda did not specify engine choice or configuration of the 777's, which can seat up to 375 passengers.
Boeing designed the 777 to meet demand for a jetliner between the company's 767-300 and 747-400 in size.
Lauda, which pioneered many long-haul nonstop routes out of Vienna, has selected the longer-range 777 to operate initialy on its Austria-Far East routes, where a higher capacity aircraft than the 767 is needed.
Firm orders and commitments for the 777 now stand at 86, with 75 options.


Sports Leisure; Runner Seeking Title in Her 2d Sport
Amanda White of Cockeysville, Md., who took up running only 15 months ago, is one of the leading contenders in the Kinney High School Cross-Country championships today in San Diego.
Running may not even be her best sport.
White, a 16-year-old junior at Dulaney High School, is also ranked nationally in swimming.
She also appears to be a natural runner.
White joined her school's cross-country team last year over the objections of her swimming coach, then won the state championship and placed third in the Kinney nationals.


Guidepost
To Protect Littlest Angels  Safety experts advise adults who will have small children in their homes at Christmas to take a thorough look around and put potential hazards out of reach.
Those not accustomed to having children around can conduct this simple test: Get on your knees and see what you can reach; if you can reach it and it could be dangerous, lock it away.
Remember that children can climb onto chairs and tables to get at things.
And if you will be driving with small children, rent or borrow a car seat.
Here are some additional suggestions.
Household Hazards
Cleaning supplies and medicines should be locked away or put on a high shelf, as should perfumes, liquor, house plants, cat box filler, garbage cans and bric-a-brac.
Cover electrical outlets, and be sure electrical cords cannot be pulled to topple lamps or other devices.
Easy-to-reach drawers should be cleared of things like earrings, batteries, nails, buttons, razors and knives.
Baby Furniture
Don't borrow or use old cribs, playpens, strollers or high chairs that might not meet current safety standards.
Get a child safety gate or other shield to bar access to open stairways or balconies.
Preventing Burns
Shield open fireplaces; move space heaters out of reach; never leave an iron out.
Lower hot-water thermostat to prevent scalds if a faucet is accidentally turned on.
Water
Toddlers love to play with water, so keep bathroom doors closed and toilet lids down.
Sources: American Association of Retired Persons, Consumer Product Safety Commission


U.S. Lag in Controlling Smog Is Tied to Misplaced Efforts
A new study by the National Academy of Sciences has found that smog is so poorly understood that much of the nation's effort to control it may be misdirected.
The study was required under the Clean Air Act passed last year and is scheduled to be issued on Wednesday.
It said progress in meeting standards for smog "has been extremely slow at best," in part because of measurement problems.
Among these problems, it said, is properly accounting for variations in weather.


Edward O'Donnell, 84, Admiral At Guantanamo in 1960's, Dies
Adm.
Edward J. O'Donnell, who commanded the United States Navy base at Guantanamo, Cuba, during the Cuban missile crisis and the Bay of Pigs invasion, died Monday at his home in Monterey, Calif.
He was 84 years old.
Admiral O'Donnell, who retired in 1967, died of a heart attack, his family said.


Long Delayed, New Town In Queens Appears Dead
A long-stalled effort to build a "new town" on a vast ocean-front site in Queens has stalled again because the poor economy has forced the developer to withdraw, city officials said yesterday.
They said that the 23-year-old Arverne urban renewal project in the Rockaways -- already one of the nation's most notorious examples of redevelopment gone nowhere -- suffered its latest setback when the developer of the latest plan for the site, Oceanview Associates of Manhattan, pulled out last week.


Bush's Balancing Act
The Bush Administration drew up its proposal to aid the Soviet economy in about five days.
The plan for an American economic recovery, expected to be issued in January, has taken months.
The contrast points to President Bush's dilemma in balancing foreign and domestic priorities.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


'Good Housekeeping' Holds A Book Sale for the Neediest
It turned out that Alice Garbarini Hurley had only been playing possum, standing there unassumedly with that chest-to-chin stack of books.
Because when she spotted her prey, she took off like a tiger -- whoosh -- past the other literary bargain hunters.
Moments later she resumed her pose, but now with a copy of "Dave's Way" on her pile.


Anglers Warm to 'Letting Them Go'
"Let them go, let them grow" is a sport-fishing slogan of the Saskatchewan Parks and Natural Resources Department that reflects a growing attitude in this Western province and across Northern Canada.
Steve MacKinnon, a native of Prince Albert and a lodge owner in Northern Saskatchewan, supports the province's catch-and-release policy, even though it occasionally puts him on the defensive.
MacKinnon, whose Ena Lake Lodge opened last summer, voluntarily adopted the policy to maintain and enhance the good fishing at the lake, a 15-mile, glacial-carved body of water just a short cast from the border of the Northwest Territories.


Miller Is Found Guilty of Fraud; Speaker Loses Seat in Assembly
Assembly Speaker Mel Miller was convicted of fraud charges yesterday, shattering his career as one of the most powerful politicians in New York State.
Mr.
Miller, of Brooklyn, was convicted of 8 of the 19 felony charges against him.
The verdict means that he is automatically expelled from the State Assembly and faces the likelihood of going to prison and being disbarred.
It also promises to have broad impact in Albany, where, as the Assembly's top Democrat, he was one of the chief negotiators in efforts to solve the state's worsening budget problems.


Carnegie Hall Splits Its Public Affairs Office
Carnegie Hall's public affairs department is being reorganized into two independent departments, the hall's executive director, Judith Arron, announced yesterday.
The two new departments are marketing, to be headed by David Kitto, and public relations, to be headed by Jennifer Wada.
Mr.
Kitto, who joined the Carnegie Hall staff in 1983 as marketing manager, will oversee marketing and advertising efforts and will direct the hall's licensing and tour programs.
Ms.
Wada, who has been assistant director of public relations since 1987, will be responsible for press and public relations.


Cascade International Chain Plans to File for Bankruptcy
Cascade International Inc., the retail clothing and fragrance chain whose chief executive and majority shareholder, Victor G. Incendy, disappeared last month, said it would seek protection from creditors in bankruptcy court.
The announcement was made yesterday in a company news release by Aaron Karp, a New York lawyer who was appointed interim chairman after Mr.
Incendy disappeared amid charges that the company had been misleading investors about the extent of its operations and its financial health.
The release stated that the company expected to file its Chapter 11 petition next week and would then develop "an appropriate plan for restructuring."


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Autotrol Corp., Glendale, Wis., a maker of water treatment equipment, said it had agreed in principle to merge with Wicor Inc., Milwaukee, a holding company, with Autotrol becoming a wholly owned subsidiary of Wicor. *
Electrosource Inc., Austin, Tex., a battery technology concern, said it would sell $1.5 million in preferred stock to a partnership and would not pursue the proposed merger with a privately held company as announced earlier.


Editorial Notebook; Why Cheer for William K. Smith?
Every day during the celebrated rape trial in Palm Beach, the television cameras recorded a crowd of people cheering William Kennedy Smith as he entered and left the courthouse.
Not only after he told his story, or after he was acquitted, but before he even took the stand.
He was an accused rapist, yet people cheered.
Mr.
Smith's testimony left the jury with more than reasonable doubt that he had committed rape.
But did he merit cheers?


K.G.B. Passes Secrets Back to U.S.
Robert S. Strauss, the American Ambassador to Moscow, was visiting his new friend, the head of the K.G.B., the other day when Mr.
Strauss witnessed the "most amazing thing" he had ever seen.
In a display of the new candor in the Soviet-American relationship, the K.G.B. chief, Vadim V. Bakatin, not only admitted that his agency had bugged the new American Embassy in Moscow but also turned over detailed plans that he said showed how it had been done.


Maxwell Inquiry Focus: Goldman
The strong relationship between Robert Maxwell and Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company has become a focus of investigation by British Government officials amid suggestions that Goldman's actions served to support the share price of the Maxwell Communication Corporation over a period of many months.
A spokeswoman for Britain's Serious Fraud Office, which is already investigating other aspects of Mr.
Maxwell's dealings, said today that it had received information from officials at the Department of Trade and Industry that could lead to a formal inquiry into Mr.
Maxwell's transactions with Goldman.
"We'll decide early next week," she said.


Crowd Rallies to Guard Honecker
Hundreds of pro-Communist demonstrators blocked the Chilean Embassy early today to support the former East German leader Erich Honecker, who was sheltered inside as a midnight deadline for his expulsion passed.
Germany is seeking Mr.
Honecker's extradition to put him on trial on manslaughter charges for the policy of shooting people who tried to flee Communist East Germany.


CHRONICLE
It would be hard to match the spectacular effects that ARNOLD SCAASI provided for a cocktail party he gave to honor NORMAN MAILER on Tuesday.
Mr.
Scaasi had some Roosevelt Island ruins, the remains of the mid-19th-century Smallpox Hospital, lighted so they were visible from his apartment overlooking the East River from Manhattan.
The designer said that since moving in a year ago, he had wondered why the old hospital, a New York City landmark, was lost in darkness at night.
"In Europe, ruins are lit, not just ignored," he said.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Wheaton and Stich Win


Too Much Scratching For Too Little Reward
To the Editor:
It is unsurprising that New York City's anti-crime lottery game is not meeting sales expectations, as you report Nov. 19.
Although the concept -- a lottery where money goes to the city's social needs, rather than to the state -- seems quite attractive, in practice the game works very differently from the state lottery and is burdensome to play.


U.S. Shipbuilding Withers as Japan's Thrives; Remember the Mariners
To the Editor:
During the 1991-95 period, the United States will commemorate World War II, a conflict that began and ended at sea.
"The Imprint of Pearl Harbor" (editorial, Dec. 1) should also have mentioned the American merchant mariners who shared the dangers and losses of the war.


Penguins Beat Devils in Final Minute
Jubilation turned to gloom for the Devils in the waning moments of tonight's game with the Pittsburgh Penguins at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Scott Stevens inspired the delirium by tying the game for the Devils with 76 seconds left in the third period, but Joe Mullen quieted matters 40 seconds later with the goal that gave the Penguins a 4-3 triumph.


Douglas and the Lakers Agree on Offer Sheet
Point guard SHERMAN DOUGLAS has signed an offer sheet with the Los Angeles Lakers, the team said yesterday.
Terms were not announced.
Douglas, a restricted free agent, hasn't played this season because of a contract dispute with the Miami Heat.
The Heat, for whom Douglas played the last two seasons, has 15 days to match the Lakers' offer or give up rights to the former Syracuse star.


Quote of the Day
"I think it's a disgrace. I think it was a political witch hunt." MEL MILLER, New York Assembly Speaker, after his conviction.  [ 1:2. ] "It's always a sad situation when any public official is indicted and convicted." ANDREW J. MALONEY, who prosecuted him.  [ 1:2. ]


Middle-Class and Jobless, They Share Sorrows
As a chill rain soaked the bare trees and a "House for Sale" sign outside, 11 people sat around a living room in this middle-class enclave today and told two members of Congress what a faltering economy had done to their once-satisfying lives.
"We feel we are typical of the people for whom the American Dream fell flat on its face," said the hostess, Elaine Feldman, as the House Majority Leader, Richard A. Gephardt, and Representative Rosa DeLauro nodded sympathetically.
"We did everything right. Now, in our 50's, we find ourselves losing our home, and where do we go?"


Was He Just a Dreamer? Or Was It All a Fraud?
As his criminal fraud trial closed today, Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City heard his lawyer call him a "visionary" and a "dreamer" who just wanted to be a successful developer and who would "bet the last chip" to reach his goal.
"Dreamers are entitled to their dreams and their folly," said the lawyer, Matthew P. Boylan.
But the Mayor also heard Michael Chertoff, the United States Attorney for New Jersey, say he had no objection to Mr.
McCann's dreaming dreams, but that "He dreamt dreams at someone else's expense, and when he bet the last chip, he used someone else's chip."


Sports of The Times; The Cases Of Manley And Nixon
You had to feel strong emotion for Dexter Manley, the 32-year-old football player gripped by a drug addiction who tearfully bade us farewell at a news conference Thursday.
This was the fourth time that Manley, most recently a defensive end for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, had tested positive for drug or alcohol abuse since he entered the National Football League in 1981.
He had been suspended from football twice before.
He was reinstated in November 1990, but now, he would not be allowed to play anymore.
And you had to wonder, what will become of Dexter Manley?
You had to feel strong emotion because somehow you felt that Dexter Manley was beset by something he has not been able to control, despite his desperate attempts.
It seems certain that he didn't want or need these troubles, that he didn't want to give up his $650,000-a-year contract, nor embarrass and humiliate himself or his family.


Classical Music in Review
June Anderson, Soprano Carnegie Hall


Teamsters Vote Is Official
Ronald Carey won the teamsters' presidency in the union's first rank-and-file election, according to final results today.
Mr.
Carey, who heads a Queens local, finished with 188,883 votes, or 48 percent; R. V. Durham received 129,538, or 33 percent; and Walter Shea finished with 71,227 votes, or 18 percent.
Some ballots were disqualified.


Hey, Nobody Pays Retail, Right?
Turning a corner at Times Square, you come upon a line of 30 terrific-looking 25-year-olds outside a small loft building.
It looks like the opening of a hot new club.
But, no, it's better than that -- a sample sale of Italian sportswear.
"Stuff I love," says a tall redhead, rolling her eyes, "and dirt cheap."
You're waiting for a light in the garment center now.
Someone hands you a flier for a sample sale of beaded evening dresses.
A minute later it's a flier for shearling coats, then lingerie, cashmere sweaters, leather jackets -- all being offered at, you are told, heartbreaking savings.


Classical Music in Review
Richard Tauber Centennial Gala Carnegie Hall


Hurdles, Big and Small, for Baker's Trip
As Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d prepares to set off for Moscow, Administration officials acknowledge that even their modest plans for helping to prevent disorder in the crumbling Soviet Union face formidable obstacles -- not the least of which could be finding fuel to power Mr.
Baker's plane on his tour of Soviet republics.
Mr.
Baker leaves on Saturday for Russia, Ukraine, Kirghizia, Byelorussia and Kazakhstan.
The State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said that despite reports of airport closings throughout the Soviet Union because of fuel shortages, the five republics that Mr.
Baker will visit have all assured him that they will have jet fuel on hand for his Air Force 707, as well as gasoline for his motorcade.
If that does not turn out to be the case, Miss Tutwiler said, the State Department has contingency plans.


New President of the Teamsters Returns to New York


Hard Day for a Willing Shopper
While merchants are busy blaming the economy for their woes, Stanley Marcus points his accusing finger at them.
During a recent stroll through some of New York City's finest stores, Mr.
Marcus -- who as chairman of Neiman Marcus turned extravagance into necessity -- uncovered thin inventories, listless salespeople and a numbing lack of innovation, glitz or pizazz.


Kohl Calls the Path to European Unity Irreversible
Chancellor Helmut Kohl asserted today that accords signed by European leaders this week would ultimately lead the Continent to political union.
"The way to European unity is irreversible," Mr.
Kohl declared to a special session of Parliament.


A Lobbyist Guards His (and Others') Privacy
For Robert Ellis Smith, a leading advocate for consumer privacy, it was a pretty good week.
Last Saturday, his wife gave birth to twin sons.
Then on Tuesday, TRW Inc., a major credit reporting company and one of Mr.
Smith's longtime adversaries, settled similar lawsuits by the Federal Trade Commission and 19 states.
The company agreed, among other things, to make it easier for consumers to correct errors in those reports.


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about a retired justice of the Appellate Division of the New York State Supreme Court rendered her name and age incorrectly in some editions.
She was Sybil Hart Kooper, and she was 66 years old.


5 ASIAN REPUBLICS JOIN SLAVS IN PLAN FOR COMMONWEALTH REPLACING THE SOVIET UNION
The five central Asian republics agreed to join the new Commonwealth of Independent States today, conclusively rebuffing President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's protestations and all but sealing the end of the Soviet Union.
The decision, reached in a meeting in the Turkmenian capital of Ashkhabad, 1,500 miles southeast of Moscow, means that 8 of the 12 Soviet republics are now in accord on the commonwealth plan, and the 4 others have expressed interest in joining.


In Bronx, Pupils Find Creativity And Hope
Young students overreach, let their imaginations take wild flight.
The first compositions of boys and girls in landlocked Iowa concern things like whaling.
All children gravitate to secret kingdoms, distant galaxies, brontosauruses.
At Public School 85 in the Fordham section of the Bronx, children were told they could write an opera -- yes, an opera! -- about anything they chose.
Whimsy was not on their list.
Their topics hit piercingly close to many of their own homes.
A father's alcoholism, child abuse, drug addiction.


Richard Protovin, 46, Artist and Educator
Richard M. Protovin, a painter, film maker and art teacher, died on Dec. 6 at his mother's home in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
He was 46 years old and lived in Pass-a-Grille Beach, Fla.
He died of AIDS, said Laurie Loeb, an assistant professor in New York University's film and television department.


Tibetans Protest Chinese Leader's Visit to India


Times Sees Higher Profit
The New York Times Company said yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings would exceed analysts' estimates as a result of a favorable tax settlement, greater circulation revenues and lower expenses in its newspaper operations and higher-than-expected earnings from its magazines.
The company said its fourth-quarter net would range from 40 cents a share to 45 cents a share, compared with 19 cents a share in the last quarter of 1990.
Until the announcement, the consensus of analysts' forecasts was 13 cents a share.


Bond News is Good, but Prices Fall
Prices of Treasury notes and bonds moved lower yesterday despite a batch of reports that analysts called uniformly favorable for holders of fixed-income securities.
The reports included a four-tenths of a percent rise in the November Consumer Price Index; figures showing that business inventories rose for the second straight month during October, and numbers from the nation's auto makers that indicated the very sluggish sales pace that has been in place for the last several months did not suddenly change during the first 10 days of December.


INSIDE
Restarting Arms Reactor After years of repairs to a nuclear reactor, the Government approved the resumption of an operation crucial in making atom bombs.
Page 8.
Iowans Hurt in Fraud Case
Funds of many Iowa municipalities were frozen in a Federal securities fraud case, and more stringent regulation was sought.
Page 35.
Consumer Prices Up 0.4%
Consumer prices rose four-tenths of 1 percent in November, the Government reported, but analysts said inflation was under control.
Page 35.


Observer; Not Since Junk Bonds
Fun Galore, caterers to the avant-garde of chic, are happy to announce an entirely new party concept for our patrons.
We call it The Depression Wingding and predict it will be the most exciting new thing to hit the fun scene since junk bonds.
Be the first in your crowd to throw a Depression Wingding.
Phone Fun Galore today for our amazingly low, low rates.
Yes, low, low, low!


Rangers Sign Thon
He had wanted to join a team where he could play regularly, so DICKIE THON left the Philadelphia Phillies yesterday and agreed to a one-year contract with the Texas Rangers for a guaranteed $700,000.
He earned $1.25 million in 1991.
In 146 games with the Phillies this year, the 33-year-old free-agent shortstop hit .252 with 9 home runs and 44 runs batted in.
He led the club in games started with 144 and was third in hits (136), total bases (189) and stolen bases (11).


Albert H. Gaynes, 73, Former Steel Executive
Albert H. Gaynes, a retired steel executive and an advocate for political and social causes, died on Monday at his home in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
He was 73 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.
From 1949 to 1979 he worked for the Capitol Steel Company, fabricators of reinforcing steel for concrete construction.
He served as a vice president and director for most of that period and was a one-third owner.
From 1980 to 1990, he was a marketing and management consultant and also ran Gaynes Enterprises, a sales company dealing in minerals and ores.


Mets-Cardinals Trade
The Mets and Cardinals exchanged minor leaguers yesterday with St.
Louis sending reliever CLYDE KELLER to New York for outfielder CHUCK CARR.
Carr, a 23-year-old switch-hitter, batted .195 with 27 stolen bases for the Class AAA Tidewater Tides last season.
He also played in a dozen games for the Mets.
Carr began his professional career in 1986.
Keller, a 24-year-old right-hander, spent last season at Class A Springfield, Ill.
He was 5-0 with 31 saves and an 0.75 e.r.a.


Iowa Funds Are Frozen In Inquiry
Repercussions of a fraud case filed by the Federal Government in Los Angeles rippled through municipalities and counties in Iowa today and were felt here, as well.
The funds of scores of local governments were frozen, and the Securities and Exchange Commission was prompted to seek more stringent examinations of the nation's 17,000 investment advisers and higher fees to pay for the reviews.
The problems for Iowa's local governments were touched off when a Federal judge in Los Angeles on Wednesday ordered the $1.2 billion in assets of Institutional Treasury Management Inc. of Irvine, Calif., frozen.


66 Injured in Bombing of a Police Station in Northern Ireland


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.00
8.00
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.00
5.00
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.50
5.50
11.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.18
5.19
7.38
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.23
5.23
7.31
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.39
7.39
8.74
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.91
7.91
9.00
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.98
8.98
10.02
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.93
6.93
7.70
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Jerusalem's Mayor Assails Raids in Arab Quarter
Mayor Teddy Kollek of Jerusalem denounced the Israeli Government today for catering to "extremists" with its support of fervent Israeli nationalists who moved this week into a large Arab district of East Jerusalem.
Mr.
Kollek accused the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of yielding to "people with a fanatically shortsighted understanding of Jerusalem's true interests." It exacerbated tensions between Jews and Arabs, he said, and perhaps also undermined the Middle East peace process.


Dog Drags Her Owner From a Burning Van
A woman paralyzed from the waist down and unable to get out of her van after it caught fire was dragged to safety this week by her 104-pound dog.
The woman, Kathie Vaughn, was unharmed but her dog suffered burns on the pads of her paws.
"She saved my life," Ms. Vaughnsaid Thursday of her dog, a Rottweiler named Eve.


U.N. Fights Bonn's Embrace of Croatia
The United States and the United Nations Secretary General are bearing down on Germany to pull back from its plan to extend diplomatic recognition this month to Croatia and Slovenia, which declared independence from Yugoslavia in June.
The coordinated diplomatic campaign was initiated in the belief that Germany's separate recognition of the two republics would destroy the peacemaking efforts of the European Community and the United Nations, Bush Administration and United Nations officials said today.


U.S. Says Sterilizing Solution Poses a Health Risk
Several Federal agencies took action today to remove from the market widely used disinfecting agents used to sterilize medical instruments, saying they may pose a risk to public health.
The Food and Drug Administration, acting with the Environmental Protection Agency, the Federal Trade Commission and two United States Attorney's offices, moved to stop the use of Sporicidin Cold Sterilizing Solution and four related products.


Newspaper Outlook Still Dim
Declines in newspaper advertising linage appear to be slowing, but no upturn is yet in sight, a group of newspaper company executives said yesterday.
Executives of The New York Times Company, the Chicago-based Tribune Company and the Washington Post Company who spoke yesterday echoed the presentations that others had made at a weeklong conference sponsored by the brokerage firm Paine Webber: 1991 will prove to be a poor year for revenues and earnings, and the outlook for next year is largely dependent on an economic recovery.


Witness for Freedom
A great discovery was made in the 18th century by Europeans sickened by wars of religion.
They learned it was possible to disagree on theology without torturing opponents as heretics.
This opened the way for free speech on other issues, notably the misdeeds of governments.
The idea took root in Britain's American colonies, where it helped ignite a revolution.
Just 200 years ago the new American Republic crowned its Constitution with 10 amendments -- the Bill of Rights -- of which the first forbade Congress to abridge freedom of worship and utterance.


Stuart Challender, 44, Australian Conductor
Stuart Challender, chief conductor and artistic director of the Sydney Symphony Orchestra since 1987, died today.
He was 44 years old.
He died of AIDS in a hospice where he had spent the last few months, an orchestra spokesman said.


Art Sale Benefits Act Up
An exhibition and sale of contemporary art to benefit Act Up, an AIDS advocacy and protest group, is on view through Dec. 21 at the Matthew Marks Gallery, 1018 Madison Avenue, near 78th Street, and the Paula Cooper Gallery, at 155 Wooster Street in SoHo.
The exhibition includes paintings, sculptures, drawings, prints and photographs by more than 90 artists.


State Job Agencies May Not Give Edge To Minority Testees
The Bush Administration, in a move mandated by the new civil rights law, announced today that state employment agencies may no longer raise the rankings of black and Hispanic job applicants on a federally sanctioned aptitude test to give them better job prospects.
The policy of raising the rankings of minority candidates was started a decade ago to increase their representation in the work force.
Today's change is expected to lead to questions over how best to evaluate applicants within state employment agencies and the businesses that had relied on the tests to screen applicants.


Don't Tackle Hostetler. Or Tickle Him.
Jeff Hostetler is healing, but too slowly for his own comfort.
"I feel better," he said, "but I can't step it up."
Hostetler, the Giants' starting quarterback, was injured three weeks ago in the team's 21-14 victory over the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
He suffered fractures to three transverse processes, the winglike attachments to the vertebrae in his back.
The injury ended his season.


Hebert's Suit Revived
The California Supreme Court has revived a suit by New Orleans quarterback BOBBY HEBERT challenging the National Football League's Plan B restrictions on movement of free agents between clubs.
Hebert's suit said he was prevented from signing with the Los Angeles Raiders last season, and did not play at all, because the Raiders were unwilling to compensate his team, the Saints, as Plan B required.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the flow of illegal immigrants across the border with Mexico misidentified the home state of former Representative Peter W. Rodino Jr. in some copies.
He is from New Jersey.


He's M.L., Not L.T., but Jets Are Already Counting on Him
Not a lot has been written about the Jets' linebacking corps this year.
That could be a sign of a couple of things.
But for Mo Lewis, there's an easy explanation.
"It's not that we're not playing good or that we're playing bad," said Lewis, the Jets' fourth-round draft choice this year out of the University of Georgia.
"I think we had a little black spot on us because I remember before I got drafted I was reading a book and it said: 'Quiz Time: Can you name a Jets linebacker?' and the answer was, 'I can't either.' I think there was this dark cloud because nobody knew anything about the linebackers." Enter Mr.
Cook
With the 7-7 Jets fighting for their playoff life this Sunday in the Meadowlands, the 6-3, 240-pound Lewis will be face to face with the answer to another quickie quiz: Who is the New England Patriots' tight end?


At a Queens Station, Rush Hour at Its Worst
"Watch your backs, watch your backs!" yells Bill Mangin.
It is 8:15 A.M., and the doors of a jammed Manhattan-bound F train are closing.
But many people are determined to get aboard.
Near Mr.
Mangin, one of nine conductors who work the platform of the Roosevelt Avenue Station in Queens each morning trying to control the chaos, a woman has managed to get one leg inside the train.
"You'll have to step off, ma'am," he says.
The woman leans into the car with all her might.


Guilty Verdict in 1981 Shootout that Killed New Jersey Trooper
Richard C. Williams was convicted today of killing state Trooper Philip J. Lamonaco, nearly 10 years after the officer was shot to death in rural Warren County.
Mr.
Williams was found guilty in Superior Court of murder, felony murder and escape after a two-and-a-half-month trial and four days of jury deliberation.
Mr.
Williams showed no reaction as the verdict was read.
Trooper Lamonaco's widow, Donna, wept.
"He can finally rest in peace," she said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY ASSEMBLY SPEAKER GUILTY OF FRAUD


November Consumer Prices Up 0.4%
Consumer prices climbed four-tenths of 1 percent in November, with what may prove temporary surges in food, clothing and energy not fully offset by lower inflation for housing and medical care, the Labor Department reported today.
The rise, which followed a one-tenth of 1 percent advance in October, was a bit more than expected, but analysts said the latest figures did not significantly undermine the conviction that inflation was under control, and with the economy weak, it was unlikely to flare up anytime soon.


Religion Notes
Limping Talks
While the Middle East peace talks in Washington limped along this week with little progress and a lot of wrangling, Muslims, Jews and Christians put differences aside Wednesday evening and gathered for a reception and prayer service at the National Cathedral in the capital.


Beware Postcards Bearing Gifts And 900 Numbers
"This is your official notification that you have definitely been awarded two of the items shown below and you must claim them immediately!" said the teaser on a postcard received recently by a New Yorker.
The first two "prizes" listed were $10,000 cash and $1,000 cash.
The recipient was not alone.
Millions of similar cards have been sent by mail-order entrepreneurs who conduct promotional programs.
And in most cases, it is all perfectly legal.


Editorial Notebook; Why Cheer for William K. Smith?
Every day during the celebrated rape trial in Palm Beach, the television cameras recorded a crowd of people cheering William Kennedy Smith as he entered and left the courthouse.
Not only after he told his story, or after he was acquitted, but before he even took the stand.
He was an accused rapist, yet people cheered.
Mr.
Smith's testimony left the jury with more than reasonable doubt that he had committed rape.
But did he merit cheers?


CHRONICLE
The film star RICHARD GERE and the model CINDY CRAWFORD, who have been an item for three and a half years, eloped to Las Vegas and were married on Thursday night, a publicity agent for Mr.
Gere said yesterday.
But beyond the guest list, the agent, BUMBLE WARD of Andrea Jaffe &amp; Associates in Los Angeles, was unable to provide any details.
"It was a surprise to us, too," she said.
Witnessing the ceremony were three friends of Mr.
Gere's: Ed Limato, his agent; Herb Ritts, the photographer, and Bruce Roberts.
It is the first marriage for both Mr. Gere, 42 years old, and Ms. Crawford, 25.


Accused Professor Was Not a Nazi
To the Editor:
You report accusations Nov. 28 that I wrote anti-Semitic views as a young woman in Nazi Germany.


Music Notes; Shoring Up the Classical at the Y
When the 92d Street Y created the Tisch Center for the Arts at the start of the concert season, there were reports that the institution's arts division was about to be reconfigured, with its classical music programs whittled away in favor of more popular fare.
Since then, the center's directors have been working to quell those fears.
They appointed a composer in residence, David Diamond, and guaranteed that the New York Chamber Symphony was safe for at least three more seasons.
The Y itself has had a face lift in the form of a lighted marquee and a set of poster cases, added this month to make the nondescript building on Lexington Avenue look more like the arts center it has been since the 1930's.


Toney and McCallum Battle to a Draw
James Toney retained his International Boxing Federation middleweight title tonight in a bruising and spirited bout with Mike McCallum that was declared a draw.
Toney, who had McCallum wobbling in the final seconds of the bout, appeared to land the heavier blows throughout the 12-round bout, but the judges saw it otherwise.


Insurers Await Pathologist's Report on Maxwell
The British underwriters of Robert Maxwell's life insurance policy said today that they did not consider the Spanish autopsy report, issued today, as the final word.
They said they would make no payment on the $36 million policy until they had reasonable proof that Mr.
Maxwell had died as a result of an accident.
The policy does not cover a nonaccidental death.
The Spanish magistrate in charge of investigating the death of the well-known entrepreneur announced today that she had closed the case after concluding that there was no crime involved.
Mr.
Maxwell, who headed a gigantic and disintegrating business empire, disappeared off his yacht and was found afloat in the Atlantic off the Canary Islands on Nov. 5.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A Federal fraud case rippled through Iowa's municipalities and counties, freezing scores of local government funds and prompting the S.E.C. to seek more stringent examinations of the nation's 17,000 investment advisers.  [ Page 35. ]


Rensselaer County Doesn't Need a Third Exit
To the Editor:
One of the "460 earmarked projects" in the new transportation bill that you refer to in "A New Road for Transportation" (editorial, Nov. 29) is for $35 million to construct a mile-long exit off Interstate 90 in Rensselaer, N.Y.


Kimberly Bergalis Is Buried in Pennsylvania


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the arrests of four people from a newspaper in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., misstated the charges against one of the four, a columnist.
He was charged only with conspiracy to publish the contents of an illegally taped telephone conversation.
The prosecutor said he did not charge the columnist with illegal taping because the statute of limitations had passed.


The Koreas Begin to Reconcile
Another small foreign policy miracle may be in the making.
Long estranged by wars both hot and cold, South and North Korea took a welcome stride toward reconciliation yesterday.
They signed a nonaggression pact and opened the way to renewed contact and commerce between a divided people on the divided peninsula.
But Seoul and Pyongyang postponed efforts to resolve their differences over North Korea's nuclear program until later this month.
Those differences are a measure of the distance they still have to travel in order to come together.
They will need continuing encouragement from friends and neighbors if they are to go all the way.


Kimberly Bergalis Is Buried in Pennsylvania


The Speaker's Conviction
Yesterday's conviction of Mel Miller, Speaker of the New York State Assembly, effectively ends the political career of a bright, outspoken lawmaker whose liberal views and flamboyant style helped shape the political debate in Albany for years.
The guilty verdict also throws a floundering state capital, struggling to cope with the impact of a sinking economy, further into confusion.
Under state law, Mr.
Miller's conviction on charges of dealing unethically with clients for personal gain means automatic expulsion from the Assembly seat he's held for 21 years and ends his five-year role as Speaker -- the most powerful Democratic legislator in the state.
James Tallon Jr. of Binghamton becomes the Acting Speaker.


Youth Is Killed in Subway Fight
A 17-year-old Brooklyn high school student with a group of friends returning home from a basketball game was shot and killed on a subway platform in Manhattan yesterday evening, apparently after one of the youths bumped into another teen-ager and an angry dispute erupted, the police said.
The student, Trevor Murriell, of 47 Wilson Avenue in Bushwick, and nine other students were waiting at the Fulton Street station in lower Manhattan for a Brooklyn-bound J train after attending a basketball game between Bushwick High School and Telecommunications High School in Bay Ridge when the shooting occurred at 6:30 P.M., a spokesman for the transit police said.


EXECUTIVES
*
Bowater Inc., Darien, Conn., a paper products company, named Donald J. D'Antuono vice president-corporate development, succeeding R. W. Toelle, who retired earlier this year. *
CMS Energy Corp., Dearborn, Mich., named Victor J. Fryling president, succeeding S. Kinnie Smith Jr., who becomes vice chairman.
The company's subsidiary Consumers Power Co., a utility, announced that Frederick W. Buckman, president, had assumed the additional position of chief executive.


Vehicle Sales Off Again, Falling 10.6%
DETROIT, Dec. 13 --
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks declined 10.6 percent in early December, the auto makers reported today.
Analysts said the drop suggested that retail demand for vehicles remained weak at best.
"There is certainly no evidence of any improvement here," said Harvey Heinbach, automotive analyst at Merrill Lynch in New York.
He said the figures, while low, followed a pattern in recent months in which the first 10-day sales period of the month was significantly lower than the following two periods.
He attributed the discrepancy to certain estimates used to calculate sales rates.
Therefore, "there may not be a new round of further deterioration," he said.


19 Hurt in Explosion at Plant
A chemical explosion ripped apart an industrial cleaning plant today, injuring 19 people, the authorities said.
But only one person was admitted to a hospital; the others were treated for minor injuries and released.
The cause of the explosion at the Cygnet Automated plant was under investigation.
The company, 20 miles west of Detroit, cleans metal and steel containers with chemical solvents for reuse.


News Summary
International 3-7  5 MORE TO JOIN NON-SOVIET UNION
The five central Asian republics agreed to join the new Commonwealth of Independent States, conclusively rebuffing President Gorbachev's protestations and all but sealing the end of the Soviet Union.  1


Smith to Seek Payment of Some Trial Costs
Taxpayers will most likely pay part of William K. Smith's enormous legal bill, a county official said today.
Mr.
Smith's lawyer, Roy E. Black, said he planned to file a motion seeking such payment with Judge Mary E. Lupo of Palm Beach Circuit Court.
He said such motions were routine after an acquittal because Florida law provided for a defendant to be reimbursed for certain costs.


The Korean Accord
In the four decades since North Korea swept across the border and turned this peninsula into a scene of carnage that ended in a fearsomely armed standoff, few here could imagine a day when the two Koreas would renounce fraticidal war and promise to "cease confrontation on the international stage."
But when the moment finally came at a little after 10 this morning, the event seemed oddly devoid of magic, or even much celebration.
After 40 years of recriminations, assassinations, terrorism and now the fear of a nuclear-armed North, few South Koreans seem to hold real hope that the Government of President Kim Il Sung will abide by the most sweeping agreement ever reached between the two countries.


Hyman Gelfand, Wine Retailer, 79
Hyman Gelfand, a wine importer and retailer in New York City for more than 50 years, died on Sunday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of leukemia, his family said.


Public &amp; Private; Running, Anyone?
Talking to Mario Cuomo is like playing tennis with Jimmy Connors.
By the time you put down the phone, the only proper response seems to be to kick back, hang a towel around your neck and drink a bottle of Gatorade.
You've made it through the suggestion that you don't take the state budget crisis seriously enough, the quotation from the prophet Jeremiah ("you will find your own strength in the strength of the whole community"), the speech about how liberals lost his parents and the rest of the lower middle class, and a gleeful first person plural recitation of defeat: ". . . when we got killed by Krupsak, when we lost to Koch, when Carey made a fool of us . . ." All in the service of one little question.


Smits Fined $3,000
Center RIK SMITS of the Indiana Pacers has been fined $3,000 by the National Basketball Association for flagrantly elbowing ANTOINE CARR of the San Antonio Spurs.
The incident occurred in Tuesday night's game at Indianapolis in the fourth quarter of the Pacers' 109-102 victory.
Smits, trying to protect the ball on a rebound, swung around and hit Carr in the mouth. (AP)


Patents; An Inventor Wins, but Isn't Happy
Having just won his second big patent battle against the automobile industry, Robert W. Kearns is well on the way to becoming a very rich man.
One would think the inventor of the intermittent windshield wiper might finally be at peace.
Mr.
Kearns's device, which sweeps the windshield of light rain or mist every few seconds, has become a common auto fixture, and his long struggle against the industry has resulted in victory against Ford and this week against Chrysler.
But Mr.
Kearns still feels the patents system has failed.
It is not just that he feels the payments he has received are far less than he had argued were fair compensation.
The bigger issue, he said, is lost time.


Mexico's Chief and Bush to Talk Trade
When President Carlos Salinas de Gortari arrives in Maryland on Saturday to meet with President Bush at Camp David, he may well have Pennsylvania on his mind.
It was about the time of Harris Wofford's victory in the United States Senate election there last month that Mr.
Salinas's overarching goal -- a North American Free Trade Agreement -- became an uncertainty for next year.


Alaska Governor Agrees to Give Away Stock to Settle Ethics Case
State conflict-of-interest charges against Gov.
Walter J. Hickel could be quickly dismissed under a proposed settlement in which the Governor has agreed to give away his stock in a pipeline company.
Mr.
Hickel was accused of violating state ethics law by keeping stock in the Yukon Pacific Corporation, which would benefit from a natural gas pipeline he has promoted.
Value Put at $10 Million
In the settlement, which was announced Thursday, the 72-year-old Governor did not contest the conflict-of-interest charges and agreed to set up a charitable foundation to which he would donate his 12 percent share of the company.


Your Taxes; A Court Decision For Scientologist
In a decision that has roiled long-established practice, a Federal appeals court has legitimized a challenge to deductions for certain charitable contributions by a Scientologist, who contended that he had been a victim of discrimination.
At issue is the deductibilty of contributions to religious organizations when the church or synagogue provides something in return.


Vaduz Journal; Other People's Money: What Price Liechtenstein?
Vaduz Castle still towers as in a fairy tale, high on the steep cliff against whose foot this town of 4,870 is nestled.
A Prince, Hans-Adam II since 1989, still reigns.
But his Alpine-village capital, which charmed visitors not so long ago, has become a bland commercial center dominated by banks and small offices representing large absentee corporations.
They have brought high prosperity, but a minority worries that Liechtenstein has become a poor little rich country.


A $109,000 Minimum Wage
Players who will earn the minimum major league salary next baseball season didn't throw or hit a pitch yesterday, but they nevertheless received a $9,000 raise.
Because of the rise in the consumer price index in the past two years, the major league minimum salary increased to $109,000.
Last season, 100 players were listed at the minimum, which was scheduled to be adjusted before the 1992 season as part of the collective bargaining agreement reached in 1990.


Bridge
Gullible juveniles, when tossing a coin, are sometimes amenable to the suggestion, "Heads I win, tails you lose." Amend this to "Heads I win, tails you don't," and the situation in a match played Wednesday night at the Beverly Club, at 130 East 57th Street, is accurately represented.
It was the final of the Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship in which a team continues until it has been defeated twice.
Michael Radin, Michael Kopera and Bob and Jill Blanchard were undefeated in earlier rounds, so when they lost by 2 imps to Rick Zucker, Jim Krekorian, Steve Sanborn and Warren Rosner, they were not eliminated.
But if they had won, the victory would have been complete since the Zucker team had lost an earlier match: "Tails you don't."


With a Crash, Robbers Lose $800,000 Loot
It was a lot of money, but it wasn't theirs for long.
Four men stole $800,000 yesterday from an armored car making a bank delivery in Manhattan, but after they crashed while being chased, they left the money in a getaway car a few blocks away, the police said.


Argentina and Brazil Sign Nuclear Accord
Argentina and Brazil signed an agreement today for international safeguards to prevent nuclear technology from being used to make weapons.
The accord was drawn up by the International Atomic Energy Agency at the request of the two Governments.
Until recently, Argentina and Brazil, Latin America's two biggest countries, were rivals in a potential nuclear race.


Unemployment Issues Go Beyond Race
To the Editor:
Two letters Nov. 12 criticize an Oct. 29 article and comments by me about Timothy Smeeding's study comparing anti-poverty efforts in the United States, Western Europe and Canada.
Roger Wilkins complains about the failure to recognize the special American problem, race, and Sheila Kamerman and Alfred J. Kahn disagree with my assertion that social spending in the United States cannot be one-dimensionally compared to that in the prosperous and largely segregated countries of Western Europe.


By the Grace of Allah
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 19 report from Islamabad states that before any airplane lands in Pakistan, one of the flight crew announces, "We shall be landing soon, God willing." This invocation is not raised by the flight attendants because of a lack of faith in Pakistani airplanes or because Pakistani pilots are poorly trained.
The invocation is "insha'allah" -- which means by the grace of God.
Muslims believe that all events take place through the grace of God.
If we eat a good meal, it is through the grace of God; if we buy a new car, it is through the grace of God, and, yes, if an airplane lands safely, that too is through the grace of God.
ASIF YUSAF V.P., Pakistan Club, Queens College Flushing, Queens, Nov. 25, 1991


Review/Dance; Latvian in 'The Nutcracker'
The New York City Ballet has always been on the lookout for tall male dancers to partner its tall ballerinas, and the latest recruit is Erlends Zieminch, who was seen as the cavalier in George Balanchine's "Nutcracker" for the first time on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater.
Mr.
Zieminch, who is from Latvia, made his debut with the troupe last spring in Balanchine's "Diamonds." He has been virtually invisible since then, but he has obviously adjusted to the mobile partnering of the Balanchine style.
The proof came not only in his own good timing but also in the freedom with which Darci Kistler danced as his ballerina.


Review/Dance; For a Revival of 'Pas de Duke,' the Torrid Goes Back In
The huge festival that Alvin Ailey staged in homage to Duke Ellington in the summer of 1976 was preceded earlier by a gala that featured an unusual Ailey duet to Ellington music.
The dancers were Mikhail Baryshnikov and Judith Jamison.
It is this same "Pas de Duke" that was revived with very different dancers and very different results on Thursday night by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater at the City Center (131 West 55th Street).
More than ever, "Pas de Duke" recalls the work's genesis as a star vehicle for an unlikely duo, a combination that cannot be reproduced.


First American Gets New Chief Executive
First American Bankshares Inc., the embattled Washington, D.C., bank-holding company that Federal prosecutors say was secretly controlled by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, has announced that George L. Davis, a founder of a New York financial consulting firm with more than 30 years' experience in bank management, has been elected the company's new president and chief executive and a member of the board.
He will succeed Jack W. Beddow, who retires at the end of the month.


Panel Faults Checkup of Motorman Before Crash
The subway motorman accused of being drunk when his train crashed near the Union Square Station last August, killing five people, smelled as if he had been drinking when a Transit Authority doctor examined him last January, but the doctor did not test his blood for alcohol or tell the motorman's supervisors, according to a report released yesterday by the agency.
The report, from a Transit Authority board of inquiry investigating the worst New York subway disaster in 63 years, criticized the doctor for not administering an alcohol test of the motorman, Robert E. Ray.
It also said the doctor, who was not identified, should have notified Mr.
Ray's superiors of her suspicions so that they could have monitored him "more closely."


Mayor Names a Chief Adviser on Homeless Women


Religion Notes
Limping Talks
While the Middle East peace talks in Washington limped along this week with little progress and a lot of wrangling, Muslims, Jews and Christians put differences aside Wednesday evening and gathered for a reception and prayer service at the National Cathedral in the capital.


Dow Up 19.23 to Close at 2,914.36
Stocks closed higher yesterday, cementing a broad two-day rally that more than erased losses earlier in the week.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 2,914.36, up 19.23 points for the day and 27.96 for the week.
The Dow rose sharply at the opening and remained above 2,900 for the rest of the day.
Advancing issues almost doubled losing ones, 1,090 to 563, and volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy at 201.5 million shares.


EFFORT TO REPEAL NEW TAX ON INCOME FAILS IN HARTFORD
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. today vetoed a plan to repeal Connecticut's new income tax only 30 minutes after it was approved, asserting that the legislature had embarked on a path of "full-scale surrender to fiscal gimmicks and political fantasies." The House then failed to override his veto, eliminating all hope for repeal of the income tax this year.
Although neither the veto nor the failure to override it came as a great surprise here, the day's events nonetheless stood out as landmarks in the 10 months of conflict and passion that have informed the tax debate, capturing both Mr.
Weicker's resolve and the legislature's inability to thwart him.


Zairian Prime Minister Is Certain U.S. Wants Change in His Nation
The Prime Minister of Zaire, Nguza Karl-i-Bond, ended a visit here today, saying he was convinced that the United States wants major political changes in the Central African nation that has been ruled for more than a quarter-century by President Mobutu Sese Seko.
Mr.
Nguza, a major Zairian diplomat and political figure off and on over the last two decades, said President Mobutu is aware that he cannot expect to cling to power much longer without the support of outside forces.


Corrections
A map of Zaire and Congo on page A4 in some copies yesterday, with an article about Iraq, was published in error.
It was a duplicate of one that appeared correctly on page A9 with an article about Congo.


Review/Jazz; A Big Band Plays Gems By Ellington
Only a few years ago, the American Jazz Orchestra's concert on Thursday night at Cooper Union might have seemed remarkable.
It was a program of Duke Ellington's music, concentrating on worthy but lesser-known pieces and including one composition, "No Smoking," that the Ellington band apparently never played.
The orchestra, a big band of seasoned jazz musicians conducted by Loren Schoenberg, was joined for a few pieces by the alto saxophonist Frank Morgan, one of the greatest living ballad players.
But now that two jazz repertory orchestras (the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra is the other one) play regular seasons, and a Carnegie Hall jazz repertory project is on the way, the stakes have gone up.
Merely playing through the music and getting notes and intonation right, as the American Jazz Orchestra did on Thursday night, is no longer enough.


So Many Children, So Few Toys
When it comes to this year's most popular toys and games forget all that has been said about the recession dampening demand.
Retailers and toy industry observers report that the hot items are disappearing as fast as in any other year.
And some of the products may not be back on the shelves before Christmas.
This year's spurt of demand for some toys can be attributed both to the usual fads generated by popular movies or television shows and to the soaring number of births that have occurred in the last few years.


Camacho Fight Off
A fallout -- if not a knockout -- has interrupted plans to have Hector (Macho) Camacho usher boxing into the Paramount, formerly the Felt Forum, in the Madison Square Garden complex Jan. 10.
Camacho, who grew up in East Harlem, was scheduled to fight Carl Griffith in a junior-welterweight bout, but a disagreement developed with promoter Dan Duva.


Q and A
Transferring Rent Rights Question: A new Chinese restaurant opened in an annex of my building.
A large ventilation system has been installed on the roof directly in front of my kitchen windows.
The noise and smells make me nauseous and give me headaches.
The new landlord has offered to move me to another apartment in the building.
Would I lose my status as a rent-controlled tenant if I moved? . . .
Estelle Kochan, Manhattan


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
As recording companies try to glean new profits from their archives, every holiday season now brings an outpouring of boxed sets.
More extensive than greatest-hits collections, less unwieldy than a performer's full catalogue, boxed sets can put a performer in perspective, summing up a career or adding a revisionist spin to it.
If compiled with care, a set can also unearth material that collectors would have a hard time finding otherwise.
Typically, a boxed set will offer a fancy package, a few rarities among the reissues and a biographical booklet or liner notes -- something to memorialize the music for posterity.
Here are some of this season's best boxes.
Antoine (Fats) Domino: 'They Call Me the Fat Man'
EMI E4-96784; four CD's (around $50).


Amy M. Tardio Marries in Rye
Amy M. Tardio, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil Tardio of Rye, N.Y., was married last evening to David M. Blumberg, a son of Rena and Michael Blumberg of Shaker Heights, Ohio.
Rabbi Joel Segal officiated, assisted by the Rev.
James Gardiner, a Roman Catholic priest, at Westchester Country Club in Rye.
Ms.
Tardio, 32 years old, is the grooming and fitness editor of GQ magazine in New York.
She attended the University of Colorado.
Her father is an independent film director in New York.
Mr.
Blumberg, also 32, is a managing director of the investment banking group of Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
His mother is the community-relations director of WDOK-FM and WRMR-AM in Cleveland.
His father is the president and chief executive of Repco Electronics Inc., a Cleveland distributor.


A Step Back to Supper Clubs and Swing
The time may not yet have returned to swing-and-sway with Sammy Kaye but dancing to big-band sounds and dining at lamp-lit tables in glamorously glitzy supper clubs certainly seems to be on the upswing.
"More and more clubs are offering swing dancing as an option to the pounding top 40 disco beat," said Diane Roberts, administrative director of the New York Swing Dance Society, a nonprofit organization dedicated to the promotion, revival and preservation of swing dancing to big band music.


Solitary Confinement
THE OTHER DAY my former husband called, inquired into my health, then put his 4-year-old son by his second marriage on the line.
Despite the lack of nomenclature -- legal or otherwise -- for this peculiarly contemporary relationship, we managed to converse with fluency.
The young man and I were exchanging pleasantries -- he had just told me about his toy broom and I was discussing the recession -- when his father intervened.
"You have a winning child," I said generously.
"He makes mature observations."


Valerie Roberts to Marry in March
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward B. Roberts of Newton, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Valerie Jo Roberts to Mark Andrew Friedman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin J. Friedman of Miami Beach.
A March wedding is planned.
Ms.
Roberts, 28 years old, is a vice president of corporate bond trading at Salomon Brothers in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is a business professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the chairman of Pugh-Roberts Associates, a management consulting firm in Cambridge, Mass.
Her mother, Nancy Roberts, is a computer science and education professor at Lesley College.


Cirella Prefers Look of a Ranger
Every game night, about 6 o'clock, Ranger defenseman Joe Cirella faces a thorny fashion dilemma: Should he don the red-white-and-blue jersey provided by the equipment manager, or should he head for the press box in his natty suit?
Cirella, who cuts a dashing, slim figure in either his uniform or street clothes, thinks he looks better on skates.


LEST WE FORGET
Like Leonard Kriegel, my husband and I (but mostly my husband) have assumed responsibility for an elderly and increasingly senile aunt and uncle.
They do not call in search of a forgotten name, but may call our home as many as 14 times a day.
Phone messages often bear a plea for urgency and the desperation in our aunt's voice is alarming.
Return calls, however, reveal no memory of these messages, but rather a report that they are fine and all is well.
My husband, who visits them at least once a week to tend to their bills, banking and other necessities, has driven to their apartment to lock their door because they have suddenly forgotten how.
And our aunt, who for the past three years refused to seek medical care for any reason, has taken to calling for an ambulance at the slightest provocation, requiring my husband to go to the hospital to bring her home (sometimes at 2 in the morning).


Stephanie Drongowski, Nurse, Wed
Stephanie Jean Drongowski, a nurse, and Mark Stephen Griffith, a financial executive, were married yesterday in New York.
The Rev.
Albert -Jeandheur officiated at the First Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 39 years old, is the chief psychiatric nurse clinician for the walk-in psychiatric clinic at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center of New York.
She graduated from New York University and has a master's degree in nursing from Hunter College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Drongowski of New York.
Her father is a building superintendent.


The Man Who Learns Anew From Each Picture
When Harry Callahan expounds on his philosophy of photography, he speaks in a husky twang that recalls his upbringing as a Michigan farmboy.
The 79-year-old Mr.
Callahan, his round Buddha-like face occasionally breaking into a quick smile, is sitting with a visitor in his Atlanta apartment.
On the wall behind him are oversize prints of two photographs.
One, of the heroic figure of a woman walking along a Chicago street, is among his most famous.
The other -- a lyrical image of a tapestry of leaves on the ground, each a different shade of gray -- is relatively unknown.
As he talks over the course of a long afternoon, Mr.
Callahan returns again and again to the central belief underlying his work: that for him, making a photograph remains an act of profound discovery.


Living With AIDS Child Is Easy Part
Shirley Rivers's eyes lit up as she spoke about her 3 1/2-year-old foster son, Antoine.
"He'll talk you to death," she said, smiling proudly.
"He asks a lot of questions now. He likes any kind of cartoon. He loves to run. He's small, but he loves to eat."
Taking in a foster child is never a simple decision.
But when Ms.
Rivers was approached about Antoine when he was 6 months old, she had to face a hard choice of the heart: the baby boy had been infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, by his drug-addicted mother, and a commitment to care for him would most likely include the duty of watching him die.


In the Nation; Mr. Bush's Socks
Anyone who expected a new chief of staff to produce a fast turnaround in White House attitudes toward the slumping national economy must have been disappointed last week by testimony from President Bush's principal economic advisers.
They told the Senate Finance Committee that the President
might
propose an investment tax credit for business -- but only for
some
investments.


Social Events
Soviet Affairs
Dec. 15 -- Yuli M. Vorontsov, the chief Soviet delegate at the United Nations, will speak at a 5:30 P.M. convocation, and William Safire, the New York Times columnist, will address diners later at Yeshiva University's annual Hanukkah dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria.
Dinner at 6:30.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 960-0863.  'A Christmas Carol'
Dec. 16 -- A dramatic reading of "A Christmas Carol" at 8 P.M. at the Hudson Theater at the Hotel Macklowe, 145 West 44th Street, will benefit the Actors' Fund and its programs to help members of the entertainment industry in need.
Zoe Caldwell will direct, and the cast will include Christopher Plummer, Eli Wallach, Anne Jackson and Maureen Stapleton.
Tickets, $50 for the performance only; or $1,000 for dinner before at 6 and a 9:30 dessert buffet after, all at the Macklowe.
From (212) 221-7300.
Alvin Ailey for AIDS
Dec. 18 -- AIDS Films, a nonprofit educational film company committed to AIDS education, will benefit from an Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater performance at 8 P.M. at the City Center Theater.
Tickets, from (212) 629-6288: $75 for the performance only; $150 to include a reception at 6 P.M. at the theater; $300 to include a post-theater buffet supper at 10:30.
At-home supper hosts include Kitty Carlisle Hart, Kimberly Farkas and Etan Merrick.
Wearable Art
Dec. 18 -- Gallery Stendhal, 622-626 Broadway (between Bleecker and Houston Streets), will be open from 6 to 9 P.M. for a sale of clothing decorated by 15 New York artists including the photographer Francesco Scavullo.
No admission charge.
God's Love We Deliver, which delivers food and other assistance to people with AIDS, will benefit.
Off Broadway
Dec. 19 -- Equity Fights AIDS will benefit from the opening night of "Raft of the Medusa," a play with an AIDS theme by Joe Pintauro, at 7 P.M. at the Minetta Lane Theater, 18 Minetta Lane, east of Sixth Avenue.
Tickets, $30, from (212) 869-8530, extension 305.
Christmas Concert
Dec. 21 -- Dino Anagnost, dean of music at the Greek Orthodox Archdiocesan Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, will direct the Little Orchestra Society and Metropolitan Singers/The Greek Choral Society in a candlelight Christmas concert at 7 P.M. at the church, 319 East 74th Street.
Dinner and dancing afterward at Maxim's, 680 Madison Avenue (at 61st Street).
Proceeds will help finance future Cathedral Concert programs.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 704-2100.


Political Talk
Image Bad, but Better
Bad news is good news, at least if it's less bad than the news used to be.


Old World With One Currency Is New to U.S.
Though this week's decision by the European Community to adopt a single currency by the end of the decade could affect everything from the dollar's role in global markets to the price of French wine at the local store, the implications for the United States of the action are little known and less discussed.
The Treasury and State departments have barely begun to analyze the issue, and at banks and corporations the thinking on the subject is largely confined to economists and foreign exchange experts.


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
As recording companies try to glean new profits from their archives, every holiday season now brings an outpouring of boxed sets.
More extensive than greatest-hits collections, less unwieldy than a performer's full catalogue, boxed sets can put a performer in perspective, summing up a career or adding a revisionist spin to it.
If compiled with care, a set can also unearth material that collectors would have a hard time finding otherwise.
Typically, a boxed set will offer a fancy package, a few rarities among the reissues and a biographical booklet or liner notes -- something to memorialize the music for posterity.
Here are some of this season's best boxes.


Katie Danziger Is to Marry in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard M. Danziger of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Block Danziger, to Steven Horowitz, the son of Norman Horowitz of Los Angeles and Florence Horowitz of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Danziger, 28 years old, is known as Katie.
A graduate of Vassar College, she is the promotion supervisor at Viewer's Choice, a division of the Pay-Per-View Television Network Inc. in New York.
Her father is of counsel to the law firm of Richards &amp; O'Neil in New York.


Data Update
VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
(Residential in millions of dollars)
Oct. 91
Oct. 90
Change
New York
441.9
367.9
+20%
New Jersey
233.0
196.2
+19%
Connecticut
96.7
78.9
+23%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.82
8.92
10.03
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.38
6.47
8.11
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.72
8.80
9.86
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.31
6.36
7.90
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.71
8.80
9.92
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.29
6.38
8.02
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.05
9.06
10.20
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.82
7.03
8.33
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.61
4.74
7.24
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.78
8.78
9.67
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Venezuela Is Expanding Its Role in Caribbean
When Haiti's President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, was spirited to the airport after his overthrow by soldiers in September, the foreign jet awaiting to fly him into exile was not sent from Washington or Paris, traditionally the most influential of the Caribbean nation's foreign partners.
Instead, in a gesture that diplomats and political analysts say reflected his country's increased diplomatic presence in the region, it was Venezuela's President, Carlos Andres Perez, who sent his personal plane to carry Father Aristide to Caracas, where he has lived in exile since.


The Man in The Glass Closet
GEORGE CUKOR: A DOUBLE LIFE
A Biography of the Gentleman Director.
By Patrick McGilligan.
Illustrated. 404 pp.
New York:  St.
Martin's Press. $24.95.


Science Fiction
These are tough times for science fiction, or at least that part of the genre set in the near future (the next hundred years or so).
Whether they come across as prediction, satire or cautionary tale, stories about the near future must build on contemporary events in a plausible way or readers will have trouble suspending disbelief.
When the Soviet Union and its bloc began to fission, the rules changed overnight: all stories featuring superpower rivalries -- which meant virtually all near-future stories -- were suddenly out of date.
Under the circumstances, one might think that science fiction writers, who have all of space and time to play with, would steer clear of the near future until some new world order takes shape and reduces the risks of premature obsolescence.
But Norman Spinrad has always been a risk taker.
His novel "Bug Jack Barron" was denounced in England for its blunt language; "The Iron Dream," his alternative-history novel "written" by the famous science fiction writer Adolf Hitler, was banned in Germany.
And in "The Void Captain's Tale" Mr.
Spinrad took a deadpan look at the ultimate in unsafe sex: orgasm-powered space travel.
Now, with RUSSIAN SPRING (Bantam, $22.50), he tries, and instructively fails, to stay one step ahead of the headlines.


Making a Difference; The Goldin Touch in 'Workouts'
Two years ago, Harrison J. Goldin made an abrupt career change, and not entirely of his own volition: The then-Comptroller's sad showing -- 3 percent of the vote -- in the 1989 New York mayoral primary propelled him out of public life after some 25 years and into the private sector as a corporate consultant.
Interviewed at the time, he sounded forlorn but resolute as he prepared for a forced march uptown from his old office at the Municipal Building to his new one in the General Motors building.
He is forlorn no more.
As he prepared to celebrate the second anniversary of Goldin Associates, Mr.
Goldin described his new career in "workouts" -- the restructuring and reorganizing of troubled corporations and real estate -- with relish.
"I try to get warring parties to agree on a plan in situations that tend to be contentious and acrimonious," he said last week, adding with the hint of a lip smack, "The stakes are usually very big, with a lot riding on the success."


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
As recording companies try to glean new profits from their archives, every holiday season now brings an outpouring of boxed sets.
More extensive than greatest-hits collections, less unwieldy than a performer's full catalogue, boxed sets can put a performer in perspective, summing up a career or adding a revisionist spin to it.
If compiled with care, a set can also unearth material that collectors would have a hard time finding otherwise.
Typically, a boxed set will offer a fancy package, a few rarities among the reissues and a biographical booklet or liner notes -- something to memorialize the music for posterity.
Here are some of this season's best boxes. 'Howlin' Wolf'
Chess/MCA CHD3-9332; three CD's (around $42) or cassettes ($39.98); five LP's ($39.98).


New G.M. Leadership Flails for Ways to Halt the Car Maker's Slide
Robert C. Stempel became the General Motors Corporation's 11th chairman in August 1990, amid widespread hope that "Team Stempel" could turn the nation's largest company around.
As an engineer, in contrast with the series of accountants who preceded him, Mr.
Stempel seemed well positioned to overhaul G.M.'s car and truck models to compete against the Japanese.
And his collegial and attentive style was expected to inspire initiative and free expression among the troops, loosening up the authoritarian culture that had prevailed when Roger B. Smith was chairman.
But 15 months later, there is little evidence that his leadership has unraveled G.M.'s most confounding predicaments.
The company's customer base in North America has failed to grow from depressed levels despite huge investments in new models, losses have mounted, and credit analysts have threatened to downgrade its debt rating -- a prospect that could severely undermine its ability to finance purchases by buyers and dealers.


Rise in Interracial Marriage Says Much
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 2 front-page article on interracial marriage states that "as the nation confronts persistent racial bigotry," the couples that intermarry are quietly trying to bridge "two increasingly alienated worlds."


Riggins and Life Without Blockers
He is still asked on the street, "Hey, Riggo, how's Sandy baby?"
And John Riggins must answer in all candor: "Don't know. Haven't seen her lately." And he still hasn't heard from her, either, even after sending a dozen roses as an apology to her at her Supreme Court office.
The apology came after the last time -- the only time -- he saw her, almost seven years ago, in January 1985, when Riggins, then a star running back for the Washington Redskins and the hero of their 1983 Super Bowl victory, was seated across the table from Justice Sandra Day O'Connor and her husband, John, at the black-tie National Press Club dinner in Washington.
Riggins, trying to make conversation while inebriated, called out: "C'mon, Sandy, baby. Loosen up. You're too tight."


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
Industrial production, percent change
0.0
-0.1
Capacity utilization, in percent
79.6
79.3
Tuesday
Housing starts, millions
1.096
1.080
Thursday
Merchandise trade, billions
$-6.8
-6.0
Friday
Gross domestic product, in percent
1.7
1.7
Gross national product, in percent
2.0
2.0
Monday: Federal Open Market Committee meets  Wednesday: Plant and equipment expenditures *
General Motors announces restructuring plan  Thursday: Germany's Bundesbank Council meeting  Friday: U.S. corporate profits *
Treasury statement on the budget  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


Don't Soak the Rich, but Lower the Taxes for the Poor
To the Editor:
In "Who the Rich Are and What They Should Pay" (letter, Dec. 1), Victor Perlo calculates with remarkable precision that a surtax of 20 percent on all taxpayers with incomes above $200,000 a year "would now yield $82 billion."


Stuck at the Airport? Then Look at the Art
IF you are interested in viewing a Rauschenberg serigraph and a Picasso at 3 in the morning, or contemplating a diversity of contemporary art on Christmas Day, head for American airports, the country's 24-hour art museums.
From Miami to Seattle, airports are amassing impressive, accessible, contemporary art collections displayed throughout terminals, even in baggage claim areas and garages.
Although they face difficulties over lack of maintenance and other problems, these airport holdings include some of the country's most intriguing public art.
Not surprisingly, the potential art audience is staggering.
During 1990, America's busiest airport, O'Hare in Chicago, handled over 60 million passengers and uncounted meeters and greeters.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, in the same period, welcomed only 4.5 million visitors.


Dylan Thomas to Music
AFTER suffering an inferior stage adaption of a literary work or a bad performance of a beloved play, it is a good idea to return to the source for reaffirmation.
But imagine a theater piece so off-putting that one wants to hear of it no more.
Such vexing, alienating thoughts are induced by "Adventures in the Skin Trade," John Tillinger and James Hammerstein's insistently uneventful musical treatment of unfinished autobiographical stories by Dylan Thomas, now at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven.


Defense Is Likely to Portray Noriega as Foe of Drug Ring
After three months of testimony from more than 40 witnesses, Federal prosecutors are expected to rest their case against Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega early next week.
Lawyers for the deposed Panamanian leader will then break a long silence and are likely to argue that their client was a victim and opponent of the Medellin drug cartel, not an ally or accomplice.
When General Noriega's trial on cocaine trafficking and racketeering charges began in mid-September, the defense lawyer, Frank A. Rubino, elected not to make an opening statement.
Nevertheless, remarks made by Mr.
Rubino that are on file in court records provide glimpses of some of the arguments that he is expected to make in the weeks to come.


Books to Free the Minds Of the Winterbound
WHERE there's winter, there's cabin fever.
Just about the time the poinsettia droops and dies, even cheerful people will turn snarly from sunlight deprivation and for most of us there won't
be
enough walls to bounce off of.
One solution is to head out of the cabin, but unless you're flying to Paris or Pago Pago, it's probably not worth getting slush in your shoes.
Publishers worry about this seasonal attitude and save their glitziest and most prestigious books for spring and fall.
But that caution creates a happy little side effect.
As it happens, winter is taken over by books perfect for curing cabin fever.
These are tales of eccentric lives and exotic places, stories that can transport readers from their cozy firesides to an African desert, a Chinese commune or the haunted House of Usher.
Here are some sanity-saving books -- mostly new ones, plus the strongest contenders from fall -- for this winter's reading.


Who You Calling a Pit Bull?
BANDIT
Dossier of a Dangerous Dog.
By Vicki Hearne. 304 pp.
New York: Aaron Asher Books/HarperCollins Publishers. $22.


SELF-HELP COURSE
Education Secretary Lamar Alexander's plan for restructuring American schools gives educators little hope for positive change.
As a proponent of parental choice, he joins the ranks of those who are ready to abandon the tremendous number of less fortunate students who don't have an advocate to help them select a school.
If it is substance that the Secretary is looking for, he (and President Bush) might begin with a national health care program that allows children to come to school healthy and well fed.
PAUL HUGHES
Middletown, N.Y.


Style Makers; Catherine Guillaud, Fabric Painter
With flicks of her long graceful fingers, Catherine Guillaud unfurls one of her flamboyant painted silk scarfs, then another, then another.
She loops one around her neck and warns: "Don't call them scarfs, because they're much more than that. They're paintings."
A native of France, the 37-year-old artist has been bouncing between New York and Paris and painting on fabric for more than a decade.
She creates two types of work.
Her silk or wool paintings can be used as wall hangings and often recall Matisse's collages of cutouts.
Her chiffon scarfs look like Impressionist scenery viewed through gauze.


CAMPUS LIFE: SUNY, Stony Brook; Afraid of Lab Courses? Workshop Offers a Cure
The wrenching anxiety of facing a new experience unprepared can be a barrier to students taking their first science laboratory course.
In the opinion of Marjorie Kandel, a chemistry lab instructor at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, it is enough to turn many students away from the sciences before they get a chance to appreciate them.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have a wood kitchen table with some type of laminate on the top.
This table is about 10 years old, and the gloss seems to be gone from the laminate.
The wood finish on the rest of the table is in perfect condition, so it seems unwise to buy a new table.
Is there any way to restore the gloss to the top?
A.
I assume the laminate is a plastic laminate like Formica or something similar.
If so, you might try using one of various polishes for restoring the gloss to faded laminates.
If this does not work, apply at least two coats of a polyurethane varnish to the top.
Clean and dry the surface, then sand lightly with fine paper before applying the first coat.
This varnish will have to be reapplied periodically, depending on the wear it gets.
Another possibility is to apply a new layer of plastic laminate on top of the old one.


Ruling Upheld in McRae Ban
A New York State Supreme Court justice in Syracuse upheld an injunction that blocks Conrad McRae, a suspended basketball player, from playing for Syracuse University.
The ruling kept the 6-foot-10-inch junior center from playing in the Orangemen's game against Texas Christian tonight at the Carrier Dome.
Justice Thomas Murphy heard two and a half hours of arguments from lawyers representing McRae, Syracuse University and the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
The school and the N.C.A.A. asked Murphy to throw out a temporary restraining order, issued by State Supreme Court Justice Parker Stone last week.
The order blocked the N.C.A.A.'s ruling barring McRae from playing for Syracuse because of recruiting violations.


U.S. Increases Aid to Somalia After U.N. Balks
The United States almost doubled its emergency aid for Somalia this week after the United Nations refused to organize significant assistance for the nearly 10,000 civilian casualties in the war-ravaged Somali capital, an American official said today.
The official, Andrew Natsios, director of the Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance, said that much of the extra $19 million allocated to Somalia would be spent on medical help, food and logistical support for humanitarian agencies working in and around Mogadishu, the capital.
He said the office had already spent $21 million on emergency assistance since a civil war in the East African country broke out again last month.


Milan
THE CHALLENGE OF THE MILAN FASHION COLLECTIONS IS STAYING awake until the final day.
That is when the dukes of Milan ready-to-wear, Giorgio Armani and Gianni Versace, present their runway shows.
In the intervening five days, fashion editors, buyers and photographers shuffle around muttering about sameness and how they can't wait to get to Paris.
Glamour is so relative (and
tiring
Giorgio Armani, whose show topped off the Italian fashion week, approaches fashion with the high seriousness of a musical conductor.
He began with a symphony of beige: fluid jackets, shorts, pants, even bathing suits.
Sheer and tailored were his principal motifs: skirted suits paired with chiffon blouses.
For evening, where his trademark is unobtrusive elegance, the most striking styles were a pouf skirt, a pearl-embroidered paisley sheer suit and a short green beaded dress with a dazzling zigzag pattern.
Everything was orderly, restrained, just so.


Some Solid Payoffs in 'I Ought to Be in Pictures'
IN regional theater, an intended alternative to the commercial marketplace, one doesn't expect to come upon a hit of a decade ago by Neil Simon, whose 25th work is bound for Broadway in February.
For the George Street Playhouse, where an artistic mission is never so unequivocal that it cannot be adjusted to the requisites of popularity, the choice in this season's repertory of "I Ought to Be in Pictures" (Broadway, 1980; Hollywood, 1982) was handily justified.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CHRISTMAS TREES


Noted With Pleasure
Fiction's Tribal Voice
The novelist, John Updike reminds us, is only the latest version of the bard, humanity's "memory bank" of essential knowledge.
This is from the speech "Should Writers Give Lectures?" included in "Odd Jobs: Essays and Criticism" (Knopf).


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
I've been reading The Book Review since I was about 10 years old, when my parents started pointing out the reviews of children's books.
Over the last 20-odd years, The Book Review has provided me with more entertainment than the editors can possibly imagine: counting the number of times numb words like "eponymous" appear in a single issue, figuring out just what reviewers are up to when they write reviews that never seem to get around to mentioning the book in question, and generally sincerely enjoying the essays.


Dance Troupe Shows What Women Can Do
If my knees didn't resemble a bag of rutabagas that even fishnet hose couldn't disguise, I'd be tempted to be a Calendar Girl ("As Symbol for Others, Dance Troupe Finds Age Is No Barrier," Nov. 17).
What a great esprit de corps is here!
They've all got rhythm, shapely legs and zest -- plus plenty of talent any feminist groups would envy.


Keeping a Home Warm
IF your home is heated by steam or hot water, the radiators or convectors in each room usually need maintenance at the start of the heating season.
For maximum efficiency, they should also be cleaned and inspected monthly in the winter.
Radiators and convectors have the same function -- delivering heat -- and are controlled and maintained in basically the same ways.
Radiators are usually made of heavy cast iron.
Heat supplied by steam or hot water warms them, and the heated metal radiates warmth into the surrounding air.


Think Round. (Think Fat!) Down Is In Again.
CLOTHING suitable for the Himalayas has become stylish streetwear in New York.
Sta-Puff Marshmallow men and women now float down the avenues and bump about in buses and subway cars.
Fur is out. Goose is in.
The bane of coat-check people everywhere, down-filled coats, which seemed to come and go in the 1970's and 80's, are in again.
The look for winter is fat, as in Triple Fat Goose down.
Lots of "loft," or puffiness, is considered cool.
The operative word is big.


What Price Harmony Atop New York City's Schools?
Earlier this year, New York City teachers were promised a week off in the middle of February, a chance for some to bask in the sun or catch up on lesson plans.
With the public scornful of the productivity of city workers and frustrated by how much schooling children really get, Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez and Sandra Feldman, the president of the United Federation of Teachers, provided assurances that the extra days off would be made up by opening schools on other holidays.


Admit It's Winter, Or Pretend It's Not: It's Your Choice
I HATE winter.
I hate the wind, I hate the cold, and no, I don't ski.
I like my knees just the way God made them.
Don't get me wrong.
There are certain charms to the colder months that I'm quite fond of.
Mashed potatoes.
Bourbon.
Cashmere.
Sex.


Sally Abramson Is Engaged to Rodney Montag
Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Abramson of Baltimore have announced the engagement of their daughter, Sally Lou Abramson, to Rodney Andrew Montag, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Montag of Tenafly, N.J.
Miss Abramson, 24 years old, graduated from Washington University and is a student at Brooklyn Law School.
Mr.
Montag, 26, graduated from Washington University School of Architecture and is the director of development for Procida Costruction Company, a New York contractor.
A May wedding is planned.


Miss Woodruff To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony Crane Woodruff of Madison, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela Williams Woodruff, to Robert Elliott Hickman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Elliott Hickman of Raleigh, N.C.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Woodruff, 25 years old, graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
She is a securities trader for Fidelity Investments of Boston.
Her father is a managing director of Kidder, Peabody, investment bankers in New York.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
John Simon's response to Norman Mailer's letter was disingenuous at best.
Mr.
Mailer's point was (a) Mr.
Simon had suggested to the editor of The Book Review that his relationship with Mr.
Mailer was "rather neutral"; (b) that representation was false; and (c) because of that misrepresentation The Book Review assigned Mr.
Simon to review "Harlot's Ghost." Mr.
Simon's response -- that it was "characteristic of Norman Mailer's cult of personality" that Mr.
Mailer's letter did not address Mr.
Simon's review itself -- is therefore irrelevant.
The charge Mr.
Mailer leveled went to Mr.
Simon's lack of candor.
DOMINIC SURPRENANT New York


Making a Difference; A New Start at a TRW Hot Spot
TRW Inc. started a campaign to improve the credit reports it compiles on 170 million Americans in 1989, after D. Van Skilling, former chief planner of the conglomerate's global businesses, took command of the company's growing Information Systems and Services unit.
But Mr.
Skilling, 58 years old and one of TRW's 10 senior executives, could not outrace the gathering storm of consumer outrage over bungled or unintelligible credit records.
Last week, Cleveland-based TRW said it would give consumers faster and clearer information on their credit histories -- and charge less to boot.


Reprimand Stands
After four years of doing battle over her harsh criticism of a judge, former Brooklyn District Attorney Elizabeth Holtzman reached the end of the legal line last week when the United States Supreme Court refused to hear her case.
This time, what was before the court was not a person, but Ms.
Holtzman's argument that her case raised important First Amendment issues.
The struggle began in 1977, when Ms.
Holtzman accused a Brooklyn judge of making a rape victim get down on her hands and knees in his chambers to demonstrate how she was raped.
Witnesses differ on whether the judge did so, but Ms.
Holtzman was reprimanded for accusing him without reading a stenographer's record or interviewing the lawyers and court officers who were present.
The Supreme Court refused to hear her effort to get that reprimand overturned.
Ms.
Holtzman is now the New York City Comptroller, but she is running for Alfonse M. D'Amato's United States Senate seat, and her opponents are expected to make much of the issue.


Two Monuments in Capital To Undergo Years of Repairs
Two of Washington's most frequently visited and photographed monuments, the Lincoln and Jefferson Memorials, will be surrounded by scaffolding and fencing for the next three to five years while they are studied and repaired.
Both the memorials along the bank of the Potomac River, the Lincoln at the west end of the Mall and the Jefferson a short distance east beside the Tidal Basin, will remain open to visitors.
But fences surrounding their raised terraces will keep onlookers from walking around the colonnades while National Park Service experts inspect the structures stone by stone and make repairs.


CAMPUS LIFE: Tufts; A New Course On World Cultures Will Be Required
Despite protests, the faculties of the Liberal Arts and Jackson colleges at Tufts University have voted to require freshmen to take a one-semester course on Western and non-Western cultures.
In a meeting convened on Wednesday just before the holiday break, the combined faculties of Jackson, the women's college, and Liberal Arts, the men's, approved the requirement, 58 to 41, with four abstentions after 1 1/2 hours of debate.
The requirement will go into effect next fall and apply to all members of the class of 1996 who are not designated engineering majors -- approximately 85 percent of undergraduates.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have a wood kitchen table with some type of laminate on the top.
This table is about 10 years old, and the gloss seems to be gone from the laminate.
The wood finish on the rest of the table is in perfect condition, so it seems unwise to buy a new table.
Is there any way to restore the gloss to the top?
A.
I assume the laminate is a plastic laminate like Formica or something similar.
If so, you might try using one of various polishes for restoring the gloss to faded laminates.
If this does not work, apply at least two coats of a polyurethane varnish to the top.
Clean and dry the surface, then sand lightly with fine paper before applying the first coat.
This varnish will have to be reapplied periodically, depending on the wear it gets.
Another possibility is to apply a new layer of plastic laminate on top of the old one.


POP-JAZZ
December
ISRAEL (CACHAO) LOPEZ.
The Cuban bassist, a mainspring for great salsa, leads his own 18-piece Latin-jazz band.
Lehman Center for the Performing Arts, Lehman College, Bedford Park Boulevard and Goulden Avenue, Bedford Park, the Bronx.
Friday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $20.
Information: (212) 960-8833.
Also Saturday at Alice Tully Hall, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 and $30.
Information: (212) 875-5299.
January


A Texas Maverick Is Bullish on the Russian Bear
President Bush named Robert S. Strauss as Ambassador to Moscow figuring his old friend was just the man to sell capitalism to the Communists and the Soviet Union to American capitalists.
But capitalism has fallen on hard times at home, Communists are an endangered species, the Soviet Union is vanishing and the crusty Texas millionaire with a reputation for being able to sell anything to anyone is finding this sale the toughest of his life.


A Voice That Launched a Thousand Trips
It is The Voice.
You know it well.
It is virile, magisterial, and in its burr is the barest hint of Yorkshire.
It is the mainstay of countless commercials for Pontiac, RCA, TV Guide and the Mirage hotel chain.
The Voice narrates "The Shape of the World," the public television series on cartography.
And it is the sound that issues forth when Capt.
Jean-Luc Picard, the Star Fleet hero, barks orders in "Star Trek: The Next Generation," the syndicated series that is now in its fifth season.
The Voice is that of Patrick Stewart (in photograph), a 51-year-old actor who will now push his vocal cords to the limit when he portrays 35 characters in Charles Dickens's "Christmas Carol" on Broadway.
The show, which begins previews Tuesday at the Eugene O'Neill Theater, opens Thursday and is scheduled to close Dec. 29.


For Young Explorers, the Stars of Sky and Stage
ONCE the hullabaloo of the holidays has been reduced to a hush -- after you've seen "The Nutcracker," celebrated Kwanza and New Year's, and attended a very British pantomime -- your family may be ready to settle down to facts and figures.


Reading the Message Punched Out by Mets
The secret, decisive pursuit of Manager Jeff Torborg.
The extravagant free-agent signings.
The daring and cathartic trading of Gregg Jefferies and Kevin McReynolds for Bret Saberhagen.
The Mets have sent a message to their fans: Get tickets for 1992.


POSTINGS: Primer for Nonprofits; Demystifying Housing Finance
The myriad mysteries of how nonprofit developers can get private financing for low-income housing projects is explained in a straightforward, easy-to-read fashion in a new guide commissioned by a consortium of nine New York City banks.
The 133-page primer, "Bank-Ability: A Practical Guide to Real Estate Financing for Nonprofit Developers," explains how a community group can form a development team, how private lenders and loan officers work and how loan applications are prepared and loan packages structured.


Days of Nuclear Anxiety  And Moments of Hope
In the 46 years and five months since the first nuclear weapon was detonated, no single week seemed so simultaneously frightening and hopeful as last week.
A Soviet commander-in-chief lost absolute control over the 27,000 atomic warheads in his arsenal; peace broke out on the Korean peninsula and Latin America's nuclear powers, Argentina and Brazil, formally abandoned their arms race by submitting their nuclear laboratories to international inspections.
For the first time since the imperatives of World War II drove the great powers to exploit the atom for its explosive potential, it seemed that sober control by a few nations that had entered the nuclear club might spin wildly out of control in what had been the Soviet Union.


Ingenuity Protects Trees From Thieves
IT is that time of year when trees will be chosen, hung with lights, trimmed with balls and tinsel and placed in a position of honor in the house for the Christmas season.
For those who grow Christmas trees as a crop, and there are 15,000 of them, this is a busy season.
Of course, the sales figures for this year are not in, but last year 35.4 million Christmas trees were sold, and the most popular variety, accounting for 30 percent of sales, is the Scotch pine.
The Douglas fir runs close to it, with about 20 percent of sales.


Winter in New York
Average annual snowfall for New York City: 29 inches
Biggest one-day snowfall: 25.5 inches, Dec. 26, 1947


Sports of The Times; Stars, Yes, But What's The Script?
FILMING won't begin until April but baseball is already buzzing over the cast for this '92 blockbuster: "The Magnificent Mets," starring Bret Saberhagen, Bobby Bonilla and Eddie Murray.
Produced by Al Harazin.
Directed by Jeff Torborg!
It's a movie without a script that won't be completed until October.
But after the Mets acquired Saberhagen and Bill Pecota from the Kansas City Royals for Kevin McReynolds, Gregg Jefferies and Keith Miller late Wednesday night, Frank Robinson, the Hall of Fame slugger and touring manager now in the Baltimore Orioles' front office, spoke for many critics.


Division II's 'Heisman'
RONNIE WEST of Pittsburg State in Pittsburg, Kan., won the 1991 Harlon Hill Trophy, Division II's equivalent to the Heisman Trophy.
The 6-foot-1-inch, 215-pound wide receiver and kick returner, caught 50 passes for 1,044 yards and 12 touchdowns during the regular season on a run-oriented team.
He also averaged 13.2 yards returning punts, and had a 29.9-yard average on kickoff returns. (AP)


Down and Out: When There's Nowhere Else to Go
MARY PETERSON lives in an abandoned lot by the waterfront in Yonkers, with a grand view of the Palisades.
By her standards, she says, she has exactly what she wants: the closeness of her family and the freedom to do as she pleases.
"There's no one making noise upstairs, nobody below and nobody complaining about my dogs," the 38-year-old woman said.
"I don't take welfare, and I don't owe anyone anything. Just let me be free. I like it this way."


Ivy M. Lashley, Lawyer, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Lashley of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter Ivy Michelle Lashley to Dr.
Jonathan F. Mauser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman L. Mauser of New City, N.Y.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Lashley, 26 years old, is a lawyer with the New York firm of DeBlasio &amp; Alton.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
Her father, a lawyer in Brooklyn, is the president-elect of the Brooklyn Bar Association.


Ms. Kremins Weds R. S. Rosenthal
Carolyn Kremins, beauty manager of Elle magazine, and Robert S. Rosenthal, a senior vice president of TBWA Advertising, both in New York, were married yesterday by Rabbi Judith Lewis at the New York Academy of Art.
Ms.
Kremins, 30 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Oneonta and the Fashion Institute of Technology.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Kremins of Wantagh, L.I.
Her father, who is retired, was a partner in Harlyn Textiles in New York.


Review/Pop; Mixing Old With New
"Who am I? What am I? Where am I to go?" sang Paul Weller in "Cosmos," in the first encore of his show at the Ritz on Thursday night.
The audience may well have been wondering the same thing.
Combining new, unreleased material like "Cosmos" with songs from his two former bands, the Jam and the Style Council, Mr.
Weller's performance was a great big question mark.
Since the mid-1980's, when Mr.
Weller last appeared in New York City, his identity has been more or less missing in action.
He started his career in 1977 with the Jam, one of the most idealistic and uncompromising bands of Britain's punk movement, then disbanded the group in 1982 in an effort to avoid becoming just another dinosaur rock outfit churning out hit singles.
His next venture, the Style Council, dabbled in everything from cocktail jazz to punchy rhythm-and-blues to disco.
By the time of the 1987 album "The Cost of Loving," Mr.
Weller had joined British peers like Roddy Frame of Aztec Camera and Paddy McAloon of Prefab Sprout in a full embrace of slick, contemporary pop-soul.


In Yugoslavia, Grief and Toll of Missing Rise
It has been more than two months since Milica Smiljanic saw her husband, Stanko, a mild-mannered 52-year-old lawyer with a heart condition.
In the Croatian town of Gospic on Oct. 16, shortly before midnight, five men wearing ski masks burst into a dingy basement sheltering several Serbian families from the fighting in Croatia.
They dragged all six men and a woman from their beds and marched them outside.
One man, a Croat hiding with his Serbian neighbors, was released the next day, but the others have not be heard from since.


The Maxwell Ship Keeps on Sinking
Some five weeks after Robert Maxwell's strange fate, the post-mortem was announced last week.
But the results did little to clear up the mystery that began when the naked body of the publishing tycoon was found on Nov. 5 floating in the sea near the Canary Islands, where he had been traveling on his yacht.
According to the Spanish coroner's report, Mr.
Maxwell died of a heart attack, not drowning.
But there was no way to tell whether he was stricken and fell overboard, or if his heart gave out when he hit the water -- from a fall or a jump.
Less ambiguous is the autopsy of the bankrupt Maxwell empire.
It became clear last week that at the time of his death, Mr.
Maxwell had financial problems that might have driven a man to suicide, or put a fatal strain on a failing heart.
The picture that is emerging is of a desperate shell game in which millions of dollars in borrowed money was shifted from one part of the empire to prop up another.
Money was taken from pension funds; the same collateral was pledged for more than one loan.
But toward the end it was getting harder and harder for Mr.
Maxwell to tread water while maintaining the illusion that he was staying comfortably afloat.
His two big private holding companies, which owe an estimated $3.36 billion, have sought bankruptcy protection in Britain.
In the meantime, investigations have been launched into a possible stock manipulation scheme at Maxwell Communication, one of his publicly held companies.


Economic Pulse: New England/A special report.; New England's Siren Call of 80's Becomes Echo of the Depression
It seemed like the American dream to Barbara Cleland when she moved here from Massachusetts eight years ago to open a private educational testing and tutorial service.
Nashua was the fastest growing town in the fastest growing state east of the Mississippi River, after Florida, and soon, with a bank loan against her house, the former teacher had two busy offices with 25 employees.
But now, with New Hampshire's economy in a shambles, Miss Cleland's students have defaulted on their tuition.
She herself had to declare bankruptcy and has lost her business, her house, her savings and her car.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
If you're going to pander to Norman Mailer's wounded ego, why not save time and trouble in the future and simply let Mr.
Mailer review his own books?
He clearly enjoys writing about himself in the third person, and assigning him the review would make a lengthy rebuttal unnecessary (though Mr. Mailer would, of course, still be free to threaten himself with physical injury if he came to doubt his own fairness).


MITTERRAND FALLS FURTHER IN POLLS
Having achieved his main goals at the European Community summit meeting this week, President Francois Mitterrand could be forgiven for expecting some credit at home.
But he has returned to a new opinion poll showing him to be more unpopular than at any time since he took office 10 years ago.
In reality, the poll published Wednesday in the weekly, L'Express, was carried out before the summit meeting in the southern Dutch city of Maastricht.
And if the French conclude that the community's decisions to create a single European currency by 1999 and to develop common regional foreign and defense polices are good for France, Mr.
Mitterrand may benefit.


Moving Defiantly on Yugoslavia, Bonn Threatens Rift With Allies
Germany will go ahead with its plans to extend diplomatic recognition to the breakaway Yugoslav republics of Slovenia and Croatia, German officials said today, increasing prospects for a pronounced rift on the issue in the Western alliance.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl's spokesman, Dieter Vogel, said on Friday that the Bonn Government would wait until after a meeting of European Community foreign ministers in Brussels on Monday before announcing recognition, which has been opposed by the United Nations, the United States and by the European Community.
But officials made clear that Bonn's decision would not be affected by the outcome of Monday's meeting.


Not Everyone Is a Devotee
To the Editor:
I must take issue with two articles on Nov. 24 that touched on a similar subject.
In "Target: Boomers and Their Babies," Janet Maslin wrote about Disney's newest film, "Beauty and the Beast"; in " 'Fantasia' Upstages the Latest Novelties in Classical Video," Allan Kozinn likewise dealt with Disney.


Ticket Increases Unjustified
To the Sports Editor:
I have been a season-ticket holder for the Mets for many, many years.
I feel that the Mets office management has an admirable staff, and the ownership is top notch.
For 1992, the Mets are raising their ticket prices to enter the free-agent market.
I am not renewing my season tickets because I do not want to be a party to an endeavor that is getting foolishly out of control.


Cuttings; An Ancient Tree Brings to Mind Botanical Travelers
Knowing the origins of plants and the journeys they made to get to our gardens is much like learning the family history of a friend.
Where did her people come from?
So they were farmers in Missouri. (That explains her passion for potatoes. But how did she end up wearing velvet hats in Greenwich Village?)
I was thinking something like this as I stared 100 feet up into the scraggly branches of a dawn redwood tree (Metasequoia glyptostroboides) at the Arnold Arboretum in Jamaica Plain, Mass., last weekend.
This tree was thought to be as extinct as the dinosaurs until it was discovered in a mountain hamlet in China in 1941.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
Call me Ishmael if you must, but Norman Mailer's depiction of John Simon as a maniacal Ahab merely marking his time over a long and prestigious (if controversial) career as a film and theater critic and occasional book reviewer, all the while waiting for the opportunity one day to harpoon the
"magnum opus"
of the great white whale of contemporary American literature, strikes me as patently absurd.
It is Mr.
Mailer who comes across as disingenuous at best, megalomaniacal at worst, in attacking both the reviewer and the editor of The Book Review, reducing his complaints of bias and prejudice to the lowest level of personal feud, worthy of a headline in a supermarket tabloid.


Outspoken
There's probably no convenient time to get convicted on Federal fraud charges, but the Friday night jury verdict against Assembly Speaker Mel Miller has thrown a wrench into more than one politician's plans.
Mr.
Miller is automatically expelled from the Legislature where he spent 21 years and became its most powerful Democrat.
His chief aide, Jay Adolf, was convicted along with him of cheating clients of their small law firm out of about $200,000 in co-op conversion deals in the 1980's.
Two Assembly Democrats, Saul Weprin of Queens, chairman of the Ways and Means Committee, and James Tallon of Binghamton, the majority leader, both immediately expressed their sympathy for Mr.
Miller and announced their candidacies for his job; yesterday, Mr.
Tallon conceded to Mr.
Weprin.
And Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo found himself with a new reason to delay deciding whether to run for President.
He has mused that it would be unseemly for him to run with the state's deficit unresolved, and Mr.
Miller was, until Friday, a crucial player in the budget talks.


The Kind of Ransoms We Paid for Hostages; For Reform in Iran
To the Editor:
For the first time since the seizure of the United States Embassy in Teheran in November 1979, no American is being held as hostage in Iran or Lebanon.
While there is every cause for joy and celebration to mark this event, it is nonetheless prudent to bear in mind, once the dust has settled from the mood of euphoria, that every person responsible for instigation of the policies that held the United States and its Western allies hostage to their every whim remains in high office within the so-called Islamic Republic of Iran.


Ingenuity Protects Trees From Thieves
IT is that time of year when trees will be chosen, hung with lights, trimmed with balls and tinsel and placed in a position of honor in the house for the Christmas season.
For those who grow Christmas trees as a crop, and there are 15,000 of them, this is a busy season.
Of course, the sales figures for this year are not in, but last year 35.4 million Christmas trees were sold, and the most popular variety, accounting for 30 percent of sales, is the Scotch pine.
The Douglas fir runs close to it, with about 20 percent of sales.


For Needy Children, Caring Hearts
This time of year, many people are digging deeper to pay for gifts to make their childrens' day brighter.
The charities affiliated with The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund are digging deeper to brighten the lives of children year-round.
The donations the Fund receives translates into many kinds of help.
For a 3 1/2-year-old boy infected with H.I.V., a program financed by fund provides counseling to deal with the heartbreak.
For a group of 10-year-olds, a volunteer's dedication has created a newspaper in which they chronicle their lives
Articles, page 48.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
Norman Mailer's efforts to maintain an old-fashioned standard of honor among American literati in an era of moral and physical cowardice can only be applauded, though in challenging John Simon to a test of arms he seems to have only half learned the lesson taught by his mentor Ernest Hemingway, who in his turn learned it from Richard Harding Davis.
Equally important as giving punishment, according to this code, is the ability to take it.
Real men, which is to say men of honor, don't whine.
DAVID TRAXEL Philadelphia


ART
Today
"AFRICA EXPLORES: 20TH-CENTURY AFRICAN ART," Center for African Art, 54 East 68th Street, Manhattan.
This illuminating examination of the diverse strands of mostly contemporary African art includes the satirical paintings of Cheri Samba and the larger-than-life painted cement figures of Sunday Jack Akpan.
Through Jan. 5.
Hours: Tuesdays to Fridays from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturdays from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays from noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2.50 ($1.50 for the elderly and children).
Information: (212) 861-1200.


The Woman in the Broken Mirror
THE ABANDONED BAOBAB
The Autobiography of a Senegalese Woman.
By Ken Bugul.
Translated by Marjolijn de Jager. 159 pp.
Brooklyn: Lawrence Hill Books.
Cloth, $18.95.
Paper, $9.95.


Santa Helps to Keep a Fragile Christmas Season Bright


Airlines Help Pan American Ticket Holders
When Pan American World Airways went out of business on Dec. 4, it left hundreds of passengers stranded in airports or holding tickets for flights that would never get off the ground.
What caught travelers and travel agents by surprise was the sudden unraveling of Pan Am's apparent deal with Delta Air Lines -- a deal that travel agents said had enticed many passengers to book on the financially ailing Pan Am.
Travel agents say that delay, disappointment and, in some cases, financial loss is inevitable during this holiday travel season, when substitute transportation to prepaid ski or warm-weather vacations will be hard to find.
American Airlines, which flies many of the same routes to the Caribbean and Latin America that Pan Am flew, refused to accept any tickets from Pan Am or its commuter line, Pan Am Express.
It also refused to operate emergency service to Brazil and Argentina, until Jan. 15, when authority will be transferred to United Airlines.
United, which flies few of the routes served by Pan Am, said it would accept Pan Am tickets only from passengers stranded en route.


Making a Difference; A Christmas For Sun-Man
The Grinch may be sitting on Santa's shoulder this year, but it's hard to tell at the Olmec Corporation, a Manhattan-based maker of "ethnically correct" dolls and action figures.
Yla Eason, founder and president of the seven-year-old toy company, said she is sending out shipments almost faster than she can track orders.
She estimates that Olmec's holiday accounts -- big chains and single stores as well as individuals -- have grown to more than 2,000 this year from about 100 in 1990.


What Doctors Must Do . . .
To the Editor:
"Putting Doctors Into Cost-Containment," (Forum, Nov. 24) levels scalding charges against the American health care system.
While most physicians would agree with the need for increased cost-conservation, few would concur with the indictment by the author, Malik Hassan, of "cultural and societal values that often keep incurable patients alive." Modern medicine has as much obligation to minister to the health needs of "incurable patients" as any others -- even if their care incurs great costs and exacts an extraordinary emotional toll.
To suggest that physicians abandon the duties and obligations entrusted in them by the Hippocratic and Maimonides Oaths out of concern for "cost-containment" is ludicrous.
MARK A. YOUNG, M.D.
Baltimore, Nov. 24


Hoist a Tall, Cool One


IN MONET'S LIGHT
The Times really should spring for the cost of a hotel for its reporters, if only so they can maintain some degree of objectivity toward their subjects.
After spending four days as a house guest of Joan Mitchell's, Solomon could have told us more pertinent things about a woman artist who gained early and enduring recognition during such a significant period of American art.
But perhaps Solomon is just easily offended by "cobwebs" and "curmudgeonly behavior." (Just how many dishes did Mitchell make her wash, anyway?) FRANK WRIGHT
High Falls, N.Y.


Salvador Talks Move to U.N. In Last-Ditch Effort on Truce
Talks to end El Salvador's 12-year civil war move to the United Nations on Monday for a last-ditch effort to reach a cease-fire by year's end.
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar, whose term ends on Dec. 31, has invited President Alfredo Cristiani's Government and leftist rebels of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front to a session aimed at resolving major differences between the two sides after 20 months of negotiations.


A la Carte: Relocation An Asset for Pasta Cafe
PASTA PASTA has been the hottest restaurant ticket in Port Jefferson Village since it moved from Rocky Point in April.
The striking and sophisticated storefront cafe offers comfortable, casual, shirt-sleeve dining and imaginative pasta dishes.
Pasta Pasta's 30-seat dining room was formerly behind a pizza parlor in Rocky Point.
But when word of its black linguine, Cajun langoustines, wild mushrooms and brandy cream sauce spread, savvy restaurantgoers found it and kept coming.


A Time Of Transition In O'Rourke's Cabinet
WITH 10 of the county's 18 cabinet-level positions in transition, county legislators began a series of hearings last week on executive nominations.
The Committee on County Officers and Departments considered five of those positions last week, acting against a background of unprecedented change in the executive branch as County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke anticipates leaving his post for a seat on the Federal judiciary.
President Bush nominated Mr.
O'Rourke for the post a month ago, and confirmation hearings are expected to begin in the spring.


Loop Landmarks
To the Editor: I enjoyed Suzanne Winckler's excellent article, "Landmarks of the Loop" (Travel, Sept. 15), but she did not mention the one-and-a-half-hour cruise on the Chicago River sponsored by the Chicago Architectural Foundation.
The very experienced docents explain in detail the architecture and history as you sail along the various branches of the river.
GLORIA McWHIRTER WEBER Wilmette, Ill.
The foundation comments:
Cruises are offered from May to October, at a cost of $15 a person.
For further information: 312-326-1393.


Peru's Most Desperate Refugees Cross No Borders
In a chalk-dry valley covered by Lima's Chincho shantytown, waves of migration are recorded by construction materials -- first houses of stucco, then of adobe brick, and finally, in the most remote gullies, huts of reed matting.
The residents are transplants from Peru's Andean highlands, their language is Quechua, and their dress reflects Indian traditions: braids, felt hats, bell-shaped skirts, and an occasional flash of color from a weaving.
They are part of a flood of more than 200,000 refugees caused by a brutal war between Peru's Shining Path terrorists and the nation's security forces.


Death Row
With the American hostages free at last, it is starting to seem as though there really are moderates in Iran.
But though the country's Government helped persuade the Shiite terrorists to open their makeshift prisons, it has done nothing to free the world's best known hostage, Salman Rushdie.
The Indian-born writer has been hiding out in Britain, his adopted country, since 1989, when Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini declared Mr.
Rushdie's novel "The Satanic Verses" a slur on Islam and announced a reward for his murder.
Last week Mr.
Rushdie surfaced briefly and, on his first trip abroad since the death sentence was pronounced, made a surprise appearance at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism, which was honoring the First Amendment and Justice William J. Brennan Jr.
"Free speech is life itself," said Mr.
Rushdie, as armed guards flanked the stage.
Then he went back underground, awaiting a change of heart in Teheran.


Editors' Note
An article on page 40 of The Times Magazine today about Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut says the Legislature seems likely to vote to repeal the state income tax but appears to lack the votes to override Mr.
Weicker's certain veto.
On Wednesday, after the magazine went to press, the Senate did vote, 21 to 15, for repeal.
On Friday, the repeal measure won final approval in the House of Representatives by 83 to 65.
Mr.
Weicker immediately vetoed the plan.
The House then failed to override his veto, eliminating chances for repeal of the tax this year.


Contemporary Quality Marks Dickens Classic
"A CHRISTMAS CAROL" is an enduring classic not only because it is a good story, but also because it has had something to say to each generation since Dickens wrote it.
Its endless contemporary quality also makes it a tale that is readily adapted to stage and screen, and there seem to be as many versions of "A Christmas Carol" as there are people willing to be credited as adapters.


Maria Goff Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Goff of Huntington, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Maria Goff to Christopher Andrew Williams, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Williams of Huntington.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Goff, 24 years old, is the assistant to the registrar of the Touro Law School in Huntington.
Mr.
Williams, 26, is the legislative aide for Rick Lazio, the Suffolk County legislator for the 11th district.
He graduated from the State University of New York at Albany and is in his last year at Touro.


Ms. Cooper To Wed in May
Herbert and Marianne Cooper of Jericho, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deborah Sidonia Cooper to Kenneth Martin Schapiro, a son of Jerome and Edith Schapiro of Wurtsboro, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cooper, 25 years old, is a doctoral candidate in political science at Columbia University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, graduating magna cum laude.
Her father is the founder and president of the Dynalytics Corporation, an engineering consulting company in Hicksville, L.I.
Her mother is the director of the Graduate School of Library and Information Studies at Queens College.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
Could Norman Mailer and John Simon possibly continue their acerbic, bombastic, yet highly entertaining correspondence?
Meow!
KIRSTIN BLAKELEY Silver Spring, Md.


Car Leasing
To the Editor: About the Practical Traveler column, "Trials of Renting a Car in Europe" (Oct.20).
We don't even think of renting a car in Europe, we lease.


A Peek Under the Tent Of the West Palm Beach Media Circus
Standing atop a ladder, holding on for dear life, Steve Dunleavy of "A Current Affair" is the master of all he surveys: the swarms of cameramen, reporters, gawkers and groupies gathered for the first day of the William K. Smith rape trial.
Assistants hand him cups of coffee ("with milk and Sweet 'n Low, babe!") pre-lit cigarettes (innumerable Marlboro Lights) and, periodically, the cordless telephone with which the undisputed maharajah of tabloid television choreographs the day's shoot.
Mr.
Dunleavy has been on the scene since 6 A.M., preparing to speak his piece the moment the Kennedy heir appears.
In reality, though, he has been awaiting this moment since late last March, just after it was first reported that Mr.
Smith had taken his accuser to his grandmother's beach-front house for "that Easter weekend," as Mr.
Dunleavy has put it, "when holiness took a holiday."


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
As recording companies try to glean new profits from their archives, every holiday season now brings an outpouring of boxed sets.
More extensive than greatest-hits collections, less unwieldy than a performer's full catalogue, boxed sets can put a performer in perspective, summing up a career or adding a revisionist spin to it.
If compiled with care, a set can also unearth material that collectors would have a hard time finding otherwise.


Sabres' Lose Again


Mutual Funds; To Cut a Dividend, or Not?
In late November, the $600 million, closed-end Global Yield Fund announced that it would not pay a dividend at the end of this quarter.
It is the first time that a closed-end bond fund has eliminated a dividend payment, fund experts say.
The shock waves created by the announcement pushed the price of the fund's shares, which are traded on the New York Stock Exchange, down from $8.75 on Nov. 21 to $7.625 the next day, a drop of 12.9 percent.
It has since risen only to $7.75.


Moldavian President Warns of a Civil War
President Mircea Snegur of Moldavia warned today of civil war as violence was reported for a second day in the separatist Trans-Dniester region.
The Moldavian Interior Ministry said a policeman was shot and seriously wounded today near the town of Dubossary, 22 miles northeast of here.


Charles Milton Preston, Lawyer, 73
Charles Milton Preston, a retired associate general counsel with the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, died on Thursday at the Veterans Administration Hospital in East Orange, N.J.
He was 73 years old and lived in Middletown, N.J.
He died of heart failure, his wife, Marjorie, said.


Elizabeth Chace to Wed B. C. Gould
Malcolm G. Chace 3d of Providence, R.I., and Mrs.
Harvey G. Kemp Jr. of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Edwards Chace to Brandt Chamberlin Gould, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Gould of West Redding, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Chace, 25 years old , is an editorial assistant at the Institute of Children's Literature, a correspondence school for children's-book writing, in West Redding.
She graduated from Trinity College.
Her father is the chairman of Mossberg Industries, a parts supplier for the wire industry, in Providence.
Her mother, Barbara Kemp, is a real estate agent with Douglas Elliman Inc. in New York.


Seen Again at Maastricht: Adam Smith's Invisible Hand
As they struggled to put at least some of the pieces of what used to be the Soviet Union back together again last week, Boris N. Yeltsin and the other leaders of his new Commonwealth of Independent States would have done well to keep one eye on the leaders of the European Community.
Europe is steadily pulling itself together, but for the last 46 years it has been a lot easier to do that economically than politically.
Last week's European summit meeting at Maastricht was no exception.
The 12 leaders who gathered here agreed relatively quickly on a single currency to go with the single, barrier-free market they will have by the end of next year, but they could not advance as far as some had hoped down the road to political union.


Frank R. Milliken, Who Headed Kennecott Copper, Is Dead at 77
Frank R. Milliken, who led the Kennecott Copper Corporation through two turbulent decades, died on Dec. 4 at his new winter home in Tucson, Ariz.
He was 77 years old.
Mr.
Milliken, whose primary residence was in Darien, Conn., arrived in Tucson two weeks before his death.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Recollections


Political Move Long Ago Led to Miller Conviction
More than a half-dozen years ago, in the cauldron of Brooklyn Democratic politics, Mel Miller made a routine decision to back State Senator Martin Markowitz in his race for borough president.
Mr.
Markowitz lost to Howard Golden, the incumbent then and now.
But it was this soon-forgotten race, in which Mr.
Miller was not even a candidate, that set in motion the events that on Friday led through a scandalous Brooklyn credit union to the Speaker's conviction on Federal fraud charges, shattering his political and personal life.


Hotel Rooms
To the Editor: Betsy Wade's advice ("Ins and Outs of 'Guaranteed' Hotel Reservations," Oct. 27), "If you get no reservation number, get the name of the clerk you talk to," is right on target.
Last year, before a friend and I journeyed to India, her husband telephoned a week in advance to guarantee a reservation for a room for the two of us at the Leyla Kempinski in Bombay at approximately $100 for our overnight stay there.


IN MONET'S LIGHT
I read with great interest the article about Joan Mitchell.
We were classmates at the Francis W. Parker School in Chicago for 11 years, graduating together in 1942.
Mitchell's mannerisms, as described by Solomon, were essentially identical to what I remember, perhaps even more pithy and acerbic now than then.
However, I was disappointed that the site of our secondary education was not mentioned.
Parker, a very progressive school for the times, nurtured all forms of artistic and intellectual expression and gave all of us a unique and invaluable start in life -- although I know Mitchell did not share my view.
ERNST R. JAFFE, M.D.
Tenafly, N.J.


True Confections
MOST WOMEN I KNOW WORK LIKE DOGS.
AT CHRISTMAS, we work like sled dogs racing the Iditarod.
We shop, we wrap, we clean, we decorate.
Most of all, we bake.
And to me, baking, an activity I normally enjoy, runs a close second to shopping, a task I
never
like, in turning holiday happiness into holiday hell.
All across the country, women reel from pastry board to oven in a cinnamon-scented stupor.
We do this in the name of tradition and in an effort, as a friend of mine says, "to make everything all shimmery and perfect."


Television Is the Campaign
Tonight at 6:30 P.M., the words
television
and
campaign
will be married in a way that tells a modern political truth.
That's when the six announced Democratic candidates blast away at each other in the first Presidential debate of the campaign.
In the process, they will demolish anew the fatuous but enduring notion that television merely covers politics.
For all the skill of its reporters, television cannot, like the print media, simply observe campaigns.
It is, primarily, where campaigns happen, the stage on which candidates jostle for position and effect.
For television to regard its role as merely covering the events of a campaign, like George Bush's famous flag-factory visit in 1988, is to invite eager manipulation by the candidates.


Sunday Dining; Places Where Shoppers Can Take a Break for a Meal
If your Christmas shopping trips take you to lower Seventh Avenue near Barneys and the home furnishings outlets on Broadway, here are some convenient places to dine.
Le Cafe
Barneys New York, 1067 Seventh Avenue (at 17th Street) (212) 929-9000, Extension 216 -- A curving marble staircase in the Women's Store takes you to this sparkling subterranean cafe.
The mirror-wrapped room, with colorful terrazzo tables, pine-green banquettes and a reflecting pool in the center -- ringed with poinsettias at this time of the year -- is a good place to stop for an espresso and pastry.


Chess
There was no doubt about the seriousness with which Yugoslavia took the 14th Mitropa Cup, held in September in Brno, Czechoslovakia.
To this competition of Central European teams, Yugoslavia sent four powerful Serbian grandmasters to mow down the opposition.
Of course, they did.
Branko Damljanovic, Ivan Sokolov, Petar Popovic and Stefan Djuric ran up 17 points in the six-round, round-robin tournament to win by a three-point margin over second-place Czechoslovakia.


CAMPUS LIFE: Barnard; Director's Ouster At Women Center Causes Concern
Barnard College has replaced the director of its Center for Research on Women to try to expand the center's mission and reduce costs, college officials say.
The move has caused concern both from students at the college and scholars and advocates outside Barnard who used the center.
Earlier this semester, Temma Kaplan was asked to resign as director, said Robert McCaughey, dean of the faculty.
Ms.
Kaplan said in an interview that the college administration asked her to take a sabbatical until July.
She added that it was a "terminal sabbatical."


Three Soups That Are Just Right for Cold Weather
WHEN the weather turns cold, soups become substantial affairs, often relying on sturdy winter vegetables.
They are good to prepare for a variety of occasions.
Well seasoned and transformed into a smooth puree, such soups can be the first course at a dinner party or a holiday dinner for family.
Served in a larger portion, perhaps, along with some good bread and a salad, soups are all that may be needed for a simple supper at home.


DANCE
Today
ALVIN AILEY AMERICAN DANCE THEATER, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
The highlights of this high-energy, high-tech (as in technique) modern-dance company's season include new works by the company's artistic director, Judith Jamison, and by Donald Byrd, a choreographer, the company premiere of Louis Falco's "Escargot" and a revival of Donald McKayle's "District Storyville." 3 and 8 P.M.
Also Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M., Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sundays at 3 and 8 P.M.
Through Dec. 29.
Tickets: $10 to $42.
Information: (212) 581-7907.


Unrelentingly Negative
To the Editor:
I was surprised and disturbed by your Dec. 2 front-page article on interracial marriages.
I am a white woman married to a black man.
We have been together 12 years.
We have lived in New York City, Los Angeles, suburban Massachusetts and for the last several years in a severely depressed rural area of northeastern Connecticut.
We have traveled extensively in the United States.


The Sounds of Christmas
THE merriment and religious significance of Christmas will be interpreted in a wealth of music to be offered to Westchester churchgoers and concert audiences over the next 10 days.
Most of it will be familiar, its repetition anticipated with pleasure year after year.
One such favorite is Tchaikowsky's "Nutcracker Suite," to be performed at a concert Saturday at 7:30 P.M. at Christ Episcopal Church in Bronxville, together with the "Fantasy on a Theme of Thomas Tallis' by Vaughan Williams. The adaptation was composed in 1910, but the original work was written around 1567 when Tallis was in his 60's and at the peak of a long career as a favored composer to Henry VIII, Edward VI, Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth.


Meg Shevach, Lawyer, Weds
Meg Allison Shevach and Joseph Serino Jr., lawyers in New York, were married last evening at the Hotel Westbury in New York.
Sheldon Ackley, a former leader of the Ethical Cultural Society, officiated.
Mrs.
Serino, 26 years old, is an associate at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
She graduated from Hamilton College and received a law degree from Emory University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Melvin Shevach of New York.
Her father is a radiologist at Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern, N.Y.


3 Athletes Rock Boat As Well as the Bobsled
During their quest to become members of the 1992 Albertville Olympic team as bobsledders, Edwin Moses, a former track star, and Willie Gault, a wide receiver with the Los Angeles Raiders, proved themselves to be among the best pushers in the world, giving the United States a realistic hope for an Olympic medal in the bobsled competition for the first time since 1956.
But after disagreements with the United States Bobsled and Skeleton Federation this summer, Moses, Gault and Greg Harrell, a former National Football League player, abandoned their efforts to make the team.


A Shaman Without Religion
Sitting in the dark recently at La Mama's Annex Theater in downtown Manhattan, listening to wordless bass chants imitating the vocal style of Tibetan monks, I felt as if I had wandered into a temple of an unknown religion.
Overtones swirled high above the fundamental pitches, produced by ancient techniques once passed along in monastic training.
The aura of ritual was not dispelled when seven instrumentalists slowly took positions behind altars containing an array of handmade ceramic instruments.
Some ceramics took the shape of crescent moons.
Others were jars, cast on a potter's wheel not unlike those used millenniums ago.
Still others had silken strings stretched across resonant hollows.


Sherry Safenowitz Is to Marry Jonathan Ambos
August wedding plans for Sherry Alison Safenowitz and Jonathan Josef Ambos have been announced by her parents, Carole and Aaron Safenowitz of Great Neck, L.I.
Ms.
Safenowitz, 24 years old, is an employment manager at Macy's in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Ithaca College.
Mr.
Ambos, 28, is a management consultant.
He graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and has an M.B.A. from New York University.
He is the son of Ronda Ambos of Great Neck and the late Leonard B. Ambos.


Restoring Loyalty to the Workplace
As United Nations inspectors scour Iraq in a desperate hunt for contraband and nuclear materials, Washington is abuzz with schemes to insure that future Saddam Husseins don't turn up on the world stage.
The coming debate over the lapsed Export Administration Act will enable members of Congress and the Administration to offer their plans, and high on the list will be proposals for the United States to impose even tighter export controls.
Yet as we approach the first anniversary of the gulf war, one lesson that every policy maker should have absorbed is this: Export controls are no panacea.
Such controls, especially unilateral ones, have proved inadequate against the determined efforts of governments to develop a capacity for the mass destruction of their neighbors.


That Other Team in Michigan Is Smiling
Matt Steigenga had 19 points and 9 rebounds to lead Michigan State over Detroit, 91-75, today.
Michigan State (6-0) led by only 42-38 at halftime, and Detroit (4-3) pulled within 1 point, 50-49, with 15 minutes to play.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Growing Ginger Root
Q.
I should like to grow ginger root as a house plant.
How might this be done? -- Theodore H. Spaet, Scarsdale, N.Y.
A.
The ginger root that's sold at greengrocers for use in recipes is actually the underground stem or rhizome of the true ginger plant Zingiber officinale.
This native of tropical Asia does indeed make a handsome, easily grown house plant, but don't confuse it with the hardy garden ginger Asarum, or with the red-flowered ginger from Hawaii, Alpinia.


The Homeless Are Moving On but the Criminals Still Linger
The Port Authority launched an ambitious effort this month to oust the homeless from its midtown Manhattan bus terminal, hoping to restore the cleanliness and safety of this gateway to the city and, at the same time, to help those encamped in the station rather than just chase them into the streets.
Commuters say they already notice a difference.
And the Port Authority proudly says that it has put hundreds of homeless men and women in touch with the social workers who now operate out of a basement office at the terminal.
Among the non-profit groups the Authority pays to help with the problem are Manhattan Bowery, which primarily runs treatment centers, and the Partnership for the Homeless, which runs a network of small shelters in churches and synagogues.


Gunfire at Group Kills Youth, 15
A 15-year-old was killed and two of his friends were wounded early yesterday morning after they stopped briefly by a shattered storefront on a Brooklyn street and a group of men opened fire, the police said.
The teen-ager, Neal Lutchmidat, died instantly in a barrage of bullets just before 5 A.M. on the sidewalk at 3188 Fulton Street in the East New York section, said Sgt.
Thomas Morris, a detective at the 75th Precinct in Brooklyn.
Eswardeon Roopan, 22, was hit in the leg and his 13-year-old nephew, Ravea Roopan, was hit in the arm, he said.


INSIDE
AIDS and Organ Transplants
In an effort to prevent transmission of the virus that causes AIDS, Federal health officials are developing a national system to keep track of organs and tissues from donation to transplant.
Page 38.
Nation's Peaceful Expansion
The United States acquired a California-size addition this year, when the Census Bureau added territorial waters to its definition of the area of a state.
Page 26.
U.S.-Mexico Trade Talks
President Bush told President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico that he wanted a free-trade agreement as soon as possible, even as support is waning in Congress.
Page 18.
Noriega's Day in Court
When lawyers for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega open their defense this week, they are expected to argue that the deposed Panamanian leader was a dupe, not an accomplice, of the Medellin drug cartel.
Page 26.
U.P.S. to Atlanta
Spurred by the high cost of housing in Fairfield County, Conn., United Parcel Service has packed up its headquarters and trucked it south in one of the nation's largest corporate moves.
Page 44.


NEW LEADERS VIE TO SUCCEED KOHL
Two new political gladiators have begun circling each other in the German Parliament, each hoping to become the next Chancellor.
Both men, Wolfgang Schauble and Hans-Ulrich Klose, made their debuts as parliamentary leaders last month.
With their emergence, a new generation stepped to the forefront in Bonn.


Howard Wraps Up Heisman Trophy
Back in mid-September, when the leaves were still green and Desmond Howard's football season at the University of Michigan was just one game and four touchdowns old, he sat in a restaurant in Ann Arbor, Mich., and listened to a question that seemed as much of a courtesy as anything else.
What do you think of your chances of winning the Heisman Trophy?


Reasons to Oppose Sports Betting
The Nov. 24 article "Gambling: How Much Is Too Much?" prompts these thoughts.
It would be a great mistake to add sports betting to the ever-growing disease of gambling, which has a costly stranglehold on our nation.
Gambling has dragged millions of families down into poverty and onto costly welfare rolls, unfairly and adversely affecting the lives of the children.


Ingenuity Protects Trees From Thieves
IT is that time of year when trees will be chosen, hung with lights, trimmed with balls and tinsel and placed in a position of honor in the house for the Christmas season.
For those who grow Christmas trees as a crop, and there are 15,000 of them, this is a busy season.
Of course, the sales figures for this year are not in, but last year 35.4 million Christmas trees were sold, and the most popular variety, accounting for 30 percent of sales, is the Scotch pine.
The Douglas fir runs close to it, with about 20 percent of sales.


World Markets; Can a Rebound Turn Into a Rally?
In recent years, investors in the United States have increasingly been advised to diversify their portfolios by buying stocks overseas.
But Americans who invested abroad at the beginning of 1991 probably are finding it would have been better to keep the money at home.
Most of the bad news for overseas investors occurred very late in the year, although some stock markets seemed to be bouncing off the bottom last week, in the wake of a rally on Wall Street.


Crossfire
Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator, announced his candidacy for the Republican Presidential nomination last week, charging that the vision of a New World Order dancing in President Bush's head will make the United States keep playing the role of global sugarplum daddy.
"America First" is Mr.
Buchanan's not-exactly-new theme, and Mr.
Bush was quick to attack those very words and the isolationism they stood for before Pearl Harbor.
But Mr.
Buchanan argues that alliances created to face down the Soviet Union, under which the United States footed the defense bills for much of the world, need to be re-examined now that a uniting Europe and a Japan-led Asia are powerful competitors.
Acknowledging that he is a long shot, he hopes that New Hampshire, bludgeoned by the recession, will prove a good field for his domestic theme: that Mr.
Bush, not liberals, is to blame for huge deficits and for the switch from "read my lips" to mere lip service to the idea of lower taxes.


Gliding and Whirling in the Middle of the Metropolis
TOURISTS and natives usually inhabit parallel New Yorks, but for a few weeks each December they meet, noses dripping, in midtown Manhattan.
The out-of-towners make their way to something the brochures call the Rink at Rockefeller Center.
New Yorkers, especially the older ones, still think of it as the Skating Pond, and as far as they are concerned, the place is Radio City.


Corrections
A report in the Guide column last Sunday about the Gemini Youth Symphony referred incorrectly toanother orchestra, the New York Virtuosi Chamber Symphony.
It remains in existence, and is scheduled to perform in February at the Hillwood Recital Hall in Brookville.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have a wood kitchen table with some type of laminate on the top.
This table is about 10 years old, and the gloss seems to be gone from the laminate.
The wood finish on the rest of the table is in perfect condition, so it seems unwise to buy a new table.
Is there any way to restore the gloss to the top?
A.
I assume the laminate is a plastic laminate like Formica or something similar.
If so, you might try using one of various polishes for restoring the gloss to faded laminates.
If this does not work, apply at least two coats of a polyurethane varnish to the top.
Clean and dry the surface, then sand lightly with fine paper before applying the first coat.
This varnish will have to be reapplied periodically, depending on the wear it gets.
Another possibility is to apply a new layer of plastic laminate on top of the old one.


Vivid Lessons On Air Safety
THE most disagreeable plane ride I have ever taken was last month in a simulator at the Toronto airport that is used to train Air Canada cabin crew members for emergencies.
The cropped-off fuselage section, which is mounted on hinged legs in a hangarlike building, shook violently and tilted to the left; oxygen masks fell out of some of the overhead compartments in knots, and other latches failed to open; lights flashed outside the windows and there was a lot of noise.
The cabin attendants rose to shout at us to bend over, grasp our ankles and hold the brace position and then followed suit.
This was one of 120 scenarios that the simulator can run through.
In going through five of the drills, I absorbed valuable safety lessons.
Most passengers will probably never experience such emergencies, but the lessons are worth remembering.


A Holiday Season With Little Cheer
Christmas hangs in the air over New York City, like the aroma of chestnuts roasting in the pretzel vendors' carts.
It sounds like Christmas, with the voices of Dean Martin, Vickie Carr and the Chipmunks wafting from different store windows and spilling onto the sidewalks.


Till Debt Do Us Part
WHEN THE NEW YORK CHAPTER OF THE AMERICAN Academy of Matrimonial Lawyers held its annual dinner dance at the Plaza hotel in May 1990, Alvin Ashley played impresario.
He hopped effusively from table to table, divorce lawyer to divorce lawyer.
He presented roses to his wife and heaped encomiums on the featured speaker.
So fulsomely did he extol his fellow academy officers that the meal itself had to be delayed.
A few months earlier, with the help of powerful friends and his own charismatic personality, the 55-year-old Ashley had been elected head of the academy's New York chapter, the most high-powered subdivision of a group that deems itself the Mensa of the matrimonial bar.
Ashley's ascent represented the fulfillment of his fondest dream and was meteoric by the plodding standards of most bar groups.
Ashley's businesses, too, looked to be booming -- good news to many lawyers on hand that evening who had invested money in them.
Over cocktails in the Terrace Room, he told one colleague he would soon sell his interest in Little Caesars, a pizza chain he claimed to control, for $15 million.


Rushing in Where Copland Feared to Tread
"I call it the Hope Diamond, complete with curse," Mr.
Corigliano said recently of his commission to write a work for the company.
"If the Met asks you to write an opera, you can't turn it down, even though you know it will kill you. Aaron Copland told me not to do it, to stick with orchestral works. An opera will have its first run, and then, because the economics of opera are so horrendous, nobody will present it again unless it's a smash hit. And those are few and far between." (He may be wrong: The Met is taping one performance of "Ghosts" for telecast next year, and the Chicago Lyric Opera has expressed interest in staging it.)


Beth H. Posner Is to Be Married
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert N. Posner of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Beth Hilary Posner, to Steven Wayne Rothman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Rothman of Morganville, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Posner, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and is studying for an M.B.A. at New York University.
Her father is the sales director of the Judicial Abstract Company, a legal-services concern in White Plains.
Her mother, Lynda Posner, is a co-owner of the Paper Dolls, a stationery retailer in New Rochelle.


Three Soups That Are Just Right for Cold Weather
WHEN the weather turns cold, soups become substantial affairs, often relying on sturdy winter vegetables.
They are good to prepare for a variety of occasions.
Well seasoned and transformed into a smooth puree, such soups can be the first course at a dinner party or a holiday dinner for family.
Served in a larger portion, perhaps, along with some good bread and a salad, soups are all that may be needed for a simple supper at home.


Results Plus
SKIING Swiss Wins Downhill Chantal Bournissen of Switzerland won the first downhill of the women's World Cup season yesterday in Santa Caterina, Italy.
Bournissen, 24, made it down the 2,385-meter long Cevedale track in 1 minute 29.04 seconds.
Katja Seizinger of Germany, finished second, 0.47 seconds behind Bournissen.
Last season's world champion, Petra Kronberger, finished third, continuing her early-season slump. (AP) CROSS-COUNTRY Mueller Takes Title Liz Mueller of Waterford, Conn., raced to an easy triumph in the Kinney high school championships yesterday in San Diego.
Mueller, a 16-year-old junior at Waterford High School, defeated Amanda White of Cockeysville, Md., by 150 meters with a time of 17 minutes 21 seconds on the 5,000-meter course in Balboa Park.
White, also a 16-year-old junior and a nationally ranked swimmer, placed second in 17:44.
Sophomore Kate Landau, the New York State title-holder from Tri-Valley High, placed third in 17:54, giving the Northeast the first 1-2-3 girls sweep in the 13-year history of the meet.


Holiday Fare, Plus the Unexpected
HOLIDAY music crowds the schedule this week, but there are also a few unexpected offerings.
The first occurs at 2:30 P.M. today, when a Harrison resident, Frederick Katzenberg, comes to the Warner Library in Tarrytown to give that rarity among concert events, an oboe recital.
Appearing with him will be the pianist Gary Klein.
The free program lists works of Albinoni, Franck, Nielsen, de Falla, Finzi and the 1978 Sonatina for Oboe and Piano composed by Walter Skolnik of Manhattan; 631-2189.


Bush Tells Mexico He Wants a Free-Trade Pact Soon
President Bush today told President Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico that he wanted a free-trade agreement as soon as possible, even as support is waning in Congress for considering such a pact in an election year.
In talks at the President's Camp David retreat in Maryland, Mr.
Bush also told Mr.
Salinas that Mexican concessions would be needed to obtain a politically acceptable deal, according to an Administration official who insisted on anonymity.


SKATING
Here is a listing of ice-skating rinks now in operation in New York City.
Dates, prices and hours are subject to change.
ABE STARK ICE-SKATING RINK, West 19th Street between Surf Avenue and the Boardwalk, Coney Island, Brooklyn.
Indoor sessions: Fridays, 3:30 to 5:30 P.M.; Saturdays, 12:30 to 3:30 P.M., and Sundays, noon to 4 P.M.; closed Mondays to Thursdays.
Admission: $3.50 on Fridays, $5 on weekends; skate rentals, $3 weekdays, $3.50 weekends.
Information: (718) 946-6536.


Review/Dance; 'The Christmas Revels,' Now With a Gaelic Accent
The accent is on Scotland in this year's "Christmas Revels," the annual yuletide entertainment that again packed the house on Friday night with tykes and their elders.
Studded with fresh material like Gaelic psalms and waulking songs for women who once wove tweed, the performance will be repeated today at 1 at 5 P.M. at Symphony Space (95th Street and Broadway).
The nationwide popularity of the Revels, as they are called, is not hard to fathom.
John Langstaff, the event's founder in Cambridge, Mass., hit upon a sure-fire formula.
For all the sing-alongs and dancing in the aisles, this highly communal celebration is also a serious attempt to examine early music and pagan dances associated with the winter solstice and Christmas.


SELF-HELP COURSE
As an educator for over 20 years, as well as an advocate of public education, I always find it amusing to see how often the wheel is reinvented.
The voucher system that Lamar Alexander espouses in your article was an outdated idea in the 1970's.
His "reform" plan is supposed to give parents money and allow them to spend it on a school of their choosing.
Presumably, these would be the same people who "have too long blamed teachers for problems that are rooted in the home." It is because of unstable family situations that the schools have had to become mother, father, doctor and psychologist to students.
POLA LEVI
Monsey, N.Y.


Ms. Baruch, Lawyer, to Wed Terry Fry, Student
Valerie Michele Baruch, a Washington lawyer, and Terry James Fry, a Georgetown University medical student, are engaged to be married in May.
Ms.
Baruch, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton A. Baruch of Rockville, Md., graduated from Colgate University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and from the University of Pennsylvania School of Law.
She is an associate with Kirkpatrick &amp; Lockhart.
Mr.
Fry, the son of Barbara and Barry Fry of Fairport, N.Y., also graduated from Colgate.


Banking Bill Is Filled With Special-Interest Cases
When President Bush signs the bill that provides an enormous loan from taxpayers to the insurance fund that protects bank deposits, he is not expected to mention Section 461.
Inserted at the 11th hour by Representative Frank Annunzio, a Democrat whose district includes part of Chicago, the section does nothing more than permit a Dutch banking company that is buying Talman Home Federal Savings and Loan of Chicago to keep its insurance agency.


'Visions of Gentility'
THE AMERICAN GENTLEMAN
Social Prestige and the Modern Literary Mind.
By David Castronovo. 223 pp.
New York: A Frederick Ungar Book/ Continuum. $24.95.


Ms. Jaffess Engaged
March wedding plans for Shari Lynn Jaffess and Steven Craig Davidson have been announced by their parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Jaffess of Ossining, N.Y., and Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Davidson of Bedford Hills, N.Y.
Ms.
Jaffess, 24 years old, is a benefits consultant with William M. Mercer Inc. in Stamford, Conn.
Mr.
Davidson, 26, is a lawyer with Jeffrey D. Grant &amp; Associates in Mamaroneck, N.Y.


Reds Have Braves to Thank for Busy Off Season
One evening last week, Bob Quinn was returning from dinner when he encountered John Schuerholz and Bobby Cox on the steps of the Fontainebleau Hilton Hotel in Miami Beach.
"John put his arm around me," Quinn, the Cincinnati Reds' general manager, related, "and said, 'Do me a favor; go upstairs and go to bed.' Coxie said, 'Did we scare you that much that you had to go out and do all that?' "


Films With A View
"The Europeans," "The Bostonians," "A Room With a View," "Maurice," "Mr. and Mrs. Bridge" -- the films of the producer Ismail Merchant, the director James Ivory and the writer Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, with their rarefied appeal, bear an instantly identifiable signature.
What is cited in THE FILMS OF MERCHANT IVORY (Abrams, $45) by Robert Emmet Long as "the longest collaboration in film history" began in 1961, acquired a critical boost with "Shakespeare Wallah" in 1965 and entered a larger-scale phase after the commercial success of "Heat and Dust" in 1983.
After three brief biographical chapters, Mr.
Long provides a film-by-film account of the 31 movies with which the members of the team have been involved to date.
As do their admirers -- who also see beyond the pretentious aspects of the films -- Mr.
"Slaves of New York" is presented as "flawed in certain respects . . . but it is a good film that manages to be both light-hearted and philosophic about young artists in Manhattan." Like many of the Merchant Ivory films, this book is visually scrumptious, but also problematic.


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
As recording companies try to glean new profits from their archives, every holiday season now brings an outpouring of boxed sets.
More extensive than greatest-hits collections, less unwieldy than a performer's full catalogue, boxed sets can put a performer in perspective, summing up a career or adding a revisionist spin to it.
If compiled with care, a set can also unearth material that collectors would have a hard time finding otherwise.
Typically, a boxed set will offer a fancy package, a few rarities among the reissues and a biographical booklet or liner notes -- something to memorialize the music for posterity.
Here are some of this season's best boxes. 'Ray Charles: The Birth of Soul -- The Complete Atlantic Rhythm and Blues Recordings 1952-1959'
Atlantic 782310-2; three CD's ($39.98) or cassettes ($29.98).


Inflation: Just What America Needs
In 1933, with the country in a deep depression, J. P. Morgan the younger, then unquestionably the most important banker in the country, was called to testify at a Congressional hearing that in some ways resembled an inquisition.
Reading the transcript of Mr.
Morgan's testimony nearly six decades later provides proof that, if nothing else, this economic downturn is not going to be a rerun of that Depression.


The Kind of Ransoms We Paid for Hostages
To the Editor:
I have grown accustomed to President Bush's constant double-speak, but I was surprised by your Dec. 5 editorial "The Hostage Lesson, Even Now," which is a blatant misperception of the facts.
The United States, like Britain, France and every other country that had citizens held as hostages in Lebanon,
did
pay ransoms to get the kidnappers to release the hostages.


A Limping Seton Hall Ends Up Waltzing
Some of them were bruised and some of them were bandaged, and some of the Seton Hall players were just not healthy enough to play basketball this afternoon against St.
Peter's at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
But despite a large number of injuries, the Pirates easily defeated the Peacocks, 66-44, showing 12,131 spectators and a local television audience just how deep and talented a team they really are.


Cynthia Learn Weds John Stauffer
Cynthia Joan Learn, an associate in finance at Salomon Brothers, and John Christian Stauffer, a manager at Andersen Consulting, both in New York, were married yesterday at St.
Paul Lutheran Church in Westport, Conn., by the Rev.
Paul Teske.
Mrs.
Stauffer, 26 years old, graduated from Lehigh University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dale H. Learn of Westport.
Her father and her mother, Joan D. Learn, are founding partners in The Greenwich Group, a corporate placement concern in Greenwich, Conn.


KAHANE TESTIMONY EXPECTED TO END
Testimony in the Meir Kahane murder trial in State Supreme Court in Manhattan is expected to end tomorrow without the defendant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, taking the stand.
Since the prosecution called the last of its 51 witnesses on Wednesday morning, the defense has put on a repetitive case most notable for its failure to elicit any testimony about the Jewish Defense League.
The organization, whose existence is now in question, was founded by Rabbi Kahane in Brooklyn in 1968, several years before he moved to Israel and started the virulently anti-Arab Kach Party.


Managing; Call It 'C.E.O. Disease,' Then Listen
FIVE years ago, when W. Thomas Stephens became the Manville Corporation's chief executive, he toured several company plants.
He expected to see somber workers.
Manville, after all, was in bankruptcy -- asbestos, its original raison d'etre, had been found to cause a deadly form of lung cancer and the company was fighting a withering array of lawsuits; and, its attempts to remake itself into a fiberglass and paper packaging concern were causing chaos in the evolving corporate culture.
Still, he did not expect the outright hostility he got.
"Wherever I went, I'd get this, 'Why should I trust you?' attitude," Mr.
Stephens recalls.
"I realized then that management's reaction to the horrors of the last decade had been to shut the windows, close the doors, hide behind a cloak of secrecy, not only externally but internally as well."


Living on Borrowed Time
THE MINER'S CANARY
Unraveling the Mysteries of Extinction.
By Niles Eldredge. 246 pp.
New York: Prentice Hall Press. $20.
EXTINCTION
Bad Genes or Bad Luck?
By David M. Raup.
Illustrated. 210 pp.
New York: W. W Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


Exploring the Royal Taste in Paintings
Even on the darkest December day, people stand in line inside the new Sainsbury Wing of the National Gallery here to see "The Queen's Pictures: Royal Collectors Through the Centuries." What draws them down to the basement of the new building is, indisputably, a love of art.
But it is also, and no less indisputably, the belief that a particular magic attaches to art that has belonged to the kings and queens of England for a very long time and is not normally on public view.
In this instance, their faith is justified.
Almost everything in the show, from Duccio to Holbein, from Baldung Grien to Claude Lorrain and from Rubens to Gainsborough and Sir Edwin Landseer, is there because one or another crowned head had an imperious liking for it. (In many cases, they actually commissioned the works in question.) To that extent, a specific passion runs through the show from beginning to end.


Kathleen Vagt To Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry T. Vagt Jr. of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Graham Vagt to Richard Gentry Robbins, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Robbins Jr. of Houston.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Vagt is a lawyer in Washington with Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher, a Los Angeles law firm.
She graduated from Georgetown University and the Potomac School of Law. .
Her father is a senior engineer at GEC-Marconi, a maker of aerospace products in Wayne, N.J.
Her mother is a special-education teacher at Junior High School 80 in the Bronx.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; For Churches, the Bells Now Toll 'Build'
MENTION Connecticut and a town green comes to mind, complete with a pristine white clapboard church at one end, its spire rising above other buildings.
Its simplicity bespeaks the old New England virtues of piety, modesty and thrift.
Most of these churches are Congregational and the parishes date to the 17th century, when church and state were intertwined.
To form a town, settlers first had to form a church.
Today there are 270 Congregational churches in 168 of Connecticut's 169 towns. (only Waterford is without one).


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
As recording companies try to glean new profits from their archives, every holiday season now brings an outpouring of boxed sets.
More extensive than greatest-hits collections, less unwieldy than a performer's full catalogue, boxed sets can put a performer in perspective, summing up a career or adding a revisionist spin to it.
If compiled with care, a set can also unearth material that collectors would have a hard time finding otherwise.
Typically, a boxed set will offer a fancy package, a few rarities among the reissues and a biographical booklet or liner notes -- something to memorialize the music for posterity.
Here are some of this season's best boxes.
Bessie Smith: 'The Complete Recordings Volume 2'
Columbia/Legacy C2K 47471; two CD's (around $20) or cassettes (around $11).


If You're Thinking of Living in: Bedminster
NOWHERE are the effects of the New Jersey Supreme Court's 1975 and 1983 Mount Laurel rulings on affordable housing felt more strongly than in the rural Somerset County community of Bedminster.
Until the early 80's, the township comprised mainly large estates owned by the the Forbeses, the Dillons, the family of Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady and other influential people.
The court rulings opened the door for the overturning of Bedminster's three-acre zoning to allow construction of The Hills development, 3,000 town houses, low-rise apartments and one-family houseson 500 acres in the southeastern section of the town.


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
As recording companies try to glean new profits from their archives, every holiday season now brings an outpouring of boxed sets.
More extensive than greatest-hits collections, less unwieldy than a performer's full catalogue, boxed sets can put a performer in perspective, summing up a career or adding a revisionist spin to it.
If compiled with care, a set can also unearth material that collectors would have a hard time finding otherwise.
Typically, a boxed set will offer a fancy package, a few rarities among the reissues and a biographical booklet or liner notes -- something to memorialize the music for posterity.
Here are some of this season's best boxes.
Jeff Beck: 'Beckology'
Epic/Legacy 48661; three CD's ($51.98) or cassettes ($36.98).


Miss Toth Wed To D. A. Strubel
Meghan Elizabeth Toth and Douglas Arthur Strubel were married yesterday in Chicago.
The Rev.
John Buchanan officiated at the Fourth Presbyterian Church.
The bride, 28 years 0ld, graduated from Kenyon College and is a candidate for a master's degree in the art of teaching history at the University of Illinois at Chicago.
She is the daughter of Dorothy Menges of Sewickley, Pa., and Richard J. Toth of Pittsburgh.
Her father is an assistant manager of the USX Credit Union in Pittsburgh.
Her mother is the manager of the serology department of the Allegheny County Crime Laboratory in Pittsburgh.


Ward B. Gordon, Insurance Executive, 60
Ward B. Gordon, an insurance executive, died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 60 years old and lived in Weston, Conn., Manhattan, and Estes Park, Colo.
He died of complications from colon cancer, his family said.


With Little Meaning, Florida Offers First Democratic Contest
It was perhaps fitting that the first contest of the 1992 Presidential campaign is being staged in the shadow of Walt Disney's Magic Kingdom.
All the trappings of a legitimate political event were on display today at the Florida Democratic Party's convention: There were fiery speeches.
There was a hall jammed with placard-waving delegates.
There were balloons and bumper stickers.
There were competing cocktail parties with the candidates.


Deborah Bloom to Marry in May
Dr. and Mrs.
William H. Bloom of Bay Shore, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deborah Jane Bloom to Paolo Antonio Fulghieri, a son of Franca Zamara and Dr.
Giancarlo Fulghieri, both of Milan, Italy.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Bloom, 30 years old, is an assistant treasurer in the trust section of The Bank of New York.
She graduated from Smith College.
Her father is a neurosurgeon in Bay Shore.
Her mother, Barbara Bloom, is a freelance radio reporter.


Has Madison Avenue Gone Too Far?
Sex has long been at the heart of marketing.
Pretty women decorated Coca-Cola calendars back in the 1890's.
But sexual themes -- particularly involving the undraped body -- are being used by Madison Avenue as never before to cut through commercial clutter and grab the consumer's attention.
And if advertising trends in Europe, where sexy ads often appear first before migrating to the United States, are any indication, Americans are going to see ever more daring ads on television, in magazines and even on billboards in coming years.


LEST WE FORGET
Saturdays, he and I went to the movies before the Regency stopped showing old movies.
"When are we going to see our friend, Humphrey?" he'd ask during the week, his blue eyes bright.
How embarrassed I'd be when he'd announce in the middle of the movie, in a fully audible voice: "I have to go to the men's room." So go, I'd hiss back, mortified.
Then, on his return, he'd settle into his seat and announce in the same tone: "That's better." As the people around us broke up laughing, I wanted to hide under my seat.
Or he'd want to leave before the end, and I'd snarl at him to close his eyes and take a nap.


In Thrall


Lois Scheerer McGraw, Philanthropist, 99
Lois Scheerer McGraw, a philanthropist and the widow of a former president and chairman of McGraw-Hill publishers, died on Friday at her home in Jupiter Island, Fla.
She was 99 years old.
Mrs. McGraw also had a home in Lake Placid, N.Y.


Ms. Crandall To Wed in June
William Crandall and Penny Vanderbilt Dinger, both of Maplewood, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Virginia Dillon Crandall to David Lee Stearns Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stearns of Wallingford, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Crandall, 24 years old, is an account executive at Kornreich Insurance Services in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is a national account executive for the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company in New York.


WAS THE WORLD MADE OUT OF CHEESE?
Jonathan Kandell's article "Was the World Made Out of Cheese?" (Nov. 17) portrays the world-class historian Carlo Ginzburg as an individual with a world-class denial problem.
Surely, Ginzburg must recognize that it was because he was Jewish that he had to hide with his Gentile grandmother and that it was not his father's anti-Fascism that put his life in jeopardy.
More Freudian than Ginzburg's belated realization of the links between his early traumatic experiences and his interest in hidden heretics and witches is his failure to recognize the link between his Jewishness and his method and form of scholarship.
He says that the week he spent analyzing 10 lines of a book changed his life.
Talmudic scholars have engaged in exactly that form of exegesis for years or even lifetimes to glean greater understanding.


In This Buyers' Market The Buyers Are Edgy
NEALE S. Godfrey fretted before she bought a six-room apartment on the Upper West Side last summer and she is fretting still.
Yet she is a pro in weighing economic risks -- a former bank president, the author of a children's book on money management, the host of a radio talk show on personal finance.
And the apartment was the third home she had bought.
Moreover, with the price at only $238,000 and the mortgage carrying a 7.5 percent adjustable interest rate, the real estate market hadn't looked so inviting to her since the late 70's.


Nancy Friedman to Wed in August
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Friedman of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nancy Lee Friedman, to Charles Wortley Swift Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Swift of Greenwich, Conn.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Friedman, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from Princeton University and is studying law at Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, was the national accounting manager at United Parcel Service in Greenwich.
Her mother, Mary Lee Friedman, is a Trans World Airlines tax manager in Mount Kisco, N.Y.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
CHRISTMAS AT SUNNYSIDE
St.
Nicholas flying over the rooftops of New Amsterdam in a wagon, dropping presents down chimneys, was a fantasy of Washington Irving's.
It was first published as one of several Christmas stories in "The Sketchbook" and preceeded by many years Clement Moore's "Visit From St. Nicholas."


The Executive Life; The Office Party Gets A Dose of Downsizing
How many office parties will you attend this holiday season?
If the answer is a scaled-back one -- or none -- you're not alone.
According to Battalia Winston International, a New York executive search firm that asked 500 of the country's largest companies about their holiday plans, it's beginning to look a lot less like Christmas across corporate America.
While 66 percent of respondents were invited to company-wide galas and 16 percent were invited to departmental celebrations, 18 percent reported that no parties were planned at all in their offices.


Making a Difference; Rhubarb Over Redwoods
His name is Harold L. Arbit, but maybe it should be Arbiter.
Mr.
Arbit is playing a powerful role, though often behind the scenes, in trying to forge a compromise between environmentalists and lumber companies on logging in California forests.
If compromise legislation is enacted here, it could become a model for other timber states.
Mr.
Arbit, who runs Concord Capital Management, a portfolio management company in San Mateo, Calif., has been using his personal wealth to almost single-handedly provide financial backing for the environmentalists.
That has given him a powerful voice in decision-making.


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
As recording companies try to glean new profits from their archives, every holiday season now brings an outpouring of boxed sets.
More extensive than greatest-hits collections, less unwieldy than a performer's full catalogue, boxed sets can put a performer in perspective, summing up a career or adding a revisionist spin to it.
If compiled with care, a set can also unearth material that collectors would have a hard time finding otherwise.


Even for Food, the Greeks Have a Word
THE grand openings get the attention.
New restaurants attract crowds, headlines and reviewers.
All the excitement and glitter often eclipses established restaurants that are growing better every year.
Aegean East in Hicksville is a 14-year-old veteran that has blossomed into a serious, successful Greek restaurant from casual cafe roots.
Pastel-washed stucco walls, teal-blue carpeting, pots of flowering azaleas and a treasure trove of antiques proclaim that this is no run-of-the-mill Greek storefront.
One taste of the food confirms that.


Foreign Affairs; A Grand Aid Gesture?
Bush Administration officials say that the deteriorating situation in the former Soviet Union is filled with the most dangerous consequences.
And yet, the help they offer to arrest those trends is most modest.
Bluntly, there is a galactic gap between the problems they say we face and what they are prepared to do about them.


Helping Employees At Small Businesses
WITH the recession still going strong and companies putting renewed emphasis on increasing efficiency, executives are looking for ways to help their employees address personal problems that produce stress, which can reduce their performance.
Many large corporations have expanded employee assistance programs, confidential intervention and consultation systems for workers and their families.
A good program provides assessments, brief counseling and referrals for problems of substance abuse, work stress, family relationships and personal problems.


Moving From Greenwich to Georgia, With the Employees' Needs in Mind
One of the nation's largest corporate moves ends here this week, as the last departments of the United Parcel Service's headquarters are packed up in an office park in Greenwich, Conn., and trucked south to new offices in suburban Atlanta.
Much seems unchanged.
A swan swims in a pond outside U.P.S.'s new quarters, just as swans swim outside the now-empty offices in Greenwich.
The surroundings are wooded and park-like.
Commuting war stories are a conversational staple.


Pamela Christensen Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Christensen of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Pamela Hall Christensen to Ward Wright Olney Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ward W. Olney of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Christensen, 29 years old , is a lending officer at the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from the University of Richmond, in in Virginia.
Her father retired as a senior vice president of sales and marketing for Safetex Corp., a pharmaceutical manufacturer in Richmond.


Ralph Good, 54, Dies; Helped Save Pinelands
Ralph E. Good, a biologist whose studies of the New Jersey Pinelands helped lead to the preservation of 1.1 million acres covering nearly a fourth of the state, died on Tuesday at his home in Haddonfield, N.J.
He was 54 years old.
He died of throat cancer, his family said.


Police Sweep bergen County for Drunk Drivers
More than 2,000 vehicles were stopped Friday night in a broad, holiday-season crackdown on drinking and driving and violations of state liquor laws in Bergen County.
A force of 225 state, county, and local police officers, patrolling roads and highways in all of the county's 70 towns, took part in the operation.
Officials said today that 33 motorists were arrested for driving while intoxicated and that another 11 were issued summonses for carrying open containers of liquor in a vehicle; in all, 2,231 vehicles were stopped in the campaign's intensive, opening-night dragnet.


Want More Fans? Win More Games
To the Sports Editor:
The information in "Where, Oh Where Have the Hockey Fans Gone?" by Joe Lapointe (The Times, Dec. 4) comes as no surprise to anyone who is aware of the countless problems facing the N.H.L. today.
A recession certainly plays a part in keeping the fans away, but in the cases of the Islanders, Devils, and especially the Rangers, Lapointe fails to point out that too many lackluster seasons may be taking their toll.


Ingenuity Protects Trees From Thieves
IT is that time of year when trees will be chosen, hung with lights, trimmed with balls and tinsel and placed in a position of honor in the house for the Christmas season.
For those who grow Christmas trees as a crop, and there are 15,000 of them, this is a busy season.
Of course, the sales figures for this year are not in, but last year 35.4 million Christmas trees were sold, and the most popular variety, accounting for 30 percent of sales, is the Scotch pine.
The Douglas fir runs close to it, with about 20 percent of sales.


India Tourist Visa Jumps $43, to $50
India increased its visa fees steeply last month, to the dismay of the country's tourism industry.
A normal tourist or business visa, for single entry or multiple entries, will cost $50 compared with $7 before.
A transit visa, for a single stopover up to 72 hours, is $25; there were no transit visas previously.
India's hoteliers and tour operators pressed the Government for a delay of the changes, made by the Foreign Ministry to raise hard currency income.
But the Indian Embassy in Washington says that the new fees have been put into effect, and there are no indications that they will change in the near future.
This year had been proclaimed Visit India Year by New Delhi, but the country has fallen behind other Asian nations in attracting greater numbers of tourists from Europe, North America and the newly affluent nations of Southeast Asia and the Pacific.


Give Me Old-Fashioned Corned Beef on Rye
After reading the Long Island Journal item on Dec. 1 about "School's Top Sandwich," I went to Great Neck's nearest deli and had my own favorite.
The memory of sandwiches in all their shapes and sizes could supply one with enough nostalgia to fill a book.
Born-and-bred New Yorkers describe with reverence the simple corned beef on rye of their pasts.
Their criteria for perfection includes the chewy quality of the bread, and the correct proportions of fat to lean, and the mandatory thickness of the middle.
Of all the culinary categories, sandwiches seem to draw people together; in creating them, the sky's the limit.
In these hectic days, I'd rather have that simple turkey on rye and a Cel-Ray tonic than all the expensive trendy meals that gourmet chefs dish out.
WILMA ASKINAS Great Neck


POSTINGS: Mission House Restoration; Going Back To the Future
Twenty years before the Woolworth Building pierced the sky above Manhattan with its spires and finials, the architects Robert William Gibson and Edward J. Neville Stent were exploring the marriage of Gothic art to the emerging technology of steel-skeleton construction.
They produced the landmark Church Mission House at Fourth Avenue (now Park Avenue South) and 22d Street, a rich confection of ornament and detail that is at the same time remarkable for its broad expanses of glass.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
Let's see.
John Simon's review of "Harlot's Ghost" was entertaining.
Norman Mailer's rebuttal was even more entertaining.
And Mr.
Simon's rerebuttal was entertaining.
Conclusion: I think I'll buy a copy of the book.
HUGH FOSTER Manitowoc, Wis.


A 'Golden Opportunity'
To the Editor:
Donald V. Fites, chairman of Caterpillar Inc. ("Trapped in the Impoverished Middle Class," Nov. 17), says: "There is a narrowing of the gap between the average American's income and that of the Mexicans. As a human being, I think that what is going on is positive. I don't think it is realistic for 250 million Americans to control so much of the world's G.N.P."


Payback Time for Knicks In Garden
To become an elite team, the Knicks must begin to beat elite teams.
Their 99-89 loss to the Bulls in Chicago on Friday night dropped New York's record to 2-4 against teams that are playing .500 or better.
So despite the Knicks' 13-7 record after 20 games, most of their success has come against teams that are not contenders.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
Those of us in the Midwest (i.e., the real world) who read The Book Review were greatly amused at the feud between Norman Mailer and John Simon.
It is truly amazing how petty jealousies and silly spats can receive so much attention.


To Clear Up Confusion In the Supermarket
I was pleased to see "Supermarkets Expand Nutritional Advice"  [ Oct. 13 ] .
Availability of such information is by no means as rare as the article suggests, as supermarket corporations have had home economists on staff for years.
Yet, in many cases, their roles have simply not been as prominently utilized as they might well be.
The confusion that consumers experience during their shopping trips is very real; there are few other venues where as many new products are being introduced continuously, as in the supermarket.
Many marketers tout the absence (or presence) of particular ingredients, as if the marketer had done something unique to omit the ingredient.
Yet, the ingredient may never have occurred naturally in the product.


Sunday Outing; For the Bargain Hunter, Ample Outlets
At the start, they were a drowsy bunch, as these intrepid bargain hunters left the Upper West Side of Manhattan.
While their warm charter bus hummed on its two-and-a-half-hour trek toward Reading, Pa., early one frosty Saturday morning, many dozed.
Others chatted quietly, recalling past shopping triumphs in the place known as the Outlet Capital of the World.
"I saved a lot of money on name brands last year," said Canzetta Hamilton, a legal assistant.
"For $300, I got so many things: sweaters and shirts for Christmas gifts and a whole lot of lingerie for myself.


OLD MONEY, NEW NEEDS
I am a board member of a small (by New York City standards), nonprofit, human-service organization in northeastern Pennsylvania.
It was with some chagrin, maybe even anger, that I read, in Judith Miller's article "Old Money, New Needs" (Nov. 17), of the controversy caused by Felix and Elizabeth Rohatyn over their condemnation of lavish benefit events in New York City.
I have no doubt that the cost of just one of those affairs, even in their less lavish 1990's form, would greatly enhance our endowment fund.
I believe that your article shows how sadly and dangerously New York City is out of touch with the nation.
Brooke Astor is lauded for her humanitarian work, while we learn that she requires "a staff of 42 in three homes" to exist.
The article never makes the connection between that kind of extravagant life style and Mrs.
Astor's own words: "The arrogance of big money is one of the most unappealing characteristics, and it goes very deep."  J. C. KLICK
Kingston, Pa.


RISING HUMAN NEED OUTSTRIPS GIVING
In a converted warehouse that serves as an emergency shelter for homeless families here, the recession's pain is felt equally by those who give and those who receive.
As the economic downturn makes it more difficult to find willing contributors, the Star of Hope, the local charity that runs the shelter, struggles with staff cuts and budget deficits even as a growing number of people seek help after losing their jobs and then their homes.


In Bangkok, A Carnival Of Bargains
FOR Thais, the newly arrived Western-style supermarkets, 24-hour convenience stores and fast-food restaurants of Bangkok are interesting but, many hope, simply a fad.
For a Thai in search of a day's serious shopping or an evening's dining and entertainment, there is still nothing -- there will never be anything -- to compete with a traditional Thai market.
Experienced travelers to Bangkok learn quickly that the mazelike markets scattered across the Thai capital offer the country's best shopping bargains and some of its finest and cheapest food.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
Thanks for the money.
I bet my wife $10 that Norman Mailer could not suffer John Simon's review of "Harlot's Ghost" in silence but would feel duty-bound, as an inveterate bully, to try somehow to pound the maverick critic into submission ("A Critic With Balance: A Letter From Norman Mailer," Nov. 17).
My wife reasoned that the chorus of praise from compliant, cowed and careerist reviewers would have satisfied even Mr.
Mailer's ego.
As they say at the track, you have to know your horse.
BARON WORMSER Mercer, Me.


On the Street; If Snow Won't Glisten . . .
The sparkle of gold and silver jackets and coats has added fashion's glitter to holiday shoppers taking advantage of the surprisingly mild temperatures of fall.
One of the most popular designs is the gold leather suit appliqued with stars from Saint Laurent.
Gold leather has given the classic motorcycle jacket a rich look for sportswear wardrobes; Ivana Trump (top, second from right) was among those wearing one recently.
And a host of shimmering gold and silver lightweight raincoats and jackets have brightened gloomy December days.
They stand out like searchlights (center photos).
Even the standard down jacket looks fresh in radiator-silver fabric.
Perhaps there has been enough of all-black wardrobes.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Glen Rock 213,000
38 Fairview Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; screened porch, patio, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,075.
Livingston 200,000
15 South Cedar Parkway
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old renovated Tudor; slate fireplace, family room, full basement; taxes $3,267.
Mahwah 190,000
93 Armour Road
3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; sun room, fireplace, renovated baths; taxes $2,385.
Midland Park 160,000
422 Prospect Street
4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; fenced yard, new windows, new w/w carpeting; taxes $2,860.
Ramsey 250,000
46 Buckingham Drive
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 49-year-old colonial; deck, eat-in- kitchen; taxes $4,615.
Saddle Brook 153,500
321 Hayes Drive
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old split level; new windows, new furnace, full basement, large property; taxes $2,631.
OTHER AREAS Coram,L.I. 131,000
1 Beecher Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $4,100.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 480,000
Doeview Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; fireplace, study, eat-in kitchen, deck, family room, 2 fireplaces, 2.1 acres; taxes $7,834.
Guilford, Conn. 195,000
190 Stonehedge Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; pantry, beamed ceilings, enclosed porch, 1 acre; taxes $2,856.


Keeping a Home Warm
IF your home is heated by steam or hot water, the radiators or convectors in each room usually need maintenance at the start of the heating season.
For maximum efficiency, they should also be cleaned and inspected monthly in the winter.
Radiators and convectors have the same function -- delivering heat -- and are controlled and maintained in basically the same ways.
Radiators are usually made of heavy cast iron.
Heat supplied by steam or hot water warms them, and the heated metal radiates warmth into the surrounding air.


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
As recording companies try to glean new profits from their archives, every holiday season now brings an outpouring of boxed sets.
More extensive than greatest-hits collections, less unwieldy than a performer's full catalogue, boxed sets can put a performer in perspective, summing up a career or adding a revisionist spin to it.
If compiled with care, a set can also unearth material that collectors would have a hard time finding otherwise.
Typically, a boxed set will offer a fancy package, a few rarities among the reissues and a biographical booklet or liner notes -- something to memorialize the music for posterity.
Here are some of this season's best boxes.
Jimi Hendrix: 'Stages: 67, 68, 69, 70'
Reprise 9 26732-2; four CD's ($49.98) or cassettes ($39.98).


Refuseniks, Rowdies and Refined
WHEN it comes to New Year's Eve celebrations, people can generally be divided into three categories.
First, you have the "I hate New Year's Eve" types.
They dread the traffic, the inevitable blizzard, the elusive baby-sitter, the lethal Champagne corks, the ridiculous hats, the kisses at midnight from people they hardly know and the feeling when they wake up that they have consumed a bale of cotton.
Nothing can be done for them.
Then there are the "Let's put on the dog. Who knows? This could be the last year of my life" folks.
They eagerly look forward to the tuxedos and evening dresses and the crab cocktail and the waltz with the neighbor's spouse and the contemplative strolls in the frigid night air and the vow to take more trips next year (without the kids) and the final 10-second countdown to midnight and the Champagne spilled all over their fancy evening wear.


TV Replacing Teachers in Classrooms
IT is early morning at Pleasantville High School and three students have gathered for their French class.
Their "bon jour" is not addressed to a live teacher in the classroom, however; rather, they say "good morning" to a television set.
This class is being conducted by interactive television, a video system that allows people in two separate places to speak to and see one another.
Ben Matteo Jr., Mauria Miller and Christina Telesco of Pleasantville are full-fledged members of the French class taught by Adrienne F. Montillet at Westlake High School, which is in the Mount Pleasant School District.


Encore Vaudeville


CAMPUS LIFE: Alfred; 9th-Century Figure Is Focus of Dispute In Search for Logo
The search for a new logo at Alfred University has raised questions about the appropriateness of using a millennium-old symbol in today's world.
The debate focuses on a statue of the university's namesake, Alfred the Great, erected last year in the center of campus.
Alfred was king of Wessex from 871 to 889 A.D., during which period he defeated the Danish armies seeking to conquer the English and stimulated a revival of learning and literacy outside the clergy.


Lisa Goldstein Plans to Wed
Edna and Jerome Goldstein of Central Valley, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Beth Goldstein, to Thomas Bernard Grunfeld, the son of Ernest and Klara Grunfeld of Montreal.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Goldstein, 31 years old, is an associate in the New York law firm of McAloon, Friedman &amp; Mandell.
She received undergraduate and law degrees from Boston University.
Mr.
Grunfeld, 33, is of counsel to the New York law firm of Kazlow &amp; Kazlow.
He graduated from McGill University and the Vermont Law School.


Resume vs. an Insider for Health Department Post
Eight months after losing his health commissioner, Mayor David N. Dinkins is about to choose between two highly regarded candidates for the post -- one who is popular and another who has the right credentials.
Senior administration officials said on Friday that the Mayor had still not decided whether to appoint Dr.
Margaret A. Hamburg, the acting Health Commissioner, or Dr.
Lawrence S. Brown Jr., senior vice president for research and medical affairs at the Addiction Research and Treatment Corporation in Brooklyn.
But published reports this week saying that he was about to give the job to Dr.
Brown caused a stir among Dr.
Hamburg's supporters in and outside the Health Department.


Together Again


Miss Volk Wed To D. J. Healy
Jenny Elizabeth Volk, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Volk of New York, was married yesterday to Donald John Healy, the son of Alice Healy of Mendham, N.J., and the late Donald J. Healy.
The Rev.
Richard L. Jeske officiated at Holy Trinity Lutheran Church in New York, assisted by the Rev.
Giles Hayes, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Healy, 26 years old, graduated from Denison University and is a portfolio assistant at Lynch &amp; Mayer Inc., a New York money-management company.
Her father is the president of Chamberlain &amp; Steward, a New York asset advisory concern.


In Decked Halls, Wassails
WEDNESDAY -- The New York Public Library raised $250,000 at its fifth Table of Contents, an evening of private dinners on various themes.
This year there were 66 dinners in private homes, in restaurants and in museums.
Sonny Sloan, one of the originators of the idea 10 years ago, gave an Algonquin round-table dinner in her Park Avenue apartment.
Timothy and Anne Forbes gave a dinner at the Forbes Magazine Galleries on Fifth Avenue near 12th Street; Christopher Forbes filled in as host for his brother Timothy, who was ill with a cold.
TUESDAY -- The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater benefited from a supper dance at the New York Hilton to celebrate the world premiere of its new work "Rift."


Low-Octane Music
To the Editor:
Performers like Paula Abdul should choreograph themselves down on their knees and give thanks to MTV  [ "10 Months, $1 Million and 100 Headaches . . . ," Nov. 17 ] .
Were it not for that mush-minded medium catering to your average brain-dead pop-music consumer, disposable artists like Ms.
Abdul and others would have to rely more on how good their product
sounds
rather than how good it
looks.


Roger Hackney, Executive, 89
Roger Hackney, a retired executive vice president at the Johns Manville Corporation, died on Tuesday at his home in New Canaan, Conn.
He was 89 years old.
He died of complications from strokes, his family said.


Deals and Discounts
CANADA FARES -- Air Canada has a two-for-one deal for travelers flying together from New York, Newark or Boston to Toronto, Montreal or Ottawa between Jan. 6 and March 12.
One passenger pays the fare of $259 round trip, the other travels free.
Tickets are nonrefundable.
Reservations must be made 14 days in advance and tickets bought within 3 days; reservations cannot be changed.
A Sunday stay is required.
Call (800) 776-3000.
ST.
PETERSBURG TOURS -- Independent tours to St.
Petersburg (formerly Leningrad), are offered by a company called Finnway starting at $599 a person, double occupancy, in January for a three-night "theater weekend," including round-trip Finnair flights from New York, accommodation at the Hotel Moskva, breakfast and lunch daily, a city tour, transfers and service charges; theater tickets are extra.
A similar eight-day package starts at $699 (for January departures) and includes four sightseeing programs.
Finnway is the United States division of the 82-year-old Finland Travel Bureau.
More information: (800) 526-4927 or, in New Jersey, (201) 535-1610.


Kerry Decker, Teacher, Weds
Kerry Anne Decker, the daughter of Judge and Mrs.
George K. Decker of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to Kenneth Paul Ducey Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ducey of Garden City.
The Rev.
Paul F. Butler officiated at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in Garden City.
Mrs.
Ducey, 26 years old, is a teacher at the Oakwood elementary school in South Huntington, L.I.
She graduated from Susquehanna University and received a master's degree in elementary education from Adelphi University.
Her father, Judge Decker, sits in New York State Family Court in Nassau County.


RECORD BRIEFS
Sor: Songs
Montserrat Figueras, soprano; Jose Miguel Moreno, guitar. Astree E 8730; CD.


FILM
December
"THE PRINCE OF TIDES." Barbra Streisand directs and stars in this version of Pat Conroy's sentimental best-selling novel.
She is a New York psychiatrist; Nick Nolte is a Southerner whose suicidal sister is Ms.
Streisand's patient.
Opens Dec. 18.
"HIGH HEELS." Pedro Almodovar's women are always on the verge of some sort of nervous breakdown.
Here a daughter marries her mother's former lover.
He turns up dead, and the women share the experience of being murder suspects.
Opens Dec. 18.


... In the Face of Great Odds
To the Editor:
When well managed, health maintenance organizations work fairly well ("Putting Doctors Into Cost Containment"), but cost containment has been disappointing.
H.M.O.s cannot control cultural and societal values that often keep incurable patients alive, at great cost and for long periods of time.
More information is needed for physicians to reduce unnecessary, inappropriate use of health services.
The public's demand for unreasonable access to expensive new technology, backed by threats of legal action, must be curbed.
The problems are complex and far-reaching.
Even a well run H.M.O. is, at best, nothing more than a finger in the dike.
HENRY S. METZ, M.D., M.B.A.
Rochester, N.Y., Dec. 3


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
The absence of a point in Norman Mailer's letter causes one to wonder whether somebody unintentionally dropped its last line: "To be continued."  LAURENCE B. CHASE Summit, N.J.


Determining What Shapes a Successful School
BY conventional wisdom, the American educational system is no match for its global counterpart.
Politicians and pundits alike criticize the failures of the nation's schools, citing high drop-out rates, violence and teen-age pregnancy, illiteracy and deficient technological skills.
But there are some notable exceptions that defy the prevailing gloomy outlook.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-25  GORBACHEV'S FALL, RISE AND SLIDE
President Gorbachev's return to Moscow after the failed coup in August was perhaps his finest moment.
But he slowly changed from a champion of a new order to an obstacle in its way.  1


Beyond Beauty
To the Editor:
Why doesn't Disney come up with a creative, valuable story line for girls of today?
In every feature film with female leads we see the same graceful and shapely heroine whose ultimate reward is to find the man (or beast) of her dreams and live happily ever after.


This Week
Prune holly, juniper, yew, pine and other evergreens for decorating indoors.
If you have a cut Christmas tree, put it outdoors in a bucket of water to keep it green and fragrant.
If it's a living tree, dig a hole for later planting; cover it with burlap and leaves.


Trimming Back For Christmas? Try a New Top
This is a festive time of year, with holiday galas to get dolled up for, from tree-trimming parties to New Year's Eve dinners.
But this is a year when an extravagant evening dress may not be high on the shopping list.
Luckily, there are alternatives.
Think about rejuvenating your old black skirt or pants with a lacy new bodysuit or a jeweled strapless top.
Try a big white shirt or a sparkly sweater with last year's leggings.
That's all you need in this season's toned-down fashion climate.


PEACE-ESE
Safire asks that the coiner of the phrase "peace process" come forward.
That phrase may have been the contribution of the late President of Egypt, Anwar el-Sadat.
It is a direct translation of the Arabic phrase "amaliyat as-salaam," a phrase Sadat used frequently.
The term, peace process, owes its success to its ambiguity.
Today, it seems equally to suit Palestinian leaders, Israeli prime ministers and American secretaries of state.
ISSA A. NOUR
Brooklyn


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 15, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician's successful cloning of dinosaurs for use in a theme park leads to a global emergency.
2
3
COLD FIRE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A despondent reporter finds hope and romance while she tracks the course of a good Samaritan.
3
7
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) The experiences of a couple on a trek across Europe during the ice age.
4
3
PRISONER OF MY DESIRE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 12th-century English belle seeks to capture the heart of a lord.
5
32
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
6
1
THE FOURTH K, by Mario Puzo. (Bantam, $5.99.) The tumultuous career of President Francis Xavier Kennedy, cousin of John and Robert Kennedy and inheritor of their charisma.
7
3
THE RUBY KNIGHT, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The second volume in "The Elenium," a fantasy saga.
8
8
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The coming of age of Irish women.
9 *
14
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
10
25
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
11 *
2
PERCHANCE TO DREAM, by Howard Weinstein. (Pocket, $4.99.) A "Star Trek" novel.
12 *
7
HOCUS POCUS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Berkley, $5.99.) Life in the near future, as noted by a college professor and prison administrator.
13 *
6
POSSESSION, by A. S. Byatt. (Vintage, $12.) A pair of British academics pursue the relationship between two Victorian poets.
14
16
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four novellas about horror and terror in the late-night hours.
15
4
22 INDIGO PLACE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.50.) A millionaire tycoon wants to buy an heiress's mansion and win her heart.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
30
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) Men versus women.
2
22
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
3
108
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
4
6
A LIFE ON THE ROAD, by Charles Kuralt. (Ivy, $5.99.) The memoirs of the television newscaster.
5
423
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration. (LP)
6 *
38
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspiration.
7 *
23
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) U.S. history.
8
7
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, feel, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
9
20
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five women.
10 *
126
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $8.95.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
11 *
1
ON THE TRAIL OF THE ASSASSINS, by Jim Garrison. (Warner, $5.99.) A Louisiana judge contends that President John F. Kennedy's assassination was the result of a conspiracy.
12 *
52
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A girl's life in Australia.
13 *
28
THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $7.95.) A tale of a cat.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
18
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
11
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
7
UNNATURAL SELECTIONS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Far Side" cartoons.
4
51
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
5
1
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1992. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
6 *
3
A SOUTHERN BELLE PRIMER, by Maryln Schwartz. (Doubleday, $10.) Humor.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


POSTINGS: 92d Street Blight; End of an Eyesore
Ordinarily, weeping, wailing and wakes follow the razing of an old house on the Upper East Side, but there were no tears shed last week when 125 East 92d Street came down.
The demolition of the boarded-up gray structure -- with a sunken roof, rotted timbers and burst pipes -- has left a 25-foot gap in the block's row of well-kept, 19th-century brownstones, but no one is complaining.
The house had been regarded as a blight on the block for many years.
"It was in such frightful shape," said Elizabeth Ashby, president of Carnegie Hill Neighbors, a local civic group.
"Demolition could have been done by a small child with a shovel." "The structure deteriorated to where it wasn't worth saving," agreed David Davies, who paid $117,000 for it in 1978 and intended to rebuild it for his own use but never did because of "personal problems." He passed up a $1 million offer in 1986.
He is now asking $875,000 for the lot.


For Uncertain Shoppers, Shops That Know
WITH a paltry 10 days left until Christmas, this is the time when gift-hunting panic can set in.
A good remedy is New York City's single-minded stores.
Covering every possible variation on their chosen themes, they offer specialties as dry as microscopes, as cheerful as cake decoration, as macabre as witchcraft.
Whether your goal is to satiate obsessive hobbyists or to amaze the unenlightened, these stores can supply some decidedly eccentric objects to sneak under the tree.
Some of these emporiums lurk in corners where only the initiated can find them; others flaunt their specificity.
Some come across as enthusiastic and thorough; some are morbidly fixated.
Their customers tend to be wrapped in clouds of devotion, but mere curiosity-seekers are not unwelcome.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
Advantage: Mr. Simon. THOMAS J. BRENNAN Torrance, Calif.


The Executive Computer; Hands Off the Keys, Noses Into Books
Not long ago, as part of a national survey, an advertising agency asked computer industry engineers and managers about their favorite leisure activities.
Among those who responded, reading (18 percent) was by far the most popular choice, with golf (5 percent) a distant second.
Other pastimes included: being with the family, travel, music, computer hacking and fishing (all 4 percent); woodworking and gardening (3 percent each), and sex (1 percent).


Perspectives: The Spitzer Outlook; On Alert for Sites As the Cycles Turn
THE developer-owner who finds himself without a site that he is currently developing might well bristle at the idea that he is inactive.
He is out there looking.
He is also tending to the property he already owns.
So it is with Bernard Spitzer, a 67-year-old builder and investment-owner, a civil engineer with a taste for esthetics and design, a reputation as an insightful taskmaster and a preference for residential buildings in prime Manhattan locations.
If there is an unusual construction challenge, so much the better.


Ms. Fleischman To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles D. Fleischman of Milford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Beth Robin Fleischman to Steven Lloyd Zweibel, a son of Linda Zweibel-Rosenblum of Greenlawn, L.I., and Kenneth J. Zweibel of East Northport, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fleischman, 25 years old, graduated from Brandeis University, as did her fiance, and received a master's degree in counseling psychology from Tufts University.
She is an administrative assistant at National Hadassah in New York.
Her father is a consulting engineer in Milford and the vice president and treasurer of the Henry Nias Foundation, a social services and cultural philanthropy in Mamaroneck, N.Y.


Streetscapes: The Queens County Courthouse; Beneath the Grime, Corruption
THE physical restoration of the 1909 Queens County Courthouse on Court Square in Long Island City, now under way, will be a long but fairly straightforward job.
What promises to be more difficult is reconciling its sordid past with its legitimate status as a building worth preserving.
The brick-and-granite county courthouse started out in 1876 as a Second Empire-style, three-story structure.
In 1904, a fire inadvertently started by a roofer left nothing but the exterior walls.


R. F. Hartzell Weds Ms. Berk
Valerie Berk, the daughter of Phyllis Berk of New York and Otto George Berk Jr. of Millbrook, N.Y., was married yesterday to Richard Franklin Hartzell, the son of Lois Hartzell of Stony Brook, L.I., and the late Richard Hartzell.
The Rev.
Richard D. Leonard, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Georgian Suite in New York.
Ms.
Berk, who is 32 years old and is keeping her name, heads her own desktop publishing and design studio in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Haywood-Berk, a custom construction and renovation concern in New York.


Corrections
A picture caption on the Evening Hours page last Sunday misidentified a guest alongside James and Elaine Wolfensohn.
He was Itzhak Perlman, not Pinchas Zukerman.


Two-Thirds of a Loaf in Russia
President Yeltsin of Russia promised to stabilize the economy in a year and have food baskets "two-thirds filled, not more." Page 24.


Understudy For Bono Wins One
His left knee was banged up and bandaged, but Steve Bono, the new heartthrob of Market Street, had already won the game and kept the San Francisco 49ers hopeful for another day.
By the third quarter, his understudy had taken over.
While Bono stood next to Joe Montana on the sideline and watched today, Steve Young played most of the second half of a 28-14 victory over the Kansas City Chiefs at Candlestick Park.
The victory, the 49ers' fifth in a row, didn't unravel their complicated playoff situation, but it did keep San Francisco from being eliminated today.
In Chicago, the Bears clarified their position by beating Tampa Bay and clinching a playoff berth.


With Prices Down, the Perils of Lobster Fishing Are Rising
With winds blowing from the northeast and a swell coming at his boat from the southeast, Ken Fields hurriedly hauled in the last of the lobster traps he had laid in Casco Bay.
As he leaned over the port side of his boat to band the lobsters' claws, the trap lines wrapped around his rubber boot like a lasso, ready to reel him into the icy waters.
Just as he was about to be flung overboard, his skipper noticed him tangled in the lines and freed him.
Mr. Fields is one of the lucky ones.


Internal Split Is Hobbling Kurdish Guerrillas
Deepening tensions between the two leading Kurdish guerrilla organizations in northern Iraq have made it impossible for the Kurds to present a united front to the outside world and develop a coordinated strategy in the face of increasing pressure from Baghdad.
The rancor has often paralyzed the Kurdistan Front, the collection of eight Kurdish groups that acts as a nominal government.
And it has left international relief agencies confused about whom they should deal with.


Ila Siegel to Wed Dr. Peter Sklarin
Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Siegel of Los Angeles have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ila Lynn Siegel, to Dr.
Peter Michael Sklarin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Burton Sklarin of Lawrence, L.I.
Ms.
Siegel, 26 years old, graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.
She has a master's degree in psychology from California State University at Northridge and is a second-year law student at the University of San Francisco.
Her father, who is retired, was a retail food distributor in Los Angeles.
Her mother, Roberta Siegel, is a junior high school teacher in Los Angeles.


The Fall Of Gorbachev/A special report.; A Russian Is Swept Aside By the Forces He Released
Looking back now, the August coup was both Mikhail S. Gorbachev's finest moment, and the start of the final act in his tumultuous reign.
The collapse of the pathetic coup was his victory.
It demonstrated that the freedoms he had loosed had taken root, and it brought out the qualities of courage and determination that brought about the end of the cold war.


The Tax Recipes Vary, But Share a Sour Taste
For years, policymakers have held strong opinions about the best mix of taxes.
Some criticized New York State for getting over half its revenue from income taxes, compared with about a third for other states.
Too volatile a source, critics said.
Legislators will be sorry when a recession hits.
Others blamed Connecticut for refusing to impose any income tax and relying so heavily on sales and business taxes.
Its 8 percent sales tax and 12 percent corporate income tax rates were the highest in the nation.
Too consumption-oriented, they said, and unfair to companies.
And that could leave the state especially vulnerable in an economic downturn.


BEST SELLERS: December 15, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
10
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
2
4
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the lives and fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
3
3
9
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
4
4
17
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
5
5
4
THE SAPPHIRE ROSE, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in "The Elenium," a fantasy saga.
6
6
11
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
7
10
2
WLT, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $21.95.) The birth, prosperity and decline of a down-home Minneapolis radio station.
8
7
7
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing may help save others.
9
11
40
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
10
8
14
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
11
9
7
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $22.50.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide. (LP)
12
12
90
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
13
15
8
ALL THE WEYRS OF PERN, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $20.) A new volume in the science fiction series "The Dragonriders of Pern."
14
4
LILA, by Robert M. Pirsig. (Bantam, $22.50.) On a sailboat cruise down the Hudson with a woman companion, a philosopher reflects on the nature of our society.
15
13
2
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) The story of an Auschwitz survivor in the Catskills, told in comic-book form.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
13
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
2
3
9
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
3
2
6
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
4
5
16
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces. (LP)
5
12
2
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
6
4
6
CHILDHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Putnam, $14.95.) The entertainer reflects on his boyhood and kids today.
7
6
4
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
8
7
2
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A reporter's account of an N.B.A. championship season spent with Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls.
9
10
26
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
10 *
8
7
PRAIRYERTH, by William Least Heat-Moon. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A close look at the people and mores of Chase County, Kansas.
11 *
11
56
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
12
9
5
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
13
14
17
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
14
13
7
THE NEW WORLD ORDER, by Pat Robertson. (Word Publishing, $17.99.) A clergyman discusses the significance of global changes.
15
22
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America.
16 *
15
6
DANCE WHILE YOU CAN, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $22.50.) The actress examines her feelings about relationships, aging and the future.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
2
THE BEST TREATMENT, by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice from a physician on a host of medical problems.
2
4
57
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
3
97
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
4
6
40
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
5
3
4
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE SCRAMBLE FOR AFRICA: 1876-1912, by Thomas Pakenham. (Random House, $32.) Exercising both detachment and judgment, Mr.
Pakenham relates the endless movements of the Europeans (and their African enemies) across the huge continent they snatched from its inhabitants and divided among themselves.
AN ATLAS OF THE DIFFICULT WORLD: Poems 1988-1991, by Adrienne Rich. (Norton, Cloth, $17.95; Paper, $7.95.) The 13th book of poetry by our most visible poetic proponent of feminism finds ways to balance the conflicting demands of poetry and ideology.
WHAT WORK IS, by Philip Levine. (Knopf, $19.) Mr.
Levine's collection, winner of this year's National Book Award for poetry, articulates the lives of the men and women who run the machines, punch the time clocks and work the assembly lines of America.
BETWEEN THE CHAINS, by Turner Cassity. (University of Chicago, Cloth, $22; Paper, $8.95.) A prickly charm and an original sensibility permeate these poems, many of which concern subjects -- like a used-hubcap dealer -- not often deemed poetical.
WHITEOUT: Lost in Aspen, by Ted Conover. (Random House, $20.) Mr.
Conover spent two years roaming the streets and slopes of Aspen, Colo., the trendiest place on earth; he had a wonderful time, almost lost his soul, escaped and wrote a fascinating book.
FOOLSCAP, by Michael Malone. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The author of "Handling Sin" captures in another novel the sort of absurdity we are apt to think goes on around us all the time -- but unlike us, he has the sharp eye and sensibility to capture it in motion.
HIRSCHFELD: Art and Recollections From Eight Decades, by Al Hirschfeld. (Scribners, $50.) An abounding retrospective of the work of this great visual chronicler of the theater.


Guess Who's Out To Spoil Jets' Fun?
The New England Patriots realize they could go a long way toward ending the Jets' playoff hopes by winning this afternoon at Giants Stadium.
And Coach Dick MacPherson said his team relishes the role of spoiler.
"We're coming in loosey-goosey and feel we can do it on a fast track in the Meadowlands," said MacPherson, the former Syracuse coach who took over a demoralized Patriots team that had a 1-15 record last season.


All About/Debt Collection; Persuading People to Pay Their Bills During Hard Times
Debt collectors, the enforcers of the credit world, have long been plagued by a reputation as unscrupulous thugs who work in fly-by-night operations and delight in pouncing on people when times are tough.
But the debt-collection industry says it has been misunderstood and unappreciated.
Today's debt collector, industry executives assert, is a well-educated and courteous professional who is regulated by strict laws and uses the latest technology to perform a vital service in a credit-driven economy.


A June Wedding For Amy M. Eld
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Fuller Eld of Bernardsville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Amy Margaret Eld to Daniel Knowlton Read 3d, a son of Barbara Read of Basking Ridge, N.J., and Daniel Knowlton Read Jr. of Abingdon, Va.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Eld, 28 years old, is a group manager in Brooklyn with R. H. Macy &amp; Company.
She graduated from Colgate University.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Riker, Danzig, Scherer, Hyland &amp; Perretti in Morristown, N.J.


Lisa L. Jayne To Wed in May
Mrs.
David W. Jayne 3d of Pelham, N.Y., has announced the engagement of her daughter Lisa LaForge Jayne, to Matthew John Sippel, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Sippel of Kenmore, N.Y.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Jayne, 27 years old, is the assistant classroom program manager in the circulation department of Newsweek magazine in New York.
She graduated from Williams College.
Her mother, Elizabeth Jayne, is a real estate broker with the Ann DeSantis Realtors in Pelham Manor, N.Y.
Her late father was a producer for the ABC Evening News in New York.


San Diego Is Too Hot for the Russians
The Cold War may be over between the United States and the Soviet Union, but when it comes to America's Cup yacht racing, relations are still chilly.
Despite repeated attempts, the Russians have been unable to gain United States permission to berth a yacht in San Diego Bay.
To make matters worse, infighting between two Russian sailing teams has further complicated dealings with American officials.


Not Enough Questions By Environmental Chief
The interview  [ "The Island's Environmental Agenda as Seen by New Eyes," Nov. 24 ]  with Ray E. Cowen, new head the Long Island regional office of the State Environmental Conservation Department, gives grim evidence as to why Long Island residents will continue to experience a rise in asthma, learning disabilities, birth defects and cancer.
Mr.
Cowen's unflagging faith in toxic incinerators and toxic-ash fills, as well as his marked dismay over the East End's refusal to re-elect leaders who have complied with the D.E.C.'s misguided waste-management policies only underscores the point that the $2 billion price tag that the D.E.C. foisted on area residents by the closing of Island's landfills -- money that should have gone to education, jobs and tax relief in a failing economy -- will continue under his direction.
Sadly, Mr.
Cowen refuses to grapple with the real questions regarding current waste-management practices.
He doesn't ask himself what are the serious health effects of long-term exposure to toxic emissions of tons of air-borne lead, mercury and dioxin on area residents?
The old adage what toxins go up must come down in our air, on our farmland and on marine life has obviously evaded Mr.
Cowen.


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
Typically, a boxed set will offer a fancy package, a few rarities among the reissues and a biographical booklet or liner notes -- something to memorialize the music for posterity.
Here are some of this season's best boxes. 'Crosby, Stills and Nash'
Atlantic 7 82319-2; four CD's ($69.98) or cassettes ($54.98).


Salesman at Sunrise: It's Never Too Early To Plug a Book
IF you write a book and your name is Stephen King or Sidney Sheldon or Frederick Forsyth or Ken Follett or Joe McGinniss, you can count on being invited to talk about it on one or more of the early-morning network television shows, where the nation's most popular authors sprout like floorwalker boutonnieres.
The less successful arrive hoping that the shows' endless applications of fertilizer will help them to creep up what Vladimir Nabokov (whom it is impossible to imagine in these cozy conversations) called the best-seller trellis.
Either way, name recognition is as common an ingredient as the sugar in the breakfast cereals that go with the shows.
Sprinkled into a sampling of recent book segments on ABC's "Good Morning America," the "Today" show on NBC and "CBS This Morning" were Bill Cosby, Shirley MacLaine, Dan Rather, Hume Cronyn, La Toya Jackson, Geraldo Rivera, Oliver L. North and the Duchess of York -- people who could get into any disco in town.


Defense Fund For Ex-Speaker
One controversy that was not resolved by the verdict in the Mel Miller fraud trial involves the legal defense fund established by Mr.
Miller shortly after his indictment.
Although Mr.
Miller was required as an elected official to disclose contributions to his campaigns, he has declined to reveal who has contributed to the fund.
The Legislative Ethics Commission, a bipartisan panel made up of legislators from both the Assembly and the Senate, ruled earlier this year that Mr.
Miller would have to disclose the total amount raised for the fund next May.
But he will not have to disclose who contributed to it or the amounts of individual donations.


Ferraro Getting Cozy With the Islanders
A hat trick at home that helped preserve a tie on Tuesday.
Two more goals, one of them a game winner, in Toronto on Wednesday.
Thirteen months ago, Ray Ferraro was traded to the New York Islanders; 13 games ago he began to feel like an Islander.
Last year, it took Ferraro the entire season to accumulate 21 goals.
This year he has collected 14 after just 28 games, 5 in his last 2 games, and he can trace his sudden success to two distinctly different sources: the creation of a line that placed the former Whaler between Benoit Hogue and Islanders captain Patrick Flatley, and the conclusion of a year's worth of speculation involving the fate of Pat LaFontaine and the muddled ownership of the team.


Ms. Wickenden, Teacher, Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Wickenden 3d of Belle Mead, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Linda Wickenden to Second Lieut.
Brendan Hubbard O'Malley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Shaun F. O'Malley of New York and Philadelphia.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Wickenden, 23 years old, graduated from Princeton University and teaches history at the Greenhill School in Dallas.
Her father is a former dean of admissions at Princeton and is an educational consultant in Princeton, N.J.
Her mother, Martha Titus Wickenden, is an associate in the firm.
Lieutenant O'Malley, 24, is an artillery officer in the Eighth Infantry in Baumholder, Germany.
He graduated from Princeton.
His mother, Sibyl Julia O'Malley, is a family therapist.
His father is the chairman and a senior partner of Price Waterhouse in New York.


Justice Proves Sluggish in Argentine Scandals
After a year of numerous corruption scandals and criminal indictments involving top officials of the Government of President Carlos Saul Menem, nearly all of the cases are languishing in the Argentine court system and attorneys here say it could be years before substantive convictions are brought, if they ever are.
For example, charges were made a year ago by officials of the Swift-Armour Companycoei that Mr.
Menem's brother-in-law, Emir Yoma, solicited a bribe in exchange for the right to import more than $100 million in machinery.
The charges lie dormant after company officials reportedly refused to testify.


Business Diary/December 8-13
COMPANIES Wells Fargo Battens Down the Hatches for a Lingering Slump


LEST WE FORGET
I am becoming tired of reading articles about what a burden it is to be a little civil to us old folks.
Our memories may indeed be bad, but we also have bad memories of solicitous young people who make a living writing about our purported infirmities.
ROBERT SEIDENBERG
Syracuse


Send Help Before It's Too Late
At Princeton University on Thursday, Secretary of State James Baker announced a new strategy to deal with the grave risks arising from the social and economic disintegration of the former Soviet Union.
His speech recalled Secretary of State George Marshall's historic address at Harvard in 1947, launching the reconstruction of a devastated Western Europe.
But time is crucial, as it was in 1947.
While an airlift of some essentials begins this week, the main planning -- the "coordination conference" -- is not to convene until mid-January.
This delay is highly risky, given how close the former Soviet Union is to chaos.
What Marshall said of Europe 44 years ago applies to the Soviet economy today: "The patient is sinking while the doctors deliberate."


IN MONET'S LIGHT
Maybe it's me, but I find it strange that someone who was "madly in love with Vinnie  [ Van Gogh ] " chooses not to deal with the variabilities of sunlight.
As a bewildered graphic designer and artist, I confess to finding nothing in the works shown with the article other than fertile springboards for such vapid vagaries as "the lyrical tradition of art" or that the paintings "breathe light and air" while "depicting a mythic world of ripeness and bloom." DONALD SINISI
New York, N.Y.


POSTINGS: Site-Built Affordables; Two-Family Houses
Less costly modular construction is often used for affordable-housing projects.
But 68 two-family homes are being built from scratch in a project in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn.
Designed by Harden Van Arnam Architects of Brooklyn, the two-and-a-half-story homes will have red-brick facades and stoops.
Alan R. Bell, one of the developers, said site-building was used, in part, so the homes could be designed to complement the neighborhood's architecture.
The project, for families with incomes of $53,000 or less, is called Sojourner Truth Homes, after the 19th-century African-American abolitionist.
It is going up on a three-block site off Malcolm X Boulevard (formerly Reid Avenue) and DeKalb Avenue.
Each 2,700-square-foot home will have a three- or four-bedroom owner's unit and a two-bedroom rental unit.


OLD MONEY, NEW NEEDS
Is it any wonder that per capita charitable giving is on the decline when Congress has eliminated the tax deduction from the first dollar for the ones most likely to make charitable contributions -- that is, households with incomes greater than $100,000?
By imposing an itemized deduction floor in 1991 of 3 percent of adjusted gross income, itemized deductions like charitable giving (and one's home-mortgage interest) don't become tax deductible dollar-for-dollar until the floor is exceeded.
Because a highly visible outright limitation on the deductibility of home-mortgage interest was a political hot potato, the resulting tax "trade" to the less publicized, more complicated itemized deduction floor not only raised tax revenues, but eliminated one of charitable giving's most attractive features.


Chicago Delights Its Bear-Weather Fans
It was Bears weather. It was Bears football. It was Bears 27, Tampa Bay 0.
Mark Green ran for two touchdowns as Chicago returned to its old reliable rushing game today in bitterly cold weather and clinched its seventh National Football Leaague playoff berth in eight years.
The warm-weather, last-place Bucs didn't have a chance.


A.M.A. Backs Off on an AIDS Risk List
The American Medical Association has joined Federal health authorities in abandoning plans to list procedures that doctors and other health workers should not perform if they are infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
At the conclusion of a semiannual meeting this week in Las Vegas, 424 members of the association's House of Delegates approved instead a report that called for voluntary testing for doctors who perform certain procedures that risk transmission of the virus and for supervision of doctors who are infected with the virus that causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Nov. 30  MANHATTAN  FlatIron District 350,000
5 East 22d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,150-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining alcove, 2 exposures; common charge $464, taxes $3,200 (Broker: Silverman Group)  Greenwich Village 187,500
115 East 9th Street  (St. Mark's)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 900-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, eat-in kitchen, terrace, private roof-deck; maintenance $851, 70% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  TriBeCa 347,500
52 Warren Street  1,850-sq.-ft. open loft co-op; elevator, eat-in kitchen, 1 bath, 13-ft. ceilings, exposed brick walls; maintenance $1,022, 75% tax-deductible (Broker: Tabak Real Estate)  Upper East Side 520,000
880 Fifth Avenue (69th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, windowed kitchen, partial Central Park view; maintenance $1,283, 40% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side 225,000
160 West 77th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; dining area, windowed kitchen, 10-ft.-ceilings; maintenence $714, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Klara Madlin Real Estate)  West Side 545,000
55 Central Park West (66th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, renovated kitchen, Central Park view; maintenance $905, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: Wells &amp; Gay/Stribling &amp; Associates)  BRONX  Gun Hill Road Area 125,000
3013 Laconia Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached brick and wood-frame house; dining room, finished basement, private driveway, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,040 (Brokers: Tryax Realty - New Day Real Estate)  Hunts Point 135,000
626 Manida Street  2-family detached brick house; 4 bedrooms in primary unit; 3 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, attached 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $800 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill 186,000
327 Clinton Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a brownstone; dining area, remodeled kitchen, fireplace, 25- by 70-ft. rear garden; maintenance $518, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: William B. May)  Sheepshead Bay 242,000
2372 East 22d Street  2-family semi-attached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining area,in each;2-car garage, 28- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  QUEENS  Forest Hills 285,000
67-88 Groton Street  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, sunken living room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 21- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,450 (Broker: Century 21/F.H.)  Flushing 120,000
150-38 Union Turnpike  (Village at Hillcrest)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,247-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, wrap-around terrace, c/a, 2 parking spaces; common charge $397, taxes $3,400 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Tottenville 152,000
27 Hale Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached, aluminium-sided Colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 80- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Salmon Realty)  Westerleigh 134,500
24 Merriman Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached frame ranch; dining area, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 40- by 96-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Century 21/Papp Realty)


Putting Brakes On Development
To the Editor:
In " 'Edge Cities': The People's Answer to Planners," by Witold Rybczynski  [ Nov. 17 ] , readers received several indefensible conclusions.


In Pursuit of the Marrying Kind
IF you plan to drink white zinfandel with your holiday fare, read no further.
Like those insufferable people who Christmas-shop in July, your problems are solved.
This is for the other group - there aren't many, maybe 10 million or so - who haven't the faintest idea what wine to serve with dinner for Christmas or New York or any other holiday.
Beware: There is a new species of guru loose in the landscape - the specialist in matching food and wine.
Actually, the word is "marrying," as in "the 1986 Phelan-Segur marries very well with the breast and the wings, but I prefer the 1988 with the dark meat."


Mr. Quayle's Irregular Regulation
The Task Force on Regulatory Relief didn't amount to much when George Bush headed it as Vice President.
But when Mr.
Bush moved up, he renamed it and recharged its batteries.
As the Council on Competitiveness, it has become a powerful force for watering down regulation -- and, not incidentally, for burnishing the image of its chairman, Vice President Quayle.
The council has drawn the justified fire of environmentalists, public-interest groups and Democrats in Congress for diluting proposed regulations.
The council's defenders claim it has less power than the critics say, but there's no doubt Mr.
Quayle has made it a friendly place for business to turn with complaints.


TOURS
Here is a sampling of tours by bus and foot that are scheduled during the winter in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today


A Peek Under the Tent Of the West Palm Beach Media Circus
Standing atop a ladder, holding on for dear life, Steve Dunleavy of "A Current Affair" is the master of all he surveys: the swarms of cameramen, reporters, gawkers and groupies gathered for the first day of the William K. Smith rape trial.
Assistants hand him cups of coffee ("with milk and Sweet 'n Low, babe!") pre-lit cigarettes (innumerable Marlboro Lights) and, periodically, the cordless telephone with which the undisputed maharajah of tabloid television choreographs the day's shoot.
Mr.
Dunleavy has been on the scene since 6 A.M., preparing to speak his piece the moment the Kennedy heir appears.
In reality, though, he has been awaiting this moment since late last March, just after it was first reported that Mr.
Smith had taken his accuser to his grandmother's beach-front house for "that Easter week
end
," as Mr. Dunleavy has put it, "when holiness took a holiday."


Q and A
Spas at the Dead Sea
Q.
We want to visit Israel to take advantage of treatments of arthritis at the Dead Sea.
Is there a clinic there? -- Lester J. Merrick, Phoenix


Could Be Time To Buy a Vowel
To the Sports Editor:
In my letter (Mailbox, Nov. 10) explaining why Kent Hrbek's last name is short on vowels, your printshop gremlin has made the Czechoslovak word for "neck" read "drk" when it should have been "krk." My feelings are hrt.
LOUIS JAY HERMAN New York The writer is the author of "A Dictionary of Slavic Word Families" (Columbia University Press, 1975).


CAMPUS LIFE: James Madison; Debating the Case For Standard Care At Campus Clinics
When Kathryn Peterson came down with a sore throat and swollen glands during her freshman year at James Madison University, she went to the university's health-care center.
The nurse recommended rest and a hot bath.
But two hours later, Ms.
Peterson, unable to swallow food or water, decided stronger measures were necessary and went to the emergency room at Rockingham Memorial Hospital, just outside the campus.
She was hospitalized for two days after doctors diagnosed the problem as tonsillitis.


Roman Polanski Analyzes Sexual Chemistry
For a film that shows love being twisted in all directions by passion, boredom, perversion, hate and revenge, the scene being directed by Roman Polanski at the Billancourt Studio here one recent morning seemed awfully timid.
Taking place in the ballroom of a cruise ship, the most exciting moment came when the entire set began rolling noisily to create the impression of an ocean liner on the waves.
Any grabbing that took place was simply to maintain balance.
Yet even the briefest peep at "Bitter Moon," Mr.
Polanski's 13th movie, made it clear that the 57-year-old Polish-born director is once again using psychological tension in extremis as raw material.
It is a subject he knows from his own turbulent life, and one that has served him well in his most acclaimed films, from "Knife in the Water" (1962) and "Repulsion" (1965) to "Cul-de-Sac" (1966) and "Chinatown" (1974).


English Goes to Italy
ALEX ENGLISH, the N.B.A.'s seventh-leading career scorer, signed a one-year contract with Naples, an Italian basketball team.
English, 37 years old, had been released by the Dallas Mavericks before the start of this season.Terms of the contract were not disclosed. (AP)


Warmth and Style for Children
Children do not always have to look like carbon copies of their parents, especially when it comes to coats.
Belinda Hughes, owner of Boo-Boo Baby, designs coats, she said, "to let kids be kids." She creates adventurous, brightly colored styles that can be worn casually as well as for dressing up.


Citing AIDS, Officials Propose Tracking Transplants
Walking a fine line between a serious shortage of donated organs and tissues and a desire to prevent transmission of the virus that causes AIDS, Federal health officials are developing a national system to track organs and tissues from the time they are donated to the time they are transplanted.
Though few patients are known to have been infected with the human immunodeficiency virus through transplant surgery, the Federal officials and others who took part in a two-day meeting that ended here Friday said the new system was needed to make transplant surgery even safer.
The Federal Centers for Disease Control plans to turn the recommendations into guidelines and publish them in The Federal Register to invite public comment.


Keeping a Home Warm
IF your home is heated by steam or hot water, the radiators or convectors in each room usually need maintenance at the start of the heating season.
For maximum efficiency, they should also be cleaned and inspected monthly in the winter.
Radiators and convectors have the same function -- delivering heat -- and are controlled and maintained in basically the same ways.
Radiators are usually made of heavy cast iron.
Heat supplied by steam or hot water warms them, and the heated metal radiates warmth into the surrounding air.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
Like lots of readers, I perused Norman Mailer's response to John Simon's review with bemused neutrality.
After all, Mr.
Mailer is famous for railing against his critics.
It's one of the things that make him one of the greatest shows on earth.
This time, however, Mr.
Mailer actually scored a triumph.
Apart from the usual outraged rhetoric, he introduced irrefutable and damning evidence of Mr.
Simon's compulsive vitriol.
Mr.
Simon is wrong to think "readers will enjoy the parlor game Mailer offers them: match the name with the right snippet from Simon's reviews." This reader, for one, was shocked by his descriptions of famous entertainers.


Big-Time Sports Don't Belong in College
To the Editor:
"Dining Out on College Athletics" by Allen Barra (Op-Ed, Nov. 30), on varsity football abuses at Auburn University, is a reminder of a problem that seems to defy all remedies.


SELF-HELP COURSE
I wish Secretary of Education Lamar Alexander had gone to see one of the public schools in Hell's Kitchen after he visited Holy Cross in that neighborhood last spring ("Lamar Alexander's Self-Help Course" by Susan Chira, Nov. 24).
If he had dropped by my first-grade class, at P.S. 111, he could have seen a true cross-section of children in an inner-city public school: some gifted, some average, some monolingual (Spanish), some learning disabled, some with behavioral and/ or emotional problems.
Public schools are not able to choose whom they admit.
They must accept everyone.
That is what makes the reform of public education a complex process, with no easy answers.


Ms. Greenberg to Marry in February
Susan Joy Greenberg and Robert Neil Shwartz are engaged to be married in February.
Ms.
Greenberg, 40 years old, is the director of social work for Lawyers for Children Inc., a nonprofit law firm repesenting New York children.
She graduated from Syracuse University, where she received a master's degree in social work.
She is the daughter of Frances Greenberg and the late Jacob Greenberg of Manchester-by-the Sea, Mass., where her father was postmaster.


Charities Say Tough Times Soften Hearts Of Donors
LIEUT.
RONALD B. COX was on duty at the Salvation Army in Stamford earlier this month, when a man came in and said he had just stood behind a woman in a supermarket checkout line who had to return her Christmas turkey to the freezer, because she did not have the money to pay for all her groceries.
"This was a man who had never contributed to the Salvation Army in his life," Lieutenant Cox said.
"He wrote me a check for $1,000."


New Teamster Chief's Motto: Honest Work for Honest Pay
In the truck yards and teamster union halls of America, the ghosts of Jimmy Hoffa, Jackie Presser and other godfathers of a more brazen era linger in the tales of gangland muscle and mysterious disappearances, of payoffs, sweetheart contracts, looted pension funds and rigged elections.
But there is a new legend in the making these days for the rank-and-file of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.
Its unlikely hero is a 55-year-old former United Parcel Service driver who, after 23 years leading a local in Queens, has just been elected to a five-year term as president of the 1.5-million member international union.


Sports of The Times; Laughter Came First, Then Change
THEY were proud and they were good and they won every championship there was.
Now they are running out of money and they are running out of resolve, with a bitter winter facing them.
No, no, no, we are not talking about the Yankees, that tottering baseball team.
We are talking about that other formerly arrogant giant, the sports machine of the Soviet Union, or whatever is left of it.


To Clear Up Confusion In the Supermarket
I was pleased to see "Supermarkets Expand Nutritional Advice"  [ Oct. 13 ] .
Availability of such information is by no means as rare as the article suggests, as supermarket corporations have had home economists on staff for years.
Yet, in many cases, their roles have simply not been as prominently utilized as they might well be.
The confusion that consumers experience during their shopping trips is very real; there are few other venues where as many new products are being introduced continuously, as in the supermarket.
Many marketers tout the absence (or presence) of particular ingredients, as if the marketer had done something unique to omit the ingredient.
Yet, the ingredient may never have occurred naturally in the product.


Does 'J.F.K.' Conspire Against Reason?
More than halfway into "J.F.K.," Oliver Stone's three-hour movie about the assassination of President Kennedy, New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison and his wife, Liz, are seen watching a television documentary about Mr.
Garrison's investigation of the events of Nov. 22, 1963, in Dallas.
The documentary's anchorman is heard charging that the District Attorney used improper methods to get witnesses to support his case against the New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw for his part in a supposed conspiracy surrounding the murder of President Kennedy.
Kevin Costner, portraying Mr.
Garrison, suggests by facial expression and dialogue that the charge is unfair and rigged to destroy his credibility -- thus attacking the credibility of the documentary.


Europe's Bishops Unable to Heal Rifts
With a profusion of ecclesiastical pageant, bishops from Eastern and Western Europe ended an important synod today that did little to heal the Roman Catholic Church's historic rifts with other Christian churches but affirmed the Vatican's commitment to a new crusade for followers after the cold war.
Pope John Paul II called the gathering of almost 140 prelates to focus their attention on how the Catholic Church should cope with political changes in Europe that have revived religious freedoms in the east as concern grows in the Vatican that Western Europe is slumping toward hedonism and godlessness.


Corrections
An article on page 35 of the Arts and Leisure section today about the photographer Harry Callahan misstates the address of the Pace/MacGill Gallery.
It is at 32 East 57th Street in Manhattan.


Glenda Jackson Trades Stage for Stump
Viewers who see Glenda Jackson Wednesday night in "The House of Bernarda Alba," at 9:30 on PBS, may well be watching the swan song of one of the leading British actresses of her generation.
Not that Miss Jackson thinks of it that way, but the 55-year-old actress isn't prone to sentimental reflections on her career anyway.
What matters most these days, she says, is politics, not performing.
A two-time recipient of the Academy Award, for "Women in Love" (1970) and "A Touch of Class" (1973), Miss Jackson is hopeful about winning something altogether different -- the post of Labor Member of Parliament (M.P.) for the north London constituency of Hampstead and Highgate.
John Major, the Prime Minister, will call a general election by July, at which point -- in the few weeks between the announcement and the election itself -- the serious campaigning takes place.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
Norman Mailer and John Simon deserve each other, though it must be said that Mr.
Simon's sense of "Harlot's Ghost" is not significantly different from what other experienced reviewers have said.
That plain fact raises the question of why The Book Review saw fit to spend more than a full page of space on this un illuminating exchange.
WILLIAM B. GOODMAN Cambridge, Mass.


How the Military Costs Build
To the Editor:
My compliments to Barbara Presley Noble on "Down With Milspecs." (Making a Difference, Dec. 8.) I have worked in the maritime industry for 20 years and have been responsible for installing equipment aboard commercial ships and work boats.
As a former line officer in the Navy, I believe that most off-the-shelf commercial equipment would serve very well, except in the most specialized applications.


New Gondola For 8 in Stowe
The Stowe ski resort in Vermont will celebrate the commissioning of a new high-speed eight-passenger gondola on Dec. 21 with a two-for-one weekend.
The area and 28 lodges in Stowe are adding free Saturday night lodging and Sunday skiing to buyers of Friday night lodging and Saturday skiing.
A single-day lift ticket at Stowe costs $39; accommodations in the lodges generally range from $125 to $235 a night for two people.
The Mount Mansfield Company, which operates the resort, says the new gondola is the world's fastest.
The gondola, with its 75 bright red cars, replaces a four-passenger gondola, and by running from bottom to top of the eastern portion of the mountain in 6 minutes and 20 seconds does the trip in half the time of the old one.
The new model carries 2,400 skiers uphill in an hour, compared with the old gondola's 600 an hour.
For information on the two-for-one weekend: (800) 247-8693.


... And Let Us Reassess Our 'Needs'
To the Editor:
"Trapped in the Impoverished Middle Class" might be subtitled: "And Trapped by Our Own Demands." The endless list of new items and services that a generation ago we didn't have, need, want or go into debt over plays a part -- from car phones to health club memberships to $500 "mountain bikes." Until we understand the difference between "want" and "need," we will remain "impoverished." THOMAS L. KEARNS  Merrick, L.I., Nov. 17


Turner's Exodus Sets Ram Passing for Loss
Norv Turner was the receivers coach with the Los Angeles Rams for four years before he joined the Dallas Cowboys as offensive coordinator this season.
In Turner's final three seasons with the Rams, quarterback Jim Everett threw for 12,263 yards, more than any other National Football League quarterback in a three-year span.
Rams wide receivers Henry Ellard and Willie Anderson each had over 1,000 yards receiving in 1989 and 1990.
Anderson led the league in catches in those two seasons, and exploded for a league-record 336 yards receiving in a game against New Orleans in 1989.


Board Games: Collectors Aren't Playing, Just Buying
Board games boldly emblazoned with the images of Popeye, Cootie, Nancy Drew and Superman are among today's more visually arresting collectibles.
They are also among the least expensive, although buyers complain that prices are on the rise, with some selling for as much as $300.
Collectors of such 1950's and 60's ephemera are seeking games packaged with powerful graphics borrowed from comic books, television, movies and the album jackets of rock recordings.


Snake Wine and Socialism
ROMANCING VIETNAM
Inside the Boat Country. By Justin Wintle. 464 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $25.


Ms. Sikowitz to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Sikowitz of Babylon, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Paula Beth Sikowitz to Robert Steven Whitman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Whitman of Albany.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sikowitz, 27 years old, graduated from Northwestern University and is the manager of human resources at Jackson &amp; Campbell, a Washington law firm.
Mr.
Whitman, 27, graduated from Cornell University and the University of Michigan Law School.
He is a lawyer in the civil division of the United States Department of Justice.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
BRAVE COMPANIONS Portraits in History. By David McCullough. Prentice Hall, $21.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Coram 131,000
1 Beecher Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $4,100.
East Meadow 197,000
1775 Adlin Court
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; dining room, den, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800.
Great River 165,000
139 McCarthy Lane  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 33-year-old expanded ranch; dining room, fireplace, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,300.
St.
James 325,000
10 Oakfield Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; dining room, 2 fireplaces, deck, in-ground pool; taxes $5,900.
Seaford 216,650
3725 Island Place  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 5-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, deck, 1-car garage, 60 feet of waterfront; taxes $5,652 Massapequa 220,000
67 Greatwater Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old high ranch, eat-in kitchen, den; taxes $4,200.
OTHER AREAS Glen Rock, N.J. 213,000
38 Fairview Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; screened porch, patio, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,075.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 480,000
Doeview Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; fireplace, study, eat-in kitchen, deck, family room, 2 fireplaces, 2.1 acres; taxes $7,834.
Guilford, Conn. 195,000
190 Stonehedge Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; pantry, beamed ceilings, enclosed porch, 1 acre; taxes $2,856.


Happy Memories, Aided by Neediest Cases
The Frederick Douglass Reporter comes out only once a month, but even so the deadline pressure can be excruciating.
Last Tuesday afternoon, the paper's seven reporters were working furiously on personal essays for the Christmas issue.
The publisher, Edgar Koerner, tall and slender and wearing a bow tie and a blue and white button-down pin-stripe shirt, paced the room.
"Fifteen minutes!" he called out, only seconds after they had started.
"Ten minutes!" The reporters wrote faster.
And they were actually writing with pen and paper since they do not have the advantage of working with computers, or even typewriters.


A June Wedding For Ms. Langan
Margaret Ann Langan, an M.B.A. candidate at Harvard University, and Evan D. Ladouceur, who is studying for an M.B.A. at Dartmouth College, plan to marry in June.
Ms.
Langan, 28 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard T. Langan of West Hartford, Conn.
She graduated summa cum laude from Boston College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Before starting her studies for the master's degree, she was a vice president at the Mutual Life Insurance Company in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior vice president of the Mechanics Savings Bank in Hartford.


Poachers Are Felling Trees for Seasonal Profit
It was in the spirit of Christmas -- Christmas commerce -- that two Manhattan men pulled their two-and-a-half-ton truck onto the shoulder of westbound Interstate 78 two weeks ago and began helping themselves to the spruce and pine trees that the Department of Transportation had planted there.
The state police, when they pulled up, counted 36 trees in the back of the truck, ranging in size from 3 to 7 feet, along with lots of cut evergreen boughs.


A Sure Way to Survive the Season: Stay Inside
DEC. 22, the day the sun is directly overhead at the Tropic of Capricorn, is just science's way of reiterating for me what the chill wind seeping through the leaks in my windows, reports of snowpacks in Vermont and Victor Kiam selling razors while wearing a Santa suit have already told me: Winter has arrived like a slap in the sweet and tender face of autumn.
Winter's nature is to obliterate, to deaden tactile feeling and the power of a car battery with its bracing cold, to disguise the land and manufacture raw material for dangerous thrown projectiles with its treacherous snow.


A May Wedding For Stacey Perr
Sheldon Perr of New York and Ellen Perr of Hewlett, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Stacey Perr, to Lawrence Widom, a son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Robert S. Widom of Great Neck, L.I.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Perr, 28 years old, is an assistant vice president of the Bank Leumi Trust Company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the State University of New York at Binghamton.
Her father is the president of Tiffany Arts Ltd., an importer and wholesaler of women's apparel in New York.


Review/Dance; Ritualistic Works by Ailey and Dove
A crowd of audience members surrounded a display of dancers' photographs during intermissions on Wednesday night at City Center, where the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater is performing through Dec. 29.
Such placards aren't all that unusual, but the crowds were.
And their eagerness to identify dancers was understandable.
The Ailey company has been dancing with extra boldness and technical refinement.
And the dancers' vibrant individual presences brought extra life to works by Ailey and Ulysses Dove that were performed that night.
Both Ailey's "Hidden Rites" and Mr.
Dove's "Episodes" are charged rituals.
Streamlined and stylized, each sends taut, coiled dancers across the stage in one long self-regenerating processional.
"Hidden Rites," set to a gently clangorous score by Patrice Sciortino, evokes a world of tribal spirits and ritualized life changes.
Coolly perfect bodies crossing the stage in powerful and exquisitely wrought dance phrases eddy off into ensemble numbers in which the dancers briefly become lovers, killers and leaders before plunging once more into the flowing stream.


Pirates Defeat Peacocks, 66-44


CLASSICAL MUSIC
Today
VIENNA CHOIR BOYS.
A Christmas program from Austria.
Carnegie Hall, 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $45.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
Dec. 17


A New Home for Daly
JOHN DALY is moving to Indiana and will live just a tee shot away from where he earned his stunning victory last summer in the P.G.A.
Championships.
"He has purchased a lot near Crooked Stick," said a real-estate agent, CHERYL OLSEN, referring to the club where Daly scored his improbable first tour victory, "and plans to build a home there." (AP)


Budget Gap Is Closed By Sales Tax 'Advance'
WESTCHESTER has balanced its proposed 1992 budget with "a new form of legerdemain," a leading businessmen's organization asserted last week, by including 13 months of sales tax revenues in the 12-month spending plan.
The extra month's income, an estimated $14.2 million, will not be collected by the county until January 1993.
"This is a technically proper accounting action, to accrue an income," the Westchester County Association said, "but it just delays until 1993 a gap that will have to be met."


A May Wedding For Susan Cole
May wedding plans have been announced for Susan Rockwell Cole, a senior manager at Sotheby's in New York, and Christopher Charles Callahan, a product analyst for Panagora Asset Management in Boston.
Miss Cole is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Rockwell Cole of Darien, Conn.
Mr.
Callahan is a son of Robert F. Callahan of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Mrs.
Callahan.
Miss Cole, 26 years old, graduated from Denison University, as did her fiance, 27.
Her father is president of White Oak Capital Management, an investment concern in New York.


Data Bank/December 15, 1991
Sales at Retail Outlets
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
0.3
0.0
0.6
Producer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.7
0.1
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.4
0.4
0.1
Business Inventories
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
Monthly percent change
0.4
0.6
0.0
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
1.0
1.3
0.7
Corporate Profits
III Q'91
II Q'91
I Q'91
Monthly percent change
3.9
-3.7
-4.7
Weekly Jobless Claims
Nov. 6
Nov. 29
Nov. 22
In thousands
414
471
413
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,614
1,603
1,760


A TOUGH CASE FOR DR. HEALY
For one brief moment, while reading Erik Eckholm's article "A Tough Case for Dr. Healy" (Dec. 1), I had this flash: What if by some miracle the $1 billion earmarked for in-house research at the National Institutes of Health could be funneled into community prevention?
For simple things like clinics in our city ghettos for mothers and infants, prenatal care for teen-agers, family planning for the young, nutrition counseling.
Then I caught myself.
How foolish of me.
Then, where would all those scientists get their six-figure incomes?
SUSAN KALEV
New York, N.Y.


CUOMO ALLY SEALS RACE FOR SPEAKER IN NEW YORK STATE
Saul Weprin, a genial Democratic Party stalwart from Queens, emerged today as the successor to Assembly Speaker Mel Miller, less than 24 hours after Mr.
Miller was convicted on Federal fraud charges.
Mr.
Weprin, 64 years old, would instantly become the second most powerful Democrat in state government behind Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a longtime friend from Mr.
Weprin's home borough.


CHINA'S INDUSTRIES QUITTING THE HILLS
A postscript to the cold war is being written here: a missile factory has been converted to make refrigerators.
Just as important, the refrigerators are rolling off assembly lines not in the company's old location in the mountains of south-central China but in a new industrial zone here in the provincial capital.
As the people here say, the tiger has come out of the mountains.


The Justice Department's S. &amp; L. Learning Curve
It took two and a half years to assemble and involved 900 witness interviews and boxcars full of documents.
But last week Federal prosecutors here finally brought their criminal case against Charles H. Keating Jr., the Phoenix financier who has come to embody the financial and political wreckage left by the savings and loan crisis.
The 77-count indictment accused Mr.
Keating and four associates of a wide-ranging scheme to use the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association of Irvine, Calif., and its parent company, the American Continental Corporation of Phoenix, as vehicles to enrich themselves through a variety of fraudulent schemes.
Among other things, the indictment said, Mr.
Keating and his colleagues set up sham land deals, misappropriated $975,000 from American Continental just before it lapsed into bankruptcy and misled investors who ultimately lost $250 million.


HOLIDAY SIGHTS
Here is a sampling of holiday events, including parades, fairs, Santa visits, tree lightings and holiday windows, in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today


Eric Muhlheim to Wed Ms. Siegler
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Siegler of White Plains have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lauren Siegler, to Eric Muhlheim, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilson Muhlheim of Eugene, Ore.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Siegler, 23 years old, and her fiance, 22, are cum laude graduates of Princeton University.
She is studying for a doctorate in clinical psychology at Rutgers University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Stroock &amp; Stroock &amp; Lavan.


The Stuff That Made Us What We Are
VICTORIAN AMERICA
Transformations in Everyday Life, 1876-1915.
By Thomas J. Schlereth.
Illustrated. 363 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins Publishers.


Tech Notes; A Cheap Test for Tipsiness
Since the late 1970's, law enforcement agencies have used breath analyzers -- at up to $10,000 each -- to determine the blood-alcohol count of drivers suspected of being drunk.
But an Illinois concern is now marketing a small, battery-operated, hand-held breath analyzer for as little as $149.
Roger Gerber, president of Communidyne Inc. of Northbrook, Ill., designed the device, which is roughly the size of a VCR remote control and has a disposable straw screwed into the top.
When a person breathes into the straw, the analyzer registers and displays the person's blood-alcohol level.


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
As recording companies try to glean new profits from their archives, every holiday season now brings an outpouring of boxed sets.
More extensive than greatest-hits collections, less unwieldy than a performer's full catalogue, boxed sets can put a performer in perspective, summing up a career or adding a revisionist spin to it.
If compiled with care, a set can also unearth material that collectors would have a hard time finding otherwise.
Typically, a boxed set will offer a fancy package, a few rarities among the reissues and a biographical booklet or liner notes -- something to memorialize the music for posterity.
Here are some of this season's best boxes.
Aerosmith: 'Pandora's Box'
Columbia 46209; three CD's ($51.98) or cassettes ($36.98).


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
As recording companies try to glean new profits from their archives, every holiday season now brings an outpouring of boxed sets.
More extensive than greatest-hits collections, less unwieldy than a performer's full catalogue, boxed sets can put a performer in perspective, summing up a career or adding a revisionist spin to it.
If compiled with care, a set can also unearth material that collectors would have a hard time finding otherwise.
Typically, a boxed set will offer a fancy package, a few rarities among the reissues and a biographical booklet or liner notes -- something to memorialize the music for posterity.
Here are some of this season's best boxes.
T.
Rex: 'The Essential Collection'
Relativity 88561-1063; three CD's ($37.98) or cassettes ($25.98).


Leigh Carnahan Is Wed in South
Leigh Wilson Carnahan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Carnahan of Baton Rouge, La., was married there yesterday to Daniel Lawrence Comas, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Constantine F. Comas of Crestwood, N.Y.
The Rev.
Chris H. Andrews officiated at First United Methodist Church, assisted by the Rev.
D.
Christopher Walsh, a Roman Catholic priest who is the bridegroom's uncle.
Mrs.
Comas, 26 years old, graduated from Princeton University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University.
Her father owns automobile dealerships in Baton Rouge.


RECORD BRIEFS
Cherubini: 'Lodoiska'
Mariella Devia, soprano; Thomas Moser, tenor; La Scala Opera Chorus and Orchestra conducted by Riccardo Muti.
Sony Classical S2K 47290; two CD's.


Stamps
Stamp collectors tend to fall into three categories: hobbyists who like the look and the lore of stamps, and who acquire and display them without being profound about it; investors who buy hard-to-find items when they sense that their value will increase, and philatelists who study the ways stamps are designed, printed and used.
For the hobbyists, the term "philately" seems forbidding.
There is, first of all, the question of pronunciation. (Dictionaries prefer fi-LAT-el-ly, but fi-LATE-el-ly is widely heard.) Then there is the sense, reinforced by an hour's browse through the philatelic (fi-la-TEL-ic) exhibits at a large stamp show, that the proper study of stamps requires enormous sums of money to track down every possible variation: different inks, different papers, different gums, different uses on different envelopes to different destinations.


New Yorkers, etc.
What makes one particular Christmas stand out in memory?
Who knows?
A memorable holiday season for one person might be a big yawn for another.
Or a big nuisance, which happens more than occasionally when a pet is presented to a not completely receptive family.
The only truism when it comes to Christmases is that the happiest are not necessarily the most memorable.
Still, that doesn't mean that happy (usually associated with family and friends) and memorable are mutually exclusive.
The happy part of Patricia L. Francy's Christmas one year was spending it with her sister, who was then living in Ghana, West Africa.
The memorable part was water-skiing on Christmas Day, which might have been nothing more than a so-what if it hadn't taken place on a body of water reportedly populated with barracudas.


This Way Out; Yeltsin Leads A Bold Move To Replace The Soviet Union
In the end, it did not take much to topple the Soviet Union.
A quiet weekend meeting in the woods of Byelorussia, a three-way agreement signed Sunday and ratified by Thursday, a new buzzword -- commonwealth -- and poof, a state that had fascinated and frightened the world for 70 years vanished.
But not without trace.
For by Friday, when a half-dozen other republics began to scramble aboard the Slavic bandwagon, today's commonwealth began to look uncannily like yesterday's union -- a single currency, a single military, the same politicians exchanging the same anxious phone calls, the same bureaucrats stamping the same documents, and an economy that was still sinking fast.


Jack Bober, Investment Executive, 49
Jack Bober, a former investment executive, died on Thursday at his home in New Vernon, N.J.
He was 49 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Commercial Property: Office Report Card; Rating New York City as a Place for Doing Business
NEW YORK'S recovery is not around any corner that American business leaders can see.
A new survey shows that two and a half times as many executives rated business conditions in the area "poor" this year as did in 1989.
All told, 47 percent of the chief executive officers who say they are familiar with New York believe that general business conditions make it a poor place to locate a business today, according to this year's "Business America Real Estate Monitor," conducted by Louis Harris &amp; Associates for the Cushman &amp; Wakefield real estate concern.


At the North Pole
To the Editor: I read with interest the letter from Harry K. McWilliams about the North Pole.
I too belong to the Travelers' Century Club.
And I do not check any country off my list until I have set foot in it.


Chinese-Indian Talks Seem to Favor Beijing
P.
V.
Narasimha Rao and Li Peng, the Indian and Chinese Prime Ministers, concluded two days of talks here this week with China gaining an Indian statement of support for Chinese sovereignty over Tibet, and India apparently getting little in return.
Mr.
Li, who left here on Friday, was the first Chinese Prime Minister to visit India in 31 years.
The trip raised high expectations in the Indian Foreign Ministry, coming at a time when India, long a close ally of Soviet Union, and China are both ill at ease with the collapse of Communism in Europe.
Both say they are seeking to create a new structure of relations in Asia and among developing countries generally.


Judith Krones to Wed David Schorr
Wedding plans have been announced for Judith Kay Krones, a daughter of Fred H. Krones of New York and the late Rose Krones, and David K. Schorr, the son of Dr.
Alice K. Frankel of New York and Dr.
Julian Schorr of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Ms.
Krones, 32 years old, is a certified nurse-midwife at Columbia Hospital for Women in Washington.
She graduated from Connecticut College and has two nursing degrees, a bachelor's from Columbia University and a master's from Yale University.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
Her mother was an art dealer in Larchmont, N.Y.


The Untouchables
A HUSH FALLS OVER THE AUCTION room.
"Do I hear $24,000?" asks the auctioneer.
"$23,500? . . . $23,000?" He pauses, raps his gavel and says, "Sold for $22,900, one bottle of Chateau Lafite 1804."
The scene is hypothetical, which doesn't mean it could not take place.
The current value of the 1804 Lafite, should one turn up on the market, is about $25,000.
Incidentally, it is Lafite, not Lafite-Rothschild; the Rothschilds didn't buy the place until 1868.


Duke Veterans Win Test Against Freshmen
Duke showed Michigan the difference between good and very good. It was a fine line.
Bobby Hurley, a Duke guard, scored 4 of his 26 points in overtime today to lead the top-ranked Blue Devils to an 88-85 victory over the No. 18-ranked Wolverines.


Exhibitions Examine Human Anatomy and Human Folly
JOHN COPLANS and Sandy Skoglund share three things: the art of photography, this year's Richard Koopman Distinguished Chair in the Visual Arts at Hartford Art School and, currently, the Joseloff Gallery, also at the University of Hartford.
In all other respects, the two are poles apart.
Mr.
Coplans has a resume longer than his arm.
It begins at his birth in London, 71 years ago, continues with his upbringing in South Africa and service in World War II and culminates in the United States, where he arrived as a painter in 1960.
Since then he has made a reputation as a co-founder of Art Forum magazine and, later, its editor in chief, as the senior curator at the Pasadena Museum of Art and as the director of the Akron Art Museum.
He has received the Frank Jewitt Mather Award for art criticism, two fellowships from the Guggenheim Foundation and three from the National Endowment for the Arts.
And that is not the end of the list.


As One Streak Finishes, Several More Continue
The Clippers kept winning in Los Angeles and Detroit stopped losing in Portland.
Phoenix won its ninth game in a row.
And Ricky Pierce came up short at the free-throw line.
In other words, Friday night was streak night in the National Basketball Association.
Seattle's Pierce had made 75 straight foul shots before he missed his first free throw in Boston with 3 minutes 30 seconds left in the third quarter.
He wound up three short of tying of Calvin Murphy's record because his shot was a little long.


Jordan and Money
MICHAEL JORDAN made news in two cities in two unrelated stories, but the headlines all boiled down to money.
In Charlotte, N.C., Federal investigators accused a convicted cocaine dealer of intending to evade taxes on $57,000 that he said Jordan loaned to him.
And in Chicago, Jordan, in the fourth year of an eight-year, $25.75 million contract with the Chicago Bulls, said he deserved more money.
"I know other teams are finding ways to give top players raises," Jordan said.
"But I won't complain or demand a new contract."


Camels That Kill
Each year 400,000 Americans die from illnesses related to smoking, and a million others quit.
The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, manufacturer of Camel cigarettes, seems to have crossed the line in its search for new smokers through an advertising campaign that appeals to children.
This is a dangerous development, one that cries out for closer Federal scrutiny of both the ads and the tobacco industry.
At issue is the cartoon camel that since 1988 has appeared in ads for Camel cigarettes.
R.
J.
Reynolds says the camel was designed exclusively with adults in mind and that the company has no interest in appealing to young people.


Born to Set It Right
I'M NOT AGONIZING; I'm not delaying," Mario Cuomo told Sam Donaldson of ABC, as the New York Governor wrestled with the decision to run for President. "When you run out of time, then you make the decision.
I'm not yet out of time."
"Hamlet act real old," gibed Newsweek's Conventional Wisdom Watch.
Leslie H. Gelb of The New York Times also scored a hit, a very palpable hit, in a headline alluding to Hamlet's most famous line: "To Cuomo or Not to Cuomo."


Right Picture, Wrong Studio
To the Editor:
James Caan's resurgent film career is cause for jubilation  [ "James Caan Rises From the Ashes of His Career," Nov. 17 ] .
His admirers, including this one, can only be grateful he is back and in fine form.


Lauren Ablow Is to Marry in April
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Ablow of Swampscott, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Lauren Jill Ablow to Andrew Lee Fryefield, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Fryefield of West Warwick, R.I.
An April wedding is planned.
Ms.
Ablow, 27 years old, is a marketing manager at American Express Travel Related Services in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received an M.B.A. degree from Northwestern University.
Her father is the president of Salem Paper Company, a wholesale paper distributor in Salem, Mass.
Her mother, Carol Ablow, is the company's vice president.


New York Plays Timekeeper and Turns Back the Clock
The guests in tuxedos and elegant dresses were stacked from the floor of the Grand Ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria in balconies nearly all the way to the ceiling.
From South Bend and Columbus, the people had come; from State College and Norman and Los Angeles and Tallahassee and Gainesville and Lincoln.
Many of the names, when introduced at the annual dinner for the National Football Foundation and College Hall of Fame, were instantly recognizable: Paterno, Bowden, Majors, Spurrier, Cozza, Curry.
Gifford, Conerly, Rote, Cassady, Griese, all of them in New York, the center of the college football universe, if only for little more than a week.


Marooned


Teamsters Dump the Old Guard and Send a Message
"It's total eyes," the resentful departing president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, William J. McCarthy, told delegates to the union's convention at Disney World last June.
Eyes everywhere, in particular the eyes of Justice Department investigators, have been snooping full time through the affairs of the labor union that symbolizes corruption, mob infestation, gargantuan salaries and nepotism.
Last week, in a democratic election the Justice Department required two years ago as part of a settlement of an anti-racketeering suit against the teamsters, members voiced their pent-up resentment against Mr.
McCarthy and his crowd and marked a milestone for the 88-year-old union.


James Robinson 4th and Miss Jacobs, Graduate Students, to Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Jeremy M. Jacobs of East Aurora, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Katie Louise Jacobs to James Dixon Robinson 4th, the son of Mr.
Robinson 3d of New York and Betty Bradley Robinson of Sun Valley, Idaho.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Jacobs, 25 years old, is studying for a master's degree in early-childhood education at Boston College.
She graduated from Fairfield University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Delaware North Companies, a food-service holding company in Buffalo, and the owner of the Boston Bruins hockey team.


Debate Necessary On Bond Proposal
The plan by the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority to ask the state to issue $416 million in bonds to build a convention center in Atlantic City, upgrade the Rutgers stadium and refinance authority debt may have some merit ("Sports Authority Draws Criticism on Bond Proposal," Dec. 1).
But surely it must be fully debated and not rushed through the lame-duck Legislature.
The kind of arrogance exhibited by those who would push the bond proposal through no matter what the public says is precisely what led to the recent change in government.


Rush Hour Fees Urged for Flights
There may be slightly fewer rush-hour flights and consequently fewer and shorter delays -- at some major airports following the Transportation Department's suggestion last month that congested airports impose surcharges on planes using the runways at the busiest times of day.
The question for travelers is whether the new guidelines will also mean much higher ticket prices for those who take off or land at busy times of day.
The department's proposed "peak hour" surcharges would mainly affect flights in the early morning and early evening.
The idea is that the high costs would encourage airlines to divert flights to other time slots, smoothing out the flow of traffic and cutting down on delays.
Officials said that even shifting a handful of flights can make a substantial difference in delays.


Lynn Holley Is Engaged
Mrs.
Donald W. Eisloeffel of Chappaqua, N.Y., and John C. Holley Jr. of Sante Fe, N.M., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lynn Husted Holley, to Scott Daniel Krugman, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Krugman of Englewood, Colo.
Miss Holley, 22 years old, is a project coordinator at Global Medical Communications, a specialist in health-care education programs in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her father is a vice president and the director of marketing for Schenley Industries in Dallas.
Her mother, Patricia Eisloeffel, is the director of sales and marketing for One if by Land, a travel company in Flushing, Queens.


New York Backs Columbus Center Plan in Court
Lawyers for New York City -- which is counting on the millions that a huge development planned for Columbus Circle would generate for mass transit -- are arguing before a Federal appeals court that it makes no sense to block the project just because environmental inspectors found high levels of carbon monoxide on the other side of Central Park.
"It does not make sense to hold this project hostage for a problem it has nothing to do with," Linda Young, an assistant Corporation Counsel, argued in Federal court on Friday.
The city is seeking to overturn an order issued last summer that effectively halted a project that is now also threatened by declining economic conditions.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE FRIENDLY BEASTS: A Traditional Christmas Carol.
Illustrated by Sarah Chamberlain.
Dutton. $13.95. (Ages 3 to 7) The animals gather in the manger, and one by one -- donkey, cow, lamb and dove -- and verse by verse present their gifts in this song.


Corrections
An article on Nov. 24 about this year's productions of "The Nutcracker" misidentified the company that has performed the ballet longer than any other in the state.
It is the Fokine Ballet Company of Ridgewood.


Mary S. Kearing To Wed in June
Dr. and Mrs.
Leon R. Kearing of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mary Susan Kearing, to Anthony Morris O'Connor Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Connor of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Kearing, 25 years old, is an admissions coordinator at Columbia University.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a psychiatrist at St.
Elizabeths Hospital in Washington.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


THEATER
December
"AS YOU LIKE IT." Shakespeare's version of "Into the Woods." Directed by Anthony Cornish.
Previews began Friday; opens on Thursday, Pearl Theater Company, 125 West 22d Street, Manhattan.
Information: (212) 645-7708.


Abdul-Jabbar Says He Might Play Again
As a former Laker teammate of MAGIC JOHNSON, it's hardly surprising that KAREEM ABDUL-JABBAR would want to do something to help Johnson's campaign in the war against AIDS.
But what to do?
"It's been really hard trying to figure out exactly how to contribute to the efforts to deal with this problem," Abdul-Jabbar said yesterday.


Alexandra Popovitch Plans to Marry
Joan Ross Popovitch of New York and Lyoubomir Popovitch of Upper St.
Clair, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alexandra Popovitch, to Edward Ikeguchi, the son of Fumiko Ikeguchi and Takumaro Ikeguchi, both of Whitestone, Queens.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Popovitch, 25 years old, and Mr.
Ikeguchi, 24, are fourth-year medical students at Columbia University.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University.
Her mother is the coordinator of the M.D.-Ph.D. program at Columbia.
Her father is a computer consultant based in Upper St.
Clair.
Mr.
Ikeguchi graduated cum laude from Fordham University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
His father is the asset manager in the New York office of Haseko Inc., a Tokyo-based real estate company.
His mother is a teacher at the Japanese Saturday School in Fort Lee, N.J.


Writers' Museum Opens in Dublin
Samuel Beckett, James Joyce, George Bernard Shaw, Jonathan Swift, Oscar Wilde and William Butler Yeats -- few cities can claim as many great writers as Dublin.
Now a museum devoted to the city's literary heritage has opened.
Proposed more than 20 years ago, the Dublin Writers Museum traces the history of Irish literature from early Gaelic translations of the Old Testament to contemporary works.
The museum houses many rare books and first editions including Brendan Behan's "Borstal Boy" and a signed copy of Joyce's "Ulysses." Personal items such as Joyce's piano, Oliver St.
John Gogarty's flying goggles and Patrick Kavanaugh's typewriter and death mask are also on display.
Paintings and photographs put faces to the writers, and literary periodicals of the past document the thoughts of critics.


New &amp; Noteworthy
I LOCK MY DOOR UPON MYSELF, by Joyce Carol Oates. (Plume, $7.95.) Married off at 17 to a farmer more than twice her age, a mysterious redheaded woman named Calla falls in love with an itinerant water diviner.
Inspired by a painting by the Belgian artist Fernand Khnopff, Joyce Carol Oates "has contemplated an artist's faded image and brought it fully to life," Cary Kimble said here last year.
ARAFAT: In the Eyes of the Beholder, by Janet Wallach and John Wallach. (Prima Publishing, $15.95.)Yasir Arafat finally said the magic words, renouncing terrorism and recognizing Israel's right to exist, but then he squandered his political capital by backing Saddam Hussein.
This biography of the enigmatic leader "is comprehensive in scope and detail, down to describing  [ his ]  Italian-tailored khaki uniforms, his penchant for spoonfuls of Yemeni honey and his nostalgia for the two-toned Thunderbird convertible he owned in his pre-P.L.O. days, when he was an engineer in Kuwait," Robin Wright said here last year.
"It contains splashes of unusual candor, especially for a man whose evasiveness is legendary."


Inquiry Into Nanny Agency
Massachusetts officials are investigating the licensing of the Cambridge-based agency that placed a Swiss child-care worker charged in the death of a New York family's baby.
But Federal officials say the investigation is pointless because the nonprofit agency is not required to have a business license.
E.
F.
Au Pair, which places European women with American families who seek live-in child care, has been designated a cultural exchange program, not a business, by the United States Information Agency and therefore does not need a license to operate, said Tamara Martin, program designation officer for the information agency.
The Cambridge group is one of eight au pair programs recognized by the information agency's visitor exchange program.


Technology; Trout From a Tank - Maybe Fertilizer Too
In a converted dairy barn, a stable and a boat storage shed outside this Finger Lakes city, a number of fledging entrepreneurs and Cornell University professors are trying to make aquaculture history.
For nearly a year, they have been raising trout indoors.
More important, they have been doing so with a method so economical of space and energy that three tanks, a water recycling system and a starter crop of 2,500 fingerlings would cost under $10,000.
The system would require little more than a gallon of water per fish and comfortably fit in 750 square feet -- a typical one-bedroom apartment.
And if it works, it could make fish farming as viable in abandoned inner-city warehouses as it is in Idaho's open fields.


Zurich
Switzerland's largest city officially describes itself as a "world-class metropolis," although its inhabitants number just one twentieth of New York's.
Yet Zurich's location in the heart of Europe, the Swiss-watch reliability of its communications and other services, its banking and business establishment and its intellectual life lend credibility to its global claim.
Zurich's cultural ambitions are exemplified by its Opernhaus.
The 1,230-seat neo-Baroque building on the east shore of Lake Zurich is starting its second century after recent restructuring and enlargement with a bid to rival such shrines of opera as La Scala and other major houses.
For playing in the operatic big leagues, Zurich has called on a 44-year-old Viennese, Alexander Pereira, who during the last seven years served as chief of the Konzerthaus music center in Vienna.
His first season as Zurich Opera manager presents some 20 productions with Agnes Baltsa, Renato Bruson, Montserrat Caballe, Jose Carreras, Mirella Freni, Edita Gruberova, Thomas Hampson, Ruggero Raimondi and other international stars, mostly in classics by Mozart, Wagner, Verdi, Puccini and Richard Strauss.


Camera
Today is the 200th anniversary of the ratification of the Bill of Rights, the first 10 amendments to the Constitution.
And when Bob Adelman, a freelance photographer in New York, found that the Government was not planning to celebrate this anniversary formally, he decided to do it himself with a book, which appeared last month: "Visions of Liberty, the Bill of Rights for All Americans" (Arcade/Little, Brown, $24.95).
Caught by the recession in publishing and advertising, many freelance photographers are poorer this year, and some have been forced out of business.
But ideas, like the one for this book, have made this a good year for Mr.
Adelman.
Making his living by shooting photographs mostly for publications, Mr.
Adelman expends the rest of his professional efforts on packaging original books.


Surgery for Higgins
Golden State forward ROD HIGGINS was placed on injured reserve because of a broken wrist and may miss the rest of the season.
Higgins, the Warriors' fourth-leading scorer, fractured a bone in his wrist Thursday night in the Warriors' 99-96 loss to Houston.
Higgins will undergo surgery on Wednesday. (AP)


Ruins of Provence
To the Editor: How cold-hearted of John Wain not to respond emotionally to the Maison Carree in "Provence Among the Ruins" (Travel, Nov. 10) as did Thomas Jefferson during his travels to the south of France in March 1787.
Jefferson fell in love with this classical Roman temple and in a much quoted letter to Lafayette's aunt, the Comtesse de Tesse, confided, "Here I am Madam, gazing whole hours at the Maison quarree, like a lover at his mistress."


FOR REAL SPORTS
Here is a sampling of spectator and participatory sports in New York City this winter.
Dates and times are subject to change.
FOR SPECTATORS
Basketball


Where and When to Go For a Bit of Faux July
Here are the addresses and phone numbers for the places listed, in the order mentioned.
TROPICA, concourse level, Pan Am Building, 200 Park Avenue, at 45th Street, Manhattan.
Open Mondays through Fridays; closed weekends.
Lunch: 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.; dinner: 5 to 10 P.M.; lounge: 11:30 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 867-6767.


Two Reviews Of Same Game
To the Sports Editor:
I have no idea what Harvard-Yale game Gerald Eskenazi attended on Nov. 24, but we were certainly not at the same game.
Eskenazi describes the parking lot outside the Yale Bowl as being filled with Jaguars and plaid-jacketed alumni "lathering pate" on toast triangles.
I suppose this scene fits most people's general picture of the activities at a Harvard-Yale get-together, but the reality of the situation is that this is just another drunken college football game.
All I saw as I wandered around the stadium were thoroughly sloshed students tackling each other and yelling obscene things.
The only "lathering" being done involved shaving cream, condiments, and partly clothed Ivy League bodies.
PHILIP RUBIN Cambridge, Mass.
The writer is a member of the Harvard College Class of 1993.


In the Chemical War on Rats, Home Delivery Works Best
In the continuing battle between New Yorkers and rats, the advantage shifts back and forth, but it's been a pretty even fight.
There are about 7 million rats in the city right now, said E. Randy Dupree, the Health Department's assistant commissioner for community services, who has been city government's leading pest expert for two decades.
But that estimate isn't exactly scientific.


Corrections
A report in the Headliners column last Sunday about Arlo Guthrie's efforts to buy the deconsecrated church that figured in his song "Alice's Restaurant" misstated Alice Brock's occupation and whereabouts.
She is now a writer and illustrator in Provincetown, Mass.


Sounds of Christmas
THE merriment of Christmas and its religious significance will be interpreted in musical programs throughout the state over the coming holiday period.
Offerings in churches and concert halls range from traditional carols to an original Nativity musical, and there will be at least four performances of Handel's "Messiah."
The Fairfield Orchestra, choir and soloists will perform the Handel work and Charpentier's "Messe de Minuit" in a concert at Christ Church in Greenwich today at 3 P.M., and the Bridgeport Symphony Orchestra, choir and soloists will present the "Messiah" under the direction of Ivor Edwards today at 3 P.M. at the Bridgeport United Methodist Church.


In Pursuit of the Marrying Kind
IF you plan to drink white zinfandel with your holiday fare, read no further.
Like those insufferable people who Christmas-shop in July, your problems are solved.
This is for the other group - there aren't many, maybe 10 million or so - who haven't the faintest idea what wine to serve with dinner for Christmas or New York or any other holiday.
Beware: There is a new species of guru loose in the landscape - the specialist in matching food and wine.
Actually, the word is "marrying," as in "the 1986 Phelan-Segur marries very well with the breast and the wings, but I prefer the 1988 with the dark meat."


Three Soups That Are Just Right for Cold Weather
WHEN the weather turns cold, soups become substantial affairs, often relying on sturdy winter vegetables.
They are good to prepare for a variety of occasions.
Well seasoned and transformed into a smooth puree, such soups can be the first course at a dinner party or a holiday dinner for family.
Served in a larger portion, perhaps, along with some good bread and a salad, soups are all that may be needed for a simple supper at home.


'Nick and Nora' by Way of 'Rashomon'
After she decides to investigate the murder that is the centerpiece of the new musical "Nick and Nora," Nora Charles carries a tiny notebook and gold pen with her at all times so she can jot down the incriminating facts and the telltale details.
You would be well advised to do as much if you choose to catch what, as it happens, will be the final performance today.
I realize that the scratching of a thousand pens on a thousand pieces of paper may create a distraction in the auditorium of the Marquis Theater.
But I don't see how you are going to stay abreast of matters otherwise.
It's 1937 in Hollywood, and Lorraine Bixby, the platinum-blond accountant who's been keeping the ledgers on Tracy Gardner's new motion picture, has just been "aced" in her bungalow.
That's clear as can be.
However, as the various suspects recount their version of events leading up to the fatal shot (or was it shots?), the musical gives us one contradictory flashback after another.


New Rule For Census Adds Girth To Nation
The United States is bigger today than it has ever been.
To be exact, the country is 168,655 square miles larger than it was in 1980, an addition bigger than the state of California, according to figures just published by the Census Bureau.


Let the Public Decide About Restaurants
Joanne Starkey's restaurant review "The Accent Is French, Mon Cheri, but . . . "  [ Oct. 13 ]  does serious harm to the very legitimate aspirations of the hard-working proprietor and chef.
Unless the owner asks for his restaurant to be reviewed for publicity, I see no excuse for excessive criticism -- actually cruelty, especially when the operators even have to have their child working with them.
Imagine the money, hard work and dreams that have been sunk into their venture.
No, I see no reason to review a restaurant that doesn't meet the critic's criteria of good.
So many people bilk the system or their employers or whomever and never get reviewed.
Long Island is a tough enough place for a restaurateur to make it.
Why not let the public make its own decision?
HARRY KATZ Wading River


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
My decision to buy Norman Mailer's novel "Harlot's Ghost" was based entirely on John Simon's excellent review.
The book deserves to sell well.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Guilford, Conn. 195,000
190 Stonehedge Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; pantry, beamed ceilings, enclosed porch, 1 acre; taxes $2,856.
Weston, Conn. 755,000
32 Buttonball Lane  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, newly-built contemporary; riverfront location, whirlpool bath, 2.4 acres; taxes not yet available.
Westport, Conn. 670,000
8 Imperial Landing  4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 6-year-old riverfront contemporary; hot tub, .75 acre; taxes $8,735.
Mount Vernon, N.Y. 310,000
35 Alta Parkway
3-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; entry hall, fireplace, family room, new eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $5,660.
New Rochelle, N.Y. 460,000
207 Wellington Avenue  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 71-year-old Norman Tudor; fireplace, breakfast room, den, patio, sitting room; taxes $10,527.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 480,000
Doeview Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 7-year-old colonial; fireplace, study, eat-in kitchen, deck, family room, 2 fireplaces, 2.1 acres; taxes $7,834.
OTHER AREAS Coram,L.I. 131,000
1 Beecher Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, den, 2-car garage; taxes $4,100.
East Meadow,L.I. 197,000
1775 Adlin Court
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; dining room, den, basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800.
Glen Rock, N.J. 213,000
38 Fairview Avenue
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old colonial; screened porch, patio, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,075.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have a wood kitchen table with some type of laminate on the top.
This table is about 10 years old, and the gloss seems to be gone from the laminate.
The wood finish on the rest of the table is in perfect condition, so it seems unwise to buy a new table.
Is there any way to restore the gloss to the top?
A.
I assume the laminate is a plastic laminate like Formica or something similar.
If so, you might try using one of various polishes for restoring the gloss to faded laminates.
If this does not work, apply at least two coats of a polyurethane varnish to the top.
Clean and dry the surface, then sand lightly with fine paper before applying the first coat.
This varnish will have to be reapplied periodically, depending on the wear it gets.
Another possibility is to apply a new layer of plastic laminate on top of the old one.


Nigerians Vote but Choices Are Limited
Millions of Nigerians voted today to choose governors and state assembly members in an exercise that is to pave the way for the first direct presidential election since 1983.
The voting took place under strict security restrictions imposed by the military authorities in an effort to curtail intimidation and violence, which have often marred elections here.
The restrictions forbid movement from town to town and across state boundaries.
More than 120,000 police, with the army on standby, were deployed across the country.


A Young Man's Stories Retold, After a Fashion
AFTER suffering an inferior stage adaption of a literary work or a bad performance of a beloved play, it's a good idea to return to the source for reaffirmation.
But imagine a theater piece so off-putting that one wants to hear of it no more.
Such vexing, alienating thoughts are induced by "Adventures in the Skin Trade," John Tillinger and James Hammerstein's insistently uneventful musical treatment of unfinished autobiographical stories by Dylan Thomas, now at the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven.


Ms. Clements Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Clements of Clifton Park, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Patricia Marie Clements to Enrique Berenguer Carrera, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Juan Berenguer of Barcelona.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Clements, 30 years old, is a freelance video producer and publicity agent in Barcelona.
She graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father is the manager of engineering education at the Knolls Atomic Power Laboratory in Niskayuna, N.Y.
Her mother, Sally Clements, is a retired nurse.


Authorities: Autonomy vs. Accountability
WHEN officials of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority recently asked the state to float $416 million in bonds and for permission to use part of the money to build a new convention center in Atlantic City, one of the justifications for the request was that construction of the convention center was a natural extension of the authority's role as a statewide agency.
Some critics of the plan, however, saw just the opposite: by attempting to expand its reach, they said, the authority was overstepping its bounds.


Dr. Kerner To Wed in June
Ethel Kyburg of Woodbridge, Conn., and A. Warren Kerner of Carson City, Nev., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Ann-Louise Kerner, to Peter Flentov, the son of Nina Flentov of Viborg, Denmark, and the late Ole Flentov.
A June wedding is planned.
Dr.
Kerner is a patent agent at the Boston law firm of Lahive &amp; Cockfield and a third-year law student at Suffolk University Law School.
She graduated magna cum laude from Boston University and received a doctorate in molecular biology and biochemistry from the University of Connecticut.
Her mother, a music instructor and pianist in New Haven, was a Broadway actress under the name Ethel Mills.
Her father is a business management consultant in Carson City.


Laura A. Gould To Wed in April
Laura Ann Gould, a New York physical therapist, and Joshua Douglas Crandall, a computer consultant, also in New York, are to be married in April.
Miss Gould, 23 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of New York University and a physical therapist at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
She is a daughter of Barbara and Dr.
Howard Gould of Knoxville, Tenn.
Her father is a professor of radiology at the University of Tennessee Medical Center.
Her mother is a reading specialist.


Lasting Memories


Review/Dance; Twitchy Choreography in 'Three for All'
In the first episode of a four-part suite called "It Comes in Threes," Donna Uchizono confessed that when she meditates, she has visions of three trees.
As she talked about meditating, visiting a psychic and putting on a fashion show, Ms.
Uchizono swung three balls attached to cords so that they kept whizzing about her.
Her remarks may have been rambling, but the constant motion of the balls added visual focus and kinetic excitement to her monologue.
"It Comes in Threes" was part of a program called "Three for All," which Ms.
Uchizono presented on Friday night at Performance Space 122.
In other scenes from "It Comes in Threes," Mia Lawrence, Patricia McCarthy and Annie Way alternated birdlike preening steps with rapid whirlings; Jodi Melnick, Phillip Adams, Kevin Schroder, Ms.
Way, Ms.
McCarthy and Ms.
Uchizono threaded their way about the stage as if exploring a dense forest, and Nikki Castro, Rebecca Hilton and Ms.
Uchizono followed broad gestures with spasms of twitches.


Sara L. Kizelnik to Marry in May
Rabbi and Mrs.
Meyer Kizelnik of Montreal have announced the engagement of their daughter Sara Leah Kizelnik to Dr.
Aaron Freilich, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert Freilich of Brooklyn.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Kizelnik, 24 years old, is the coordinator of tumor registry at the Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Concordia University and has a master's degree in public health from Columbia University.
Her father is the religious leader of Congregation Beth Hillel in Montreal, where her mother, Pnina, is a teacher of Jewish studies at the Hebrew Academy.
Dr.
Freilich, 26, is a resident in internal medicine at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
He graduated from Brooklyn College and the State University of New York Health Science Center at Brooklyn.
His father retired as the director of medical services for the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation.


Birthing a Nation: What Europe and the Soviets Face
In the birth or the rebirth of nations, as well as their maintenance, no problem has more seriously taxed man's ingenuity than that of bringing at least partial unity out of disparity.
And seldom if ever has that problem been so imperative in so many places at once as it is now, as the political craftsmen struggle to overcome old rivalries or to keep them in check.
The emergence of the Commonwealth of Independent States as the putative replacement for the Soviet Union, and the feverish debate over the shape of that commonwealth, was echoed in Western Europe last week by the effort, at a meeting in Maastricht in the Netherlands, to impart greater economic and political unity to the European Community.
Yugoslavia was rent by civil war.
There were ominous signs that Czechoslovakia, so recently restored to control over its own destiny, might be about to come apart.
New stirrings of nationalism, if not separatism, were heard even in Scotland.


See It Now, Save It Later
FLYING from Rome to Paris the other day, I fell into conversation with a Japanese teacher on vacation in Europe and we got to chatting about the cost of visiting what, for many Americans, has become a very expensive continent.
My curiosity had been inspired by the travel documents she had been arranging in a wallet -- hotel voucher from the superexpensive Grand Hotel in Florence, voucher for the Meridien in Paris, round-trip business class ticket from Osaka to London.
Without going into detail, she said her outlays had been, well, significant.


Neighbors


A Cosmological Event
LATELY WE'VE BEEN HEARING THAT it's good to die.
Testimony to this effect comes from the growing numbers of people who have "died" (which is to say that their heartbeat and breathing stopped) and then been revived.
Survivors of these "near-death experiences" typically say that they felt themselves rushing through dark space, saw their lives pass before their eyes and then entered a realm of light where they encountered deceased relatives or friends.
The prevailing emotion, they maintain, is euphoria.
A nationwide Gallup Poll conducted in 1982 found that fully a third of the eight million Americans who reported having had a near-death experience "recall being in an ecstatic or visionary state." Some find their flirtation with death so blissful that they get a bit grumpy about returning to life.
"Why did you bring me back, Doctor?" one complained.
"It was so beautiful!"
What we have, then, is a body of anecdotal evidence indicating that many who come close to death find the experience illuminating.
Near-death experience reports are rather consistent in this regard, though they have been collected from individuals of many different ages, nationalities and religious backgrounds.
As one might expect, a few idiosyncrasies emerge: a South Asian Hindu ventured to heaven on the back of a "bespangled cow," while an American hailed a taxicab, and although modern witnesses talk of being bathed in pure white light, in the year 1206 a poor Essex farmer named Thurkill was obliged to make his way through a more biblical landscape, where he encountered an icy salt lake, a scale where souls were weighed, a nest of piercing stakes and thorns and a fiery corridor leading to hell.
But one is impressed by the overall uniformity of the many reports that describe a rush through darkness, then heavenly light everywhere, a review of one's life, an encounter with the departed and what Dr.
Raymond A. Moody, author of "Life After Life," which drew widespread public attention to the phenomenon, calls "intense feelings of joy, love and peace."


TELEVISION
December
"CHRISTMAS ON DIVISION STREET." Hume Cronyn stars in this movie about a homeless man (another theme rears its head) befriended by a boy who, naturally enough, learns the true meaning of Christmas -- and a bit about himself as well.
Fred Savage is the astute boy.
CBS, tonight at 9.


McCallum and Toney in Artful Draw
It was compleat boxing.
There were the subtleties -- the feints and spin moves, the artful dodging.
And there were the more visceral moments when the fighters, bone-tired from big-league effort, summoned the moxie to shoot for more -- to keep punching, keep punching, keep punching.
Lovely stuff.
For 12 rounds in the Convention Center ring here Friday night, James Toney and Mike McCallum gave as fine a show of all-round boxing as any two fighters have this year.


Creativity in Design as an Urban Survival Skill
Could we stand it if the South Bronx turned around?
Could we bear to lose this photogenic symbol of the bleak underside of the American dream?
These are not cynical questions. In Hunts Point, many residents believe the Bronx
has
turned around; they resent being cast as extras in a perpetual remake of "Fort Apache, the Bronx." Yes, abandoned buildings still abound.
But there are also signs of a community on the mend.
Old housing has been renovated for a recent rise in population.
Among the vacant lots are landmark blocks and buildings that have survived the havoc of slumlords, crack users and urban planners.
And with luck and about $5 million, a new landmark may rise: the first New York project by the renowned Italian architect Aldo Rossi.


Savory French Fare Unseats Nouvelle
IT has been four years since Bertrand first opened its doors in Greenwich.
At the time the food was often ambrosial, and our major caveat was about service lapses that seemed surprising in a place otherwise so professional.
Recently we decided to venture back to see how this excellent French restaurant, whose prices were in the expense account stratosphere, was faring in these difficult economic times.
Superficially, nothing has changed.
The restaurant is as sparklingly well-kept as it was when opened.
The restaurant, which is in a building dating from 1917, has an interior that blends brick columns and arches with vaulted ceilings of golden-toned Guastavino ceramic tiles as well as apricot-hued walls, brass sconces emitting soft lighting, polished brass railings leading to the most appealing second tier dining area and mirrors with ornate bronzed frames.
Banks of fresh chrysanthemums separate two sections of the upper level, and fresh flowers are on each impeccably groomed table.
An atrium on the lower dining level makes this a good lunchtime choice.


Kitt Focuses Hard on Cup In His Downhill Quest
When the United States skier A. J. Kitt walked over to the edge of the corral at the bottom of the slope here today, he found the only other American who knows anything about winning World Cup downhills.
"I didn't come halfway around the world to see you finish fourth," said Bill Johnson, the 1984 Olympic downhill gold medalist, as Kitt approached him.
"I came over here to see you win."


Yonkers Power Plant Plan Angers Neighbors
Residents of a neighborhood along the Hudson River are angry about a proposal to build a private power plant nearby, saying that projects banned elsewhere with the cry of "not in my back yard" usually end up in theirs.
An Illinois company wants to build a $140 million plant along the river to supply steam to a neighboring sugar refinery.
If the price is right, Consolidated Edison will buy the electricity produced, enough power for about 70,000 homes.


WAS THE WORLD MADE OUT OF CHEESE?
The question I raise is how far-fetched is this from the notions of the "Primordial Soup" or the "Big Bang," promulgated by 20th-century men of science as possible sources of the creation of the universe?
Poor Menocchio!
He lived in the wrong century.
FLORENCE GRIPPE
Orient, L.I.


Quotation of the Day
"If I was 40 years old and I had $100,000 and I wanted to run it into invest it there, because it is going to be a booming economy one of these days. If I was worth $10 million, I would take that $10 million and I'd invest $100,000 of it in the Soviet Union, and no more." -- AMBASSADOR ROBERT S. STRAUSS.  [ 24:4. ]


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
The Times was more than generous to give Norman Mailer so much space for his vindictive bellowing.
I assume this was done with the aim of allowing him to be hoist with his own petard, which indeed happened.
RUTH MORRISON New York


A Peek Under the Tent Of the West Palm Beach Media Circus
Standing atop a ladder, holding on for dear life, Steve Dunleavy of "A Current Affair" is the master of all he surveys: the swarms of cameramen, reporters, gawkers and groupies gathered for the first day of the William K. Smith rape trial.
Assistants hand him cups of coffee ("with milk and Sweet 'n Low, babe!") pre-lit cigarettes (innumerable Marlboro Lights) and, periodically, the cordless telephone with which the undisputed maharajah of tabloid television choreographs the day's shoot.
Mr.
Dunleavy has been on the scene since 6 A.M., preparing to speak his piece the moment the Kennedy heir appears.
In reality, though, he has been awaiting this moment since late last March, just after it was first reported that Mr.
Smith had taken his accuser to his grandmother's beach-front house for "that Easter weekend," as Mr.
Dunleavy has put it, "when holiness took a holiday."


Hawaiian Pass For Island Flights
Hawaiian Airlines is offering a new pass that permits unlimited interisland travel -- a sort of Eurailpass in the Pacific.
The new pass, called the Hawaiian Airpass, is available to nonresidents, no matter which airline they use to fly into Hawaii.
A visitor can have 5 days of unlimited flights between the six major Hawaiian islands (the Big Island, Maui, Oahu, Kauai, Molokai and Lanai) for $129, 7 days for $149, 10 days for $199 and 14 days for $239.
The regular fare between any of the main islands for nonresidents is $65.95 each way.
The ticket plan, which has no cutoff date, also includes special rates on car rentals, dining, visitor attractions and hotel and condominium accommodations.


IN MONET'S LIGHT
I enjoyed every line of Deborah Solomon's article "In Monet's Light" (Nov. 24).
The character of Joan Mitchell, as well as the description of her life and art, prompts me to dip my hat in admiration and respect for this unusual woman.
AYTON RAMIREZ LEDESMA
New York, N.Y.


M.C.I. Increases
To the Editor:
In your Q &amp; A item on Oct. 27 about major capital improvement rent increases, Joseph D'Agosta, a deputy commissioner for the State Department of Housing and Community Renewal,is quoted as saying that " tenants who vacate the apartments are technically liable for the retroactive M.C.I. increases; but because most increases are not that large, most owners do not bother with trying to collect  [ the increases ]  once a tenant has moved away."


Sunday Menu; Turkey, Minus Stuffing
Credit for this one-dish meal goes to my daughter, Ann, who puts ingredients together in her head and then sets about cooking them.
She seldom fails in her combinations.


RECORD BRIEFS
Prokofiev: 'Ivan the Terrible' Concert Scenario (Palmer arrangement)
Soloists; Philharmonia Chorus and Orchestra conducted by Neeme Jarvi.
Chandos CHAN 8977; CD and cassette.


Already Boxed and Suitable for Wrapping
As recording companies try to glean new profits from their archives, every holiday season now brings an outpouring of boxed sets.
More extensive than greatest-hits collections, less unwieldy than a performer's full catalogue, boxed sets can put a performer in perspective, summing up a career or adding a revisionist spin to it.
If compiled with care, a set can also unearth material that collectors would have a hard time finding otherwise.
Typically, a boxed set will offer a fancy package, a few rarities among the reissues and a biographical booklet or liner notes -- something to memorialize the music for posterity.
Here are some of this season's best boxes.
The Clash: 'Clash on Broadway'
Epic/Legacy E3K 46991; three CD's ($51.98) or cassettes ($36.98).


RECORD BRIEFS
Mozart: Piano Concertos Nos. 20-27
Daniel Barenboim, piano and conductor; Berlin Philharmonic.
Teldec 9031-72024-2; four CD's.


Keeping a Home Warm
IF your home is heated by steam or hot water, the radiators or convectors in each room usually need maintenance at the start of the heating season.
For maximum efficiency, they should also be cleaned and inspected monthly in the winter.
Radiators and convectors have the same function -- delivering heat -- and are controlled and maintained in basically the same ways.
Radiators are usually made of heavy cast iron.
Heat supplied by steam or hot water warms them, and the heated metal radiates warmth into the surrounding air.


Style Makers; Phyllis Babila, Fashion Designer
Phyllis Babila designs skirts for the lighthearted coquette, not the slinky vamp.Her short, pouffy multilayered "Cinderella" skirts are for women who want "a contrast to the tight Lycra look," Ms.
Babila said
The skirts are pure fantasy, the 40-year-old Manhattan designer added.
"They're pretty fussy."


Bronwyn Smith To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
William D. Smith of Dallas have announced the engagement of their daughter, Bronwyn Mary Smith, to John Justin McElroy, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph L. McElroy of Westfield, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Smith, 26 years old, graduated from James Madison University.
She is the public relations manager for the Nickelodeon and Nick at Nite program services of MTV Networks in New York.
Her father is a senior public relations official for the Exxon Corporation in Dallas.


Just One More Thing . . .
Two decades after shambling into American living rooms as a deceptively bumbling gumshoe, Peter Falk celebrates his 20th anniversary as Columbo tonight at 9 on ABC in "Death Hits the Jackpot." And so does his raincoat.
Even though the sun will be shining in Southern California, Lieutenant Columbo will be wearing the same awful battered khaki raincoat.
What can you say about a detective who doesn't carry a gun, has no first name and has a dog named Dog?


IN SHORT: FICTION
TAR BEACH By Richard Elman. Sun &amp; Moon Press, Paper, $12.95.


Peru's Most Desperate Refugees Cross No Borders
In a chalk-dry valley covered by Lima's Chincho shantytown, waves of migration are recorded by construction materials -- first houses of stucco, then of adobe brick, and finally, in the most remote gullies, huts of reed matting.
The residents are transplants from Peru's Andean highlands, their language is Quechua, and their dress reflects Indian traditions: braids, felt hats, bell-shaped skirts, and an occasional flash of color from a weaving.
They are part of a flood of more than 200,000 refugees caused by a brutal war between Peru's Shining Path terrorists and the nation's security forces.


PARIS
HALF THE RETAIL AND PRESS CROWD HAD ALREADY FLOWN THE town when Herve Leger's turn came.
Leger, a designer who has been part of the Paris fashion business for 10 years -- as a one-time assistant to Karl Lagerfeld, a backroom designer for the House of Lanvin's couture and a proprietor of a little boutique on a seamy street -- first won the attention of American store buyers two seasons ago for his sexy ready-to-wear dresses, deftly made from pliant strips of fabric, rather like glamorous Ace bandages.
This was his first real show.
In a quintessentially French fashion scene -- an overheated, brilliantly lit salon, its shutters firmly closed lest an errant spy peek in -- a small, sweating crowd was packed on folding chairs surrounding a little runway.
With just 54 numbers, Leger proved why Paris is the center of fashion creativity.
His collection was original, well thought out, knowledgeably executed and about as incendiary as style can be these days.
His expertly constructed bandage designs were softened with veilings of chiffon, or their shapes were extended with meringue-like skirts made from swirled layers of organza.
Though they were not the sort of clothes that set international trends or are easily copied, they were excitingly new in concept.
This is what everyone expects from Paris fashion.


Glanville, Bad Rap and All, Brings His Team to the Top of the Charts
If you are an Atlanta Falcon, music greats routinely visit your practices.
James Brown and Issac Hayes, Travis Tritt and Jerry Jeff Walker.
Hammer has become your post-game favorite.
The name of his new album has become your motto, splashed boldly across T-shirts you wear: "2 Legit 2 Quit."
If you are an Atlanta Falcon, you do not slump in front of your locker before kickoff and mull over your game plan and fret and tie yourself up into knots.
A 100-watt speaker system blares music.
You prepare your own shuffle for kickoff.


... Despite Patients . . .
To the Editor:
Overlooked in "Putting Doctors Into Cost-Containment" is that there may be a medico-legal need for doctors to use the newest, most expensive technology, especially when patient noncompliance is an issue.
A doctor might want to delay using expensive technology for several weeks to see if such testing is necessary.
Patients are asked to return for re-evaluation but often do not.
This may make the physician the victim in a malpractice action when, for example, a cancer is discovered months later.
Doctors, concerned by patient noncompliance, may order tests when the patient is first seen instead of waiting.
HARVEY J. COHEN, M.D.
White Plains, N.Y., Nov. 26


The Kind of Ransoms We Paid for Hostages; Since the Caliphs
To the Editor:
"Hostages and Haste" (editorial, Dec. 3) betrays ignorance of Islamic conduct toward infidel enemies.


Injured Chang Stages A Million-Dollar Rally
Michael Chang played springtime in Paris in this frosty Bavarian capital today by coming from two sets down and a match point to defeat Ivan Lendl for a berth in the final of the $6 million Grand Slam Cup.
Two years ago, on the clay courts at Roland Garros, Chang willed himself back from a two-set deficit to score an improbable fourth-round French Open victory over Lendl en route to the men's singles title that year.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
Who needs George Foreman versus Larry Holmes?
The Norman Mailer versus John Simon bout was a humdinger.
There were no knockdowns, but a few solid blows were landed.
Amazingly, the fight went the distance.
I gave the decision to Mr.
Mailer.
STEPHEN J. KUDLESS Staten Island


Winter in New York
Average annual snowfall for New York City: 29 inches
Biggest one-day snowfall: 25.5 inches, Dec. 26, 1947


Jobs Make Ireland's Young People a Resource
In 1729 Jonathan Swift satirically proposed dealing with this country's essential problem by eating Irish children -- "a reasonable dish, and seasoned with a little pepper or salt." Today the country's overbearing problem is still too many children.
Ireland has the youngest population in Europe, half of it under 30 years old; its women lead Europe in child-bearing ratios in a nation where abortion is illegal and the dominant Roman Catholic Church inveighs constantly against contraception.


Economic Pulse: New England/A special report.; New England's Siren Call of 80's Becomes Echo of the Depression
It seemed like the American dream to Barbara Cleland when she moved here from Massachusetts eight years ago to open a private educational testing and tutorial service.
Nashua was the fastest growing town in the fastest growing state east of the Mississippi River, after Florida, and soon, with a bank loan against her house, the former teacher had two busy offices with 25 employees.
But now, with New Hampshire's economy in a shambles, Miss Cleland's students have defaulted on their tuition.
She herself had to declare bankruptcy and has lost her business, her house, her savings and her car.


CAMPUS LIFE: Princeton; Officials Urge Students to End 'Nude Olympics'
Ivy still creeps up the sides of century-old buildings at Princeton University, but some of the traditions that reflect its mostly white, all-male past are passing into history.
In the latest debate, several university officials have argued for an end to the "Nude Olympics," an annual, 21-year-old rite in which hundreds of naked sophomores celebrate the first snowfall by doing sit-ups and push-ups in a campus courtyard and running through town at midnight.
The event makes many women and minorities uncomfortable and, given the amount of alcohol consumed, can be dangerous, administrators say.


The Mail on Mailer-Simon
To the Editor:
Asking John Simon to review a Norman Mailer book is equivalent to having Johnny Carson review Joan Rivers's "Still Talking."  BURNEY C. MARSH Sonoma, Calif.


A Day After the Jury's Vote, Miller Feels Fatalistic
Mel Miller, whose 21-year career in state politics was vaporized Friday night by the lightning strike of a jury's verdict, said today that he viewed his conviction with the same fatalism he feels when watching voters go to the polls.
"It's like losing an election," the former Assembly Speaker said in a telephone interview from his home in Brooklyn.
"It's terrible. It's awful. But it's over. It happened. It's gone."


Locker Theft
To the Editor: In September, my friend and I went to the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam.
Upon entering the museum we were told by the guards to place our cameras and palm corder on their closet.
A man in suit similar to the guard's uniform with an ID card pinned on his breast approached us when we had difficulty operating the locker.
He opened the locker, told us to drop a coin in and signaled us to place our cameras and palm corder inside, which we did.
He closed the locker and gave a key to my friend, apparently keeping the correct key.
When we returned after about 20 minutes the locker was open and the cameras and palm corders were gone.
The museum didn't accept responsibility for the losses.


When Money Doesn't Mean Everything
VICKI ROBIN returned to Long Island last month in consignment-shop shoes and a borrowed black suit.
Voted "most likely to succeed" in the Manhasset High School Class of '63, Miss Robin says she has succeeded.
She has successfully disconnected herself from the "foibles of money." She lives on $7,400 a year and couldn't be happier.
"When you talk about money, you're inclined to talk about more or less," she said.
"What you want to talk about is enough."


Dollar Steady Against Pound
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
129.10
127.95
132.94
per Dollar
W.German Mark
1.5900
1.5670
1.4815
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1430
1.1364
1.1582
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8155
1.8165
1.9375
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$359.00
$368.75
$375.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
FIGARO IN VALLEY STREAM
The opera pop quiz was not going well at Forest Road Elementary School in Valley Stream.
Asked to give three words associated with opera, all Charlotte Lurie could come up with was "Figaro." And she was a parent.


Marking the End of Communism
THE show at the Lehman College Art Gallery is of photographs by contemporary Russians, and it begins with a life-size blowup of nine artisans, which is not, however, hortatory Social Realism.
Printed across several panels, the figures overlap Cubistically but otherwise the work is a straightforward if casual portrait of men standing in two rows, their expressions amiable and interested.
They could be Americans except that all give the impression of having better things to do than commune with the camera.
The title is "Cast Me Not Away From Thy Presence," which comes from the 51st Psalm, a prayer for the remission of sins and for sanctification.
The picture was taken by Vladimir Kupreanov in 1987.


CAMPUS LIFE: Washington; A Gay Group Given New Role On Campus
With the recent creation of the Gay, Bisexual and Lesbian Student Commission, homosexual students for the first time have a permanent foot in the door of the student government at the University of Washington.
The commission joins 15 other minority commissions sponsored by the student government, the Associated Students of the University of Washington.
The commission was set up to bring "gay programming, examples of gay culture and gay issues to the U.W. campus as a whole," said Jeffrey Hagen, the new commission's director.


Katharine O. Stansmore Is Engaged
Mrs.
Joseph A. Mehan of Stamford, Conn., and S. William Stansmore of Cambridge, England, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katharine Olivia Stansmore, to Peter Spelman Halt, a son of Donna S. Trombly and Frederick W. Halt, both of Buffalo.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Stansmore, 23 years old, and her fiance, 30, are first-year medical students at Columbia University.
Both graduated from the University of California at Berkeley.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Newport, R.I.; Subdividing An 1875 Estate
ONE of this city's famous Ocean Drive estates is being subdivided into one-family-house lots because the family that owns it has been unable to sell the property in one piece and cannot afford to keep it the way it is.
The estate, since the late 1940's called the Inn at Castle Hill, is on 40 acres overlooking the entrance to Narragansett Bay.
The inn itself, a converted Victorian mansion, has 14 year-round rooms, a restaurant and a lounge.
There also are seven seasonal beach cottages, six seasonal one-bedroom "harbor" houses and a three-bedroom Swiss-style chalet.
There are four small private beaches, a private cove and marina with dockage for up to 20 boats.


Jazz Awards Presented
Betty Carter, Dorothy Donegan and Harry (Sweets) Edison have been awarded American Jazz Masters fellowships, an honor bestowed annually by the National Endowment for the Arts.
Ms.
Carter is a singer; Ms.
Donegan, a pianist, and Mr.
Edison, a trumpet player.
They will each receive $20,000 for their "significant contribution to the art form in the African-American tradition." They are to be inducted into the Jazz Hall of Fame on Jan. 10 in Miami at a concert in their honor featuring the Count Basie Orchestra and the singer Sheila Jordan.
Past winners of the 11-year-old award include Miles Davis, Count Basie and Sarah Vaughn.


In 'White Lies,' Sins Of the Rich and Famous
IF you need to be titillated by the transgressions of the rich and famous -- the American Stage Company's first show of the season, "White Lies" presumes that we all do -- then it's "time for a tabloid" or "trash and slime in the supermarket."
The opening scene of the new revue, seen at the final preview performance, presages just that.
A voice at a cash register offstage repeatedly makes the pronouncement "void," a premature but apt critical commentary on the show to follow.
But "White Lies" -- an irrelevant title -- does not remain true to its own come-on.


Winning Was Everything
THE MAN TO SEE
Edward Bennett Williams: Ultimate Insider; Legendary Trial Lawyer.
By Evan Thomas.
Illustrated. 587 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $27.50.


Yeltsin Sees Food Baskets 'Two-Thirds' Full in a Year
President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic, calling on the people of the crumbled Soviet Union to rally for a grim period of transition, promised in an interview published today to stabilize the economy in a year and have food baskets "two-thirds filled, not more."
"The main thing is trust," he said in the newspaper interview in which he set basic national goals to survive what he conceded would prove a very difficult year.


Talking: Co-op Sales; Avoiding Rejection Litigation
WHEN the New York City co-op market started to shake out in the late 1980's, admissions policies were expected to become more relaxed to accommodate struggling sellers.
Moreover, many legislative proposals introduced in the State Assembly to require boards to give reasons for the rejection of a buyer -- and thus make it harder to do so -- were expected to become law.


Hogs Ripped Their Flesh
THE LITTLE BROTHERS OF ST. MORTIMER
By John Fergus Ryan. 184 pp. New York: Delta. Paper, $10.


Three Soups That Are Just Right for Cold Weather
WHEN the weather turns cold, soups become substantial affairs, often relying on sturdy winter vegetables.
They are good to prepare for a variety of occasions.
Well seasoned and transformed into a smooth puree, such soups can be the first course at a dinner party or a holiday dinner for family.
Served in a larger portion, perhaps, along with some good bread and a salad, soups are all that may be needed for a simple supper at home.


With Nothing on the Line, Game Is Important
In the past, when the Giants played the Redskins, motivation was never a problem.
The rivalry was so strong and the games so meaningful that the intensity seemed to rise automatically.
When the Giants play the Redskins in Washington today, motivation could be a problem for both teams.
The Redskins (13-1) have already clinched the home-field advantage for the National Football League playoffs.
The Giants (7-7), less than 11 months after their Super Bowl triumph, are out of the playoff picture and playing out the string.


Community Cinema Nonprofit Organization
Twice in "New Look (and Screen) at Community Cinema"  [ Oct. 27 ]  you mention Charlotte Sky and Vic Skolnick as "owners" of the cinema in Huntington.
I am sure they, the I.R.S. and the New York State powers that be would be surprised, nay dismayed, to discover that they are "owners." New Community Cinema is a nonprofit organization not unlike the Red Cross.
Who owns the Red Cross?
The writer seems to have a rather old-fashioned idea of who runs the N.C.C.
This is not a mom-and-pop operation, with mom "helping out." Charlotte Sky and Vic Skolnick are co-directors, and let there be no mistake on this.


Miss O'Shea To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
William J. O'Shea of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Charlotte Marie O'Shea to Peter Alan Glovin, a son of Robert Glovin and Linda Glovin, both of Norwood, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss O'Shea, 26 years old, is an assistant to the principals of the lower and lower-middle schools of Trinity School in New York.
She graduated from William Smith College.
Her father is a senior partner in the law firm of Burns, Kennedy, Schilling &amp; O'Shea in New York.


Connecticut Protects Its Condos
OWNERS of condominums and units in homeowner associations or co-ops in Connecticut have become the first in the Northeast to be protected against mismanagement, misdeeds or theft of funds by their property managers.
The protection is afforded by a state law that went into effect in October.
New York and New Jersey do not yet have such legislation, but lawyers and lobbyists say it is on its way as the management and budgets of these associations increasingly resemble those of large corporations -- and as a consequence demand a higher level of expertise.


An Old New York Evening
The glittering private dance is back, or at least it was Wednesday night.
That was when Harry Platt invited "old society, society today and young new beauties" to a party in the refurbished Versailles Suite of the St.
Regis Hotel.
Mr.
Platt, the former president of Tiffany's, said he thought it was time to recapture "old New York as the 20th century goes out." The evening was a recreation of the private holiday dance that he stopped giving eight years ago.


About Cars; Volvo Makes Its New 960 a Safe Bet
DEAR SIR,
For a family vehicle, safety is paramount.
Your review of the infant seats in the Chrysler vans did not mention whether the doors now have steel beams.
If I were in the market for a family vehicle, the steel beams would be far more important than pull-down child seats.
It's too bad the Government has not changed the safety standards to require those beams in the doors of minivans. -- NORMA M. BRAUDE, Fredonia, N.Y.
DEAR SIR,
I am a mom with four little kids, and I don't want to make ANY compromises on safety.
I have been saving my money for four years now, planning to buy a minivan when they finally meet the safety standards for cars.
But guess what -- my money is still sitting in the bank.


SueAnne Celentano Is Planning a May Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Celentano of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, SueAnne Celentano, to Robert John Robinson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Robinson of Deerfield, Ill.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Celentano, 30 years old, is a program assistant in the population sciences division of the Rockefeller Foundation in New York.
She graduated from Colgate University.


PEACE-ESE
The long- or short-range outcome of the Middle East peace conference remains to be seen, but William Safire touched upon the emergence of an important and basic commonality between the Arab and Israeli delegations in "Peace-ese" (On Language, Nov. 17).
The way to a peaceful settlement may well be through the stomach, as the informal exchanges turned to talk of hummus and gefilte fish.
ELEANOR S. RUBIN
Watchung, N.J.


Amy M. Quinn Weds Martin Heslin
Amy Marie Quinn, a nurse at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York, and Dr.
Martin Joseph Heslin, a surgical resident at New York University Medical Center, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Ronald A. Barry officiated at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church in Massapequa, L.I.
The bride, 25 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton and is studying at Columbia University for a master's degree in nursing.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Quinn of Massapequa.
Her father is a salesman at Characters Typographic Services, a New York printing company.
Her mother is a paralegal at Haas, Greenstein, Samson, Cohen &amp; Gerstein in New York.


Mutual Funds; Where Quality Isn't Counting
AS municipal finances deteriorate across the country, the yields on lower-grade municipal bonds would be expected to rise to compensate investors for the added risk.
That has not happened.
In fact, the yield differential between high-grade and low-grade municipal bonds remains near the historic lows of the past two years.
What happened?
As rates have declined, some investors seeking to maintain their yields have been more willing to settle for lower-quality issues, propping up demand for them.
In addition, proliferating bond insurance has increased the supply of bonds with high ratings, and issuers of this paper have probably had to pay higher rates than they would in a less crowded market.


Bridge
Players in Kharkov, Ukraine, recently developed an unusual and interesting contribution to the game, which was then taken a step further by players in Moscow: they found a way largely to eliminate the luck of the deal when playing a home or club game with four players.
Instead of scoring in rubber bridge or Chicago style, duplicate scoring is used, with game bonuses of 300 or 500 depending on vulnerability, and with 50 for a part score.
The sequence of vulnerabilities varies as at Chicago or four-deal bridge.
By analyzing thousands of deals with the aid of a computer, they calculated the scoring expectation with a given number of high-card points in a partnership.
This established a table, so that players can measure at the end of a deal whether they have met expectations, fallen short or surpassed them.
Their table is:
Combined Points
Score
0
0
21
50
22
70
23
110
For higher point counts the expectation varies with vulnerability:
Points
Not Vulnerable
Vulnerable
24
200
290
25
300
440
26
350
520
27
400
630
28
430
630
29
460
660
30
490
690
31
600
900
32
700
1,050
33
900
1,350
34
1,000
1,500
35
1,100
1,650
36
1,200
1,800
37+
1,300
1,950
This "Compensation" method was reported by Albert Silber of Birmingham, Mich., who was introduced to it last year by Vitold Brustunov during a visit to Leningrad, before that city reverted to its traditional name of St.
Petersburg.
The way this method works can be illustrated by the diagramed deal, played in Brustunov's home, on which Silber made a key play as South.
Since it was obvious that North held five spades, East should no doubt have resisted the temptation to bid his eight-card suit on the second round.
South now missed a rare opportunity: he could have made a penalty double holding a void in the opponent's suit.
At the part-score level this would probably have set a world record and would have collected 1,100.
Alternatively, and perhaps better, he could have passed and allowed his partner to double with some strength in his spade suit.
When South chose to bid, he had to struggle in four hearts.
When the diamond king was led, South made an unusual, and essential, play by winning with the ace in dummy and dropping the jack from his hand.
He then cashed the A-Q of hearts, led to the club ace, and drew the remaining trumps with the king.
Thanks to the unblock at the first trick, he was able to reach the dummy by leading a diamond.
West put up the queen and led the club queen, won with the king.
Dummy was entered with a diamond to the ten, and the spade eight was led.
Since East was known to have nothing but spades at this point, any spade would have sufficed.
South threw a club, allowing East to win with the nine.
He threw another club when the spade ace was led, and the last club loser disappeared when East continued spades into dummy's K-J.
By giving East two spade tricks South had avoided a club loser altogether.
But if he had failed to unblock the diamond jack, he would have given West the opportunity to block the diamond entry to the dummy: West would have played the queen on the seven, but not on the jack, and the game would have been unmakable.
As North-South had 26 high-card points, and were vulnerable, their Compensation target was 520.
Their actual score of 620 therefore gave them a net gain of 100.
But if South had failed to unblock the diamond jack, and failed by a trick, he would have had a net loss of 620.
And South could have had a net gain of 580 if he had permitted his partner to double three spades, or made an imaginative penalty double himself with a void in the opponent's suit.


Wall Street; Straining to Match the Russell 2000
The watchword on Wall Street over the past year has been "small is beautiful." The stocks of many smaller companies have exploded in value -- and so has institutional investors' interest in such companies.
Some of these big new players pick and choose their stocks, but others, called indexers, simply want to own everything, or at least as much of everything as necessary to produce a portfolio that will behave exactly like the Russell 2000, the most widely followed index of the small-company universe.
Far easier said than done.


Bronx Boy Falls to Death Riding Outside Elevator
Riding the wires under an elevator -- a dangerous game he had been warned against -- an 11-year-old Bronx boy fell to his death on Friday night when his jacket caught on the elevator cable, the police and neighbors said yesterday.
The boy, Hector Perez, was heard screaming as he struggled to hold on to the wires that he said were burning him, a neighbor said.
He was found dead at the bottom of the shaft of a six-story building, at 1760 Andrews Avenue in Morris Heights, the Bronx.
The boy lived a few blocks away, at 1760 Popham Avenue, with his aunt, Teresa, who said his mother was in jail and his father lived in Miami.


Solomon Kunis, Journalism Professor, 75
Solomon Kunis, a retired publicist and college journalism professor, died on Wednesday.
He was 75 years old and lived in Queens.
Mr.
Kunis was stricken with heart failure while teaching at Queens College, his family said.


Shelly Rosen Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Rosen of Englewood, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Shelly Rosen, to Ira Stuart Taub, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Taub of Tenafly, N.J.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Rosen, 25 years old, graduated from Emory University and is studying for a master's degree in nutrition at New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Streichler North River Warehouses Inc. in Jersey City.


Dasi Srulowitz To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Srulowitz of Monsey, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Hillary Srulowitz to Jeremy Nicholas Schwalbe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Schwalbe of Englewood, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Srulowitz, 20 years old, is known as Dasi.
She is a senior at Yeshiva University.
Her father is the president of Atlantic Specialty, a manufacturer and importer of men's and women's accessories in Jersey City.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CHRISTMAS TREES


Counterpoint to Carols: Jazz and Gypsy Melodies
THOUGH holiday programs crowd the schedule this week, there are other performances to enjoy as well.
This afternoon at 2:30 Lena Geller and Natasha Khait, contraltos, twin sisters and Soviet emigres who live in Westport, revive memories of the old country with a program of old Russian songs, gypsy melodies and romantic themes at the Westport Library, accompanied by the pianist Boris Shapiro.
For information call 227-8411.
Half an hour later, Richard Shillea, frequently heard in the principal clarinet chair of the Stamford and Greater Bridgeport Symphonies, steps to center stage for a recital at the Regina A. Quick Center at Fairfield University.
Joined by the pianist John Cheek, the cellist Mary Costanza and the composer and pianist Eric Ewazen, Mr.
Shillea has chosen a highly attractive program including Leonard Bernstein's Sonata, Victor Babin's "Hillandale Waltzes," Mr.
Ewazen's "Ballad for Clarinet" and the Op. 114 Brahms Trio (254-4010).


Elizabeth Schreiber to Marry in May
Mr. and Mrs.
William Schreiber of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Jane Schreiber, to Simone Valerio Dagnino, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Dagnino of Akron, Ohio.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Schreiber, 24 years old, is a financial analyst at Chemical Bank in New York, as is her fiance.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Schreiber, Simmons, MacKnight &amp; Crisses in New York.
Her mother, Louise Schreiber, is a vice president of Chase Manhattan Bank in White Plains.


ATTRACTIONS
Here is a sampling of attractions, some featuring holiday activities, in New York City.
Times and dates are subject to change.
Museums and Historic Sites


Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Ogilvy &amp; Mather Loses Big Account
After losing its flagship American Express account and several top executives, Ogilvy &amp; Mather has suffered another large account loss and another departure by a senior executive.
The Compaq Computer Corporation of Houston has reassigned its $35 million North American advertising account to Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, from Ogilvy's Houston office.


Nigeria Splits Vote on Regional Lines
Preliminary results today from state elections in Nigeria show voting for gubernatorial and legislative seats split largely along regional and ethnic lines.
Only two parties, the center-left Social Democratic Party and the right-of-center National Republican Convention, were allowed to put forward candidates in the elections, which are regarded as a major test of the military Government's plan to restore civilian rule in this populous West African nation next year.


BRT Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fisher Business Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


OLD ANGOLAN FOES STRUGGLE TO UNITE
After battling for half his life against guerrilla rebels in Angola's civil war, Alindo Ferreira has joined forces with his longtime enemies to help restore peace to this southwest African nation.
"We are all Angolans, and now have to learn to work together," said the 33-year-old Government army major based in Lubango, capital of a southern province, Huila.


New-Look Offense, Same Old Problems
The 1992 Giants' offense the one that Coach Ray Handley said would be his -- started brightly today against the Redskins.
But after a 34-17 loss, Handley railed against the turnovers, the missed chances -- in short, what this season has been all about for a self-destructing offense.
In a terse post-game statement that caught normally combative reporters so surprised there were no follow-up questions, Handley said in a growling voice, "I told the team that I was going to take responsibility for this game and this season, because obviously the coach is responsible for discipline, and our discipline has gone all to hell."


Beirut Welcomes World Bank Pledge of Aid
A pledge by intenational donors of $700 million to finance some of Lebanon's reconstruction projects has been welcomed here.
But the sum is only a small part of the billions of dollars that officials say are needed to rebuild the country after 16 years of a devastating civil war.
"This is a manifestation of international interest in the recovery of our country," Prime Minister Omar Karami said on Saturday.


Review/Pop; They Like Their Sound Intense and a Mite Loud
When the Family Stand's "Moon in Scorpio" (East West) arrived several months ago, it came swollen with audacity.
The New York-based band had released an earlier album, working within the smooth and limited confines of black pop, and it had produced portions of Paula Abdul's recent "Spellbound," making dance music with no ramifications beyond having a good time.
But "Moon in Scorpio," for all its hippieisms (one song is called "Chakra Love") and retrograde identifications with the 1960's, sounds new, as if it were the product of an imagination that hadn't been hindered by the racial politics of genre.
Mixing rock and soul, the record, one of the better albums of the year, didn't stand a chance of airplay; the band even included a song called "Plantation Radio," which insinuated that race, from radio's perspective, dictated what a musician should play.
The song dared radio to ignore the album, which it has.


RUSSIA ASKS BAKER FOR A RECOGNITION OF INDEPENDENCE
The Russian republic asked the United States today to recognize its independence and that of Byelorussia and Ukraine, a move that could force Washington to choose between President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and the new commonwealth led by Boris N. Yeltsin.
The Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, made the request to the visiting Secretary of State, James A. Baker 3d, saying recognition would help crystallize authority in the new commonwealth and prevent a slide toward further political disintegration.
Mr.
Baker said the United States would consider the request.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates this week for major economic indicators.
Monday Industrial Production...Nov.
Capacity Utilization...Nov.
Tuesday Housing Starts...Nov.
Productivity...3d Qtr.
Wednesday None Thursday Merchandise Trade...Oct.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday 2d Revision of G.N.P....3d Qtr.


Dance in Review
Mimi Garrard Garrard Studio Theater


Tensions Grow in Haiti as Word Spreads That Aristide Might Return


ATI Medical Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Qaddafi to Consult Congress On Jet Bombing, Envoys Say
The Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, has apparently decided to call a meeting of the country's legislature to discuss Western pressure over the bombing of a Pan Am passenger plane over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, diplomats said today.
Legislative committees around the country have been told to start regular meetings Monday.
The diplomats said the order indicated that the legislature, or the General People's Congress, would meet by the end of December.
It would be expected to give a formal reply to the United States and Britain, the diplomats said.


A Short Cheer for the I.R.S.
While the Internal Revenue Service may not be the Government's most popular agency, disgruntled football fans will cheer its decision to tax the irritating attachment of corporate names to college bowl games.
Case in point: the Mobil Cotton Bowl.
It was the just-plain Cotton Bowl for years until the Mobil Corporation came up with big "sponsorship" bucks -- as much as $2 million a year -- and got its name attached to the event and its attendant publicity.


Treasury to Sell Bills and Notes This Week
The Treasury has a busy week ahead, starting with its usual auction of three- and six-month bills today.
Late Friday, three-months bills were bid at 4.13 percent, and six-month bills were at 4.16 percent.
The Treasury has scheduled a sale of $12.75 billion of two-year notes on Wednesday and a sale of $9 billion of five-year notes on Thursday.


World Economies


Chicagoans Spar Over Gun Club's Pollution
For 79 years, members of the Lincoln Park Gun Club here gathered at a skeet shooting range nestled between a running path and a nine-hole golf course in a lakefront park just north of downtown.
They fired at clay pigeons lofted in the air above Lake Michigan, and the shattered targets, along with the lead pellets discharged from club members' shotguns, fell into the water.
Last May, the club disbanded, leaving behind more than 1,000 tons of lead and several hundred tons of clay in a 12-foot-high pile in the lake about 100 yards from shore, according to the Chicago Park District.
Environmentalists say the lead is leaching into the lakebed, poisoning algae and destroying the breeding grounds and habitat of lake perch and shiners, the small fish that make their home along the lake's edge.


ACM Government Opportunity reports earnings for As of Oct 31


Accounts
*
Beiersdorf A.G., Hamburg, Germany, to Ayer Europe and TBWA Europe, for additional assignments totaling $30 million, an Ayer spokeswoman said.
The accounts had previously been handled by Leo Burnett, Chicago, which resigned them over a client conflict.
The assignments include Nivea skin-care products and Gammon toiletries. *
General Mills Restaurants Canada to Doner Schur Peppler, Toronto, the Canadian unit of W. B. Doner &amp; Co., to advertise its Red Lobster seafood restaurants.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $6 million.
The account had previously been handled by McCann-Erickson of Canada Ltd., Toronto.
Grey Advertising, New York, remains Red Lobster's agency of record in the United States. *
Town &amp; Country, a Hearst Magazines monthly, to AC&amp;R Advertising, New York, for its trade advertising account, previously at MacDougall Co., New York, which is now defunct.
Billings are yet to be determined; a consumer campaign might be introduced with the trade campaign, which is expected in the spring. *
ADIA Group, Lausanne, Switzerland, a temporary and permanent personnel business, to Young &amp; Rubicam, New York, for United States and international advertising.
Billings were not disclosed.


Marci Ziff Is Married
Marci Ziff, the daughter of Florence and Jerry Ziff of New Haven, was married yesterday to Jerry Nomburg, the son of Lilian Lipschultz of West Palm Beach, Fla., and Henry Nomburg of Kings Point, L.I.
Rabbi Howard Cohen officiated at the Fox Hill Golf and Country Club in Baiting Hollow, L.I.
Mrs.
Nomburg, 33 years old, owns FJ Associates, an executive search company in New York.
She graduated from Simmons College.
The bridegroom, 44, is a co-owner of Kubla Crafts, an importer and wholesaler of children's toys and gift items in Hampton Bays, L.I.
He graduated from Long Island University.


What's Next?
Six American experts and a Russian exile novelist talk of the Gorbachev legacy and what may lie ahead for the Soviet Union's heirs.
Page A14.


Maxwell's Son Faces Scrutiny
Six weeks after the death of Robert Maxwell, his son Kevin is coming under increasingly critical scrutiny over his conduct before and after his father's death.
A dedicated executive with a gift for finance, Kevin Maxwell faced overwhelming difficulties in trying to hold the sprawling family empire together.
Now, his lawyer says, Mr.
Maxwell may face criminal charges.


Du Pont Sets New Charge
E.
I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company says it expects to take a charge that will reduce its earnings by about $675 million in the fourth quarter, more than double earlier projections.
The company said on Friday that the expected increase of $350 million in charges reflected a $1 billion cost-cutting program announced in July and costs related to a recall of its Benlate fungicide.
Last year, Du Pont earned $483 million, or 71 cents a share, in the fourth quarter.


Tax Credits for Health: Wrong Rx
The Bush Administration has finally promised to come forward with a plan to solve the nations's health care crisis before next year's elections.
White House officials are reportedly wavering between a system known as managed competition, which would build on existing employer-based insurance, and a radically new system based on universal tax credits.
At first glance, tax credits are seductive.
They promise universal coverage, cost-conscious consumers and virtually no bureaucratic complexity.
But on closer analysis, these plans look infeasible, perhaps irremediably so.


A Library-on-Wheels Fills the Void
More than a year ago, Moses Hill arrived at the Saratoga Library in Brooklyn and found its front doors boarded up, its gate locked.
Distressed, the 63-year-old Mr.
Hill, a regular patron of the limestone and brick library on Hopkinson Avenue near Macon Street in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section, threw his library card away.
"I felt let down," said Mr.
Hill, a broadly built parks worker who said he used to borrow books of science fiction and James Baldwin's writings.
"I thought, well, that's it."


Softball Pitcher Leaves Cuba For Miami
First, one of Cuba's top baseball pitchers defected to the United States.
And now its most noted softball pitcher has joined him.
Last June, RENE AROCHA defected in Miami, and a few weeks ago he signed with the St.
Louis Cardinals.
Now HECTOR TORRES has also made it to this country, via Venezuela.


Dexleigh Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bono Is Listed As Questionable
Steve Bono, the quarterback who has kept the San Francisco 49ers in contention for a playoff berth, underwent a magnetic resonance imaging test today and was unofficially listed as questionable for the game against the Chicago Bears at Candlestick Park on Dec. 23.
The results of the test showed that Bono sustained a sprained ligament in his left knee.
"It's nothing we didn't expect," 49ers spokesman Jerry Walker said.
"He's listed as questionable."


Dance in Review
Mimi Garrard Garrard Studio Theater
Mimi Garrard is best known for dance that is a part of an intricate electronic weave of sound and light.
And the more abstract recent dances she presented on Saturday night at her SoHo loft theater were the weakest in the program.
But of the two new pieces on the bill, it was the explosively physical "Time Piece" that stood out over the multi-media "Walking in Gravel."


Israelis Restrict Movement of Palestinians at Night
The Israeli Army imposed new nighttime restrictions on Palestinian movement today, ordering Arabs to stay dozens of yards from roadsides in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Army commanders said the new rules were needed to deter terrorist attacks after dark on Israeli settlers driving past Arab villages to get to and from their homes in the occupied territories.


Alpnet Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brooklyn Bibliophiles Take Advantage of City's Only Library-on-Wheels


Slovaks Are Closer to Hungary Than to Czechs; Fate of the Language
To the Editor:
"As Slovak Separatism Gains, Havel Faces the Unthinkable" (front page, Nov. 20) states, "Until 1918, there were no schools that taught in Slovak." This is not accurate.


Terrorism Strains Peru's Reforms
A fortress of a factory stands anonymously on the Pan American Highway here.
Sawhorses have been erected to block car bombers from parking areas.
Guards wearing bulletproof vests and toting shotguns search visitors.
A concrete watchtower, dominating a perimeter wall, is equipped with gun slits, a steel trapdoor and a battery-powered radio system.
Inside this top-security installation, lines of nimble-fingered women peel, wash and can asparagus and baby ears of corn.


India Admits Failure to Cut Bangladesh Influx
The Indian Government has acknowledged that its failure to deport illegal settlers from Bangladesh has created problems described as serious and complex.
Seeking better lives, several million Bangladeshis have fled to India to escape poverty, overpopulation and flooding.


Alatenn Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dr. Clemenza, Dentist, Weds
Dr.
Carolyn Mary Clemenza, a dentist in Pleasantville, N.Y., and Thomas Anthony Dixon Jr., an editor at Gannett Suburban Newspapers in Harrison, N.Y., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Francis Mellican officiated at St.
Pius X Roman Catholic Church in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Dr.
Clemenza, 30 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Fordham University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a dentistry degree from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Carmela Clemenza of Scarsdale and the late Vito J. Clemenza.
Her mother is an assistant principal of Public School 83 in the Bronx.


Board Denies Black Muslim Group Use of School
A black Muslim group was barred from using the Harlem public elementary school it rented for an event after Board of Education officials learned of posters advertising the title of main speaker's speech: "Are Jews Hiding the Truth?"
While the group, the Lost-Found Nation of Islam, said the decision trampled its freedom of speech, a school board spokesman denounced the poster and the speech's apparent content as anti-Semitic and against rules that govern rental of public school space.


More Than 400 Killed as Red Sea Ferry Sinks


Under the Cloak of Secrecy, Negotiations Continue for a 15-Month Budget
It is standard procedure for state budgets to be made in the dark.
Historically, the Governor, the Assembly Speaker and the Senate majority leader meet behind closed doors to negotiate an agreement that is then quickly ratified by the Legislature in the dead of the night.
But even by Albany standards, the current process of negotiating an unprecedented 15-month financial plan has been uncommonly private, according to a broad spectrum of lobbyists and officials with interest groups.
In a break from tradition, and some argue in a break from the state Constitution, there has not even been the pretense of a public process in putting together a budget that could control state spending through March 31, 1993.


Cellpro reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Television; 'Antony and Cleopatra' in Chicago
Based on the Shakespeare play, Samuel Barber's "Antony and Cleopatra" will be remembered for, if nothing else, being the specially commissioned opening production in 1966 at the Metropolitan Opera's new home in Lincoln Center.
A good many music critics did not find the occasion auspicious, and mechanical difficulties on the new stage didn't help matters.
Subsequently revised and shortened by Mr.
Barber and Gian Carlo Menotti, the work was mounted this year by the Lyric Opera of Chicago.
That production is being offered, with special financing from the city of Chicago, as a "Great Performances" presentation at 9 tonight on Channel 13.
A stereo simulcast will be carried on WQXR (93.6 FM).


Jay Jacobs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Officials Locate $65 Million in Fraud Case
Investigators have located $65 million of the $75.4 million that they contend was missing from investment accounts controlled by a firm accused of fraud, a court-appointed receiver said today.
But the search for money invested by scores of local governments, particularly from Iowa, was hampered, they said, by the absence of crucial documents from the firm's records.
The receiver, Robert E. Carlson, a Los Angeles lawyer, said Steven D. Wymer, president and owner of Institutional Treasury Management of Irvine, Calif., transferred the $65 million from client accounts at Refco Securities Inc. of New York to Shearson Lehman Brothers.
The transfer was made two to five days before the Securities and Exchange Commission obtained a court order on Wednesday freezing Institutional Treasury's assets.


CENTRAL AMERICA A NEW DRUG FOCUS
Repeatedly circling the mountains around Tajumulco Volcano in extreme western Guatemala one recent day, a bright blue spray plane escorted by two armed helicopters made its daily attack on fields of opium poppies.
The American pilots on the three craft talked by radio until one of them picked out a room-sized poppy field almost hidden among the wildflowers and dense growth.
Then the Thrush plane released a burst of herbicide, which hung momentarily in the near-freezing air two miles above sea level before settling over the crop.


Two Hospitals, Two Missions -- A Special Report.; A Health Care Quandary Over Training of Doctors
To administrators at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center, Dr.
Salvatore J. Corso is a student and his patients are his textbooks.
"I need multiple injuries, high-speed injuries, car accidents, gunshot wounds," says Dr.
Corso, who is near the end of a five-year residency in orthopedic surgery.
His education will not be complete, he adds, if he only sees "bread and butter" cases like "an 8-year-old with a thigh fracture."


Accugraph reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Ms. Hautzig, Author, Weds
Deborah Margolee Hautzig, an author, and William De Vries, a computer software designer, were married yesterday at the Water Club in New York.
Rabbi Rachel Cowan officiated.
The bride, 35 years old, is the author of the Little Witch books and many of the Sesame Street books, as well as two novels for young adults.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and is the daughter of Walter and Esther Hautzig of New York.
Her father is a concert pianist and a former professor at the Peabody Conservatory.
Her mother is the author of "Remember Who You Are" as well as 18 books for children.


Gartner to Go One-on-One When It Comes to Business
Here, in the land of renegotiations and collective bargaining, is a new twist.
Mike Gartner, the 32-year-old Ranger right wing who is an active member of the National Hockey League Players' Association bargaining unit, is fed up with agents' fees.


An Era of Abundance Ends in Nassau County
In an era of plenty, the free concerts at the Eisenhower Park bandshell, the public beaches, the pools, and the golf courses were all among the suburban amenities that made Nassau County one of the best-rated places to live in the country.
They were part of an expansive -- and expensive -- vision of government, paid for by an ever-expanding local economy, that helped keep the Republican party in unchallenged control of the county for three-quarters of a century.


American Dream Turns Into a Moscow Magazine
Richard Karz is convinced that there is an increasing eagerness in the unraveling Soviet Union for information about American culture and the American way of doing things.
Anyone looking to do a quick study on the American entrepreneurial spirit, however, might just consider Mr.
Karz himself.


Secret U.S. Drug Operation May Help Noriega Defense
A secret drug intelligence operation in which Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega worked closely with the United States Drug Enforcement Agency is expected to become an issue when the trial of the deposed Panamanian strongman resumes here on Monday.
Only in recent days did Federal prosecutors learn of the operation, said individuals with knowledge of the case.
They said the operation, which was in place for several years in the mid-1980's, involved the monitoring of flights carrying drug money and the laundering of those profits in Panama, with General Noriega supplying information on those activities to American drug agents.


Homes Lose Power As Front Hits Region
Cold and gusting winds swept over the region Saturday night, tearing down trees, cutting power to tens of thousands of homes and ending a spell of unseasonably warm weather.
Within a few hours, the temperature in Manhattan dropped 23 degrees, to a low of 38 at midnight Saturday, as gusts between 40 and 60 miles an hour whipped through New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.


Asamera Minerals Qtr to Sept 30 1991 1990 reports earnings for Sales


Clinical Technologies Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Puerto Ricans Tilt to Statehood
Both sides in Puerto Rico have cried foul, and voters there may well have been confused by the complex referendum questions put to them recently.
But in a 53-to-45 percent vote, Puerto Ricans rejected what looked like an attempt to load the deck against future statehood.
The results were a rebuke to Gov.
Rafael Hernandez Colon, whose party wants to expand and make permanent the island's present commonwealth status.
The Governor overreached by asking Puerto Ricans to claim constitutional guarantees for their distinct cultural identity, even if their island should become a state.
The guarantees would have included the right to field their own international sports teams.
But these are rights that only the U.S.
Congress and international sports groups can bestow.


Bridge
Consider this general principle of bidding: Honor cards are more useful in a long suit than in a short suit.
This is fine in theory, but it suffers from frequent breakdowns in practice.
Jacks are a particular problem in balanced hands, as witness the diagramed deal.
For the purposes of playing in a spade contract, South's diamond jack is of limited value and the club jack is entirely worthless.
But the heart jack, in the short suit, would be a golden card.
In the North hand the spade jack is of little value, but the heart jack would be a solid asset.


Katherine Rees-Jones Is Married
Katherine Rees-Jones, the director of advertising for the Martha Stewart Living magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Lawrence Hamilton Miller, a managing director of Chemical Bank in New York.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Rider, a Congregational minister, officiated at Waveny House in New Canaan, Conn.
Mrs.
Miller graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. O'Brien of Upper Montclair, N.J.
Her father is the Northeast territory sales manager for Digital Communications Associates, a maker of computer peripherals in New York.


Dance in Review
Mimi Garrard Garrard Studio Theater


Bold New Germany: No Longer a Political 'Dwarf'
Postwar West German leaders so assiduously avoided bold foreign policy confrontations that they earned the Germans the epithet of economic giants but political dwarfs.
This weekend an era drew to a close as a united and enlarged Germany challenged the authority of the United Nations Secretary General and Washington, long Germany's great protector across the sea, and caused its closest European allies, Britain and France, to back off over the thorny question of how to end the war in Yugoslavia.
One year after reunification, and only days after moving to the fore economically at the European Community summit meeting in the Netherlands, Germany offered for the first time since World War II a display of political might.


Frequency Electronics reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Review/Pop; Parlor Songs for Today By a Gentle Practitioner
A harp towered over the stage of the Lone Star Roadhouse, which was crowded with half a dozen violinists, a string bass, drums and, somewhere in the back, a guitarist.
At the piano was Van Dyke Parks, a slight, silver-haired, bespectacled man in suspenders and a bow tie, giving a rare live performance.
As his backup group suggests, Mr.
Parks's tastes run contrary to every pop trend of the last two decades.
No one else would be likely to explain on stage that his songs are about "the mutual interpretation of history."
Mr.
Parks wrote the lyrics for the Beach Boys' hits "Heroes and Villains" and "Surf's Up," and is known in Hollywood as a producer and sound track composer.
His five albums, beginning with the remarkable 1968 "Song Cycle" (Warner Brothers), reveal a songwriter who is steeped in 19th and 20th-century Americana, calypso and both musical and verbal free associations.
He is fascinated by America as both melting pot and exploiter.


EXECUTIVES EXPECT MANY '91 LAYOFFS TO BE PERMANENT
The thousands of jobs being trimmed from the nation's work force by I.B.M., General Motors, Xerox, TRW and other major corporations are never coming back, executives say.
That is the single biggest difference between the current economic slump and previous recessions.
"The recession was a lot worse than we thought, and it triggered this round of cutbacks," said George Davis, director of corporate human resource strategy at the Eastman Kodak Company in Rochester.
"But if it were just the recession," he said, "we would be hiring these people back again. And we aren't going to do that."


Cadema Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Day of Hope for Those Dying of Leukemia
Mario Cooper, a 33-year-old graphic design artist, appealed to the congregation yesterday morning at Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem.
Jay Feinberg, a 23-year-old foreign exchange analyst, spoke to members of Congregation Kehilath Jeshurun on the Upper East Side.


Apparel Industry Money Men Thrive
With the likelihood of another bleak holiday sales season -- and a recent parade of retailers into Federal bankruptcy court -- all ears on Seventh Avenue in New York, the heart of the nation's apparel industry, are tuned to the signals emitted by the low-profile money men who keep track of what companies pay their bills on time.
These financiers, known in the trade as factors, monitor the creditworthiness of retailers from Wal-Mart to the local dry-goods store in Walla Walla.
They act much like an insurer to manufacturers who ship clothing and other merchandise to retailers.


Icy Jets Stuck With 8 Losses, And 9 Lives
Earlier this week, when Jets Coach Bruce Coslet went before his team to give them his motivational speech for the coming game against the Patriots, he appeared before the players without anything written on his legal pad, and told them that there was nothing he could say to them, that the game spoke for itself.
This afternoon, the Jets responded, ripping that page from Coslet's notebook and turning in a performance just as blank.


Paper's Change In California
The editor and chairman of The Press-Enterprise in Riverside, Calif., said last week that he had appointed a successor to run the family-controlled newspaper for a few years until a family member takes over.
Marcia McQuern, the executive editor, has already been named chief executive and will add the title of president when Howard H. (Tim) Hays, the editor and chairman, gives up day-to-day direction of the paper on Jan. 1.


Cardis Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Cut in Funds Rate to 4 1/4% Is Expected
The power of monetary policy to influence the economy has been tested in the last 16 months and appears to have been found wanting.
The series of short-term interest rate cuts by the Federal Reserve Board has had only a neglible effect in reversing the downturn.
Some analysts contend that the Fed, which has cut short-term rates by 2.25 percentage points since August 1990, when the recession began, has been too conservative.
In their view, much deeper cuts in the overnight Federal funds rate are needed to stimulate the economy.


For Mother, An Easing Of Burdens
Sometimes Cheryl H. lets herself remember when she played the violin and dreamed of becoming a "great artist," back before she had to take a factory job to support her alcoholic mother and back before multiple sclerosis left her barely able to move.
But usually the 43-year-old woman looks ahead: to the rent bill, the utility bill, the grocery bill.
She tries to match them on a mental chart with her disability checks.
Then she scours that chart for a gap so she can buy her 14-year-old daughter jeans or shoes.


Old Agonies Revive: Israeli Philharmonic To Perform Wagner
Breaking a taboo of five decades and in the process causing some Jews considerable pain, Israel's premier orchestra said today that it would perform a program of works by Richard Wagner, who was a virulent anti-Semite and a cultural hero for Hitler and his Nazis.
For many Jews, especially concentration camp survivors, Wagner stands as an enduring and hated symbol of the Nazi Holocaust, even though he died in 1883, 50 years before Hitler rose to power.


Empire Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Equivest Finance Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Celina Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


66-Performance Tour Set For City Opera
The New York City Opera National Company, the touring division of City Opera, is to begin a 12-week tour of Puccini's "Tosca" on Jan. 9 in Syracuse.
The tour, the company's most ambitious to date, is to include 66 performances in 57 cities, in 26 states and Canada, before ending in Charlotte, N.C., on March 28.
The production, with 23 singers, 30 instrumentalists and two conductors, is to be directed by Dona D. Vaughn.
The conductors are Joseph Colaneri, music director of the National Company, and Steven Mosteller, assistant conductor.


Cuomo's Task: Painting a Rose-Colored New York
NEW York State has 13 times more cows than imprisoned criminals.
In Florida, California, Michigan and 12 other states, a larger proportion of the population is in state prison.
Five states, California included, have a higher percentage of welfare recipients.
New York is less urbanized than Connecticut, California or Maryland.
And more American Indians live in New York than in Wyoming, Colorado and Indiana combined.


Ruth A. Barcus Has Wedding
Ruth Allison Barcus, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gilbert M. Barcus of North Brunswick, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert David Feinberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Feinberg of Glen Cove, L.I.
Rabbi Lawrence Kotock officiated at the Hotel Westbury in New York.
Mrs.
Feinberg, 25 years old, graduated from Pine Manor College.
Her father is the president of Sandar Associates, a medical technology consulting company in North Brunswick.


Home Shopping Network Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Chicago Dock &amp; Canal Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Novell Move On Software
Novell Inc. said last week that it had created a venture company with Unix System Laboratories Inc.
The venture, called Univel, will develop and market operating system software based on Unix for leading computer processors like those produced by the Intel Corporation.
Novell, based in Provo, Utah, owns 55 percent of the new company, which has been underwritten with $30 million in cash and other assets.


Collins Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


AEL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Brown's Appeal Irks Party Officials
Democratic Party leaders and network officials were irked by the fund-raising appeal made by former Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California at tonight's debate.
Ronald H. Brown, the Democratic national chairman, said afterward that it was "inappropriate" for the former Governor to give out his fund-raising telephone number during the debate.
The candidate did so twice, once provoking a quarrel with the moderator, Tom Brokaw, and then again in his final statement.


New York Schoolchildren Need TB Tests
To the Editor:
While state and city officials in New York attempt to combat tuberculosis in prisons (front page, Dec. 8), the city's one million public school children are being overlooked.


Big Bank's Housing Project
The BankAmerica Corporation said last week that it would invest $70 million to create affordable rental housing for low-income families in California and six other Western states.
BankAmerica's investment will be made through the California and National Equity funds, which are operated by the Local Initiatives Support Corporation, the nation's largest not-for-profit community development support organization.


Harsh Sanction
To the Editor:
By imposing a $60,000 sanction against parents who brought what was judged a frivolous lawsuit when their son was denied entry to the National Honor Society, allegedly for their having spoken out against the school in the past (news article, Nov. 23), a Federal judge appears more interested in ending debate about the nature of our constitutional system than in participating in it.
It is one thing to tell the parents they have lost the case, quite another to penalize them for having sought legal redress.


15 Are Injured In an Explosion In Chinatown
Fifteen people were injured, two of them seriously, when an explosion ripped through a Chinatown market yesterday, spraying pedestrians with glass and sparking a fire that destroyed the ground floor of the building.
A leaking propane heater apparently caused the explosion just before 4 P.M. at the Viet Shing Wholesale Company, a vegetable market at 125-B Mott Street, a Fire Department spokesman, Capt.
Robert Love, said.


Review/Theater; A Family Disjointed And Disillusioned
Whoever billed Stuart Duckworth's new play, "Joy Solution," being presented by Primary Stages, as a comedy has some sense of humor.
The title refers to an abortogenic agent given by an abortionist in a motel to one character, who then shudders through cramps, bleeding and vomiting throughout the play.
"Joy Solution" is, in the words the character uses about her situation, "a sitcom gone haywire."
The time is the day in 1970 when Ohio National Guardsmen killed student demonstrators at Kent State University.
But the place is Detroit.
Kent State, a metaphor that remains hidden, is distant news.
Steve, a failed actor and drama coach, is invaded at home by his two sisters: Esther, an abused housewife, and Judith, an actress who, after many years away, has returned to Detroit for an abortion.


CHRONICLE
BOB HOPE's wife, DOLORES, fell at their desert home and was hospitalized with a broken arm, The Associated Press reported.
Mrs.
Hope tumbled on Friday as she entered her house and broke her left arm, said a spokesman for the couple, WARD GRANT.


Oneida Names New President
Oneida Ltd., one of the world's largest makers of tableware and silverware, has named Gary L. Moreau as its new president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Moreau, 37 years old, was most recently president of the company's Silversmiths division.
He will continue to oversee that division while assuming new management responsibilities for Oneida's food service and industrial wire operations, said William D. Matthews, Oneida's chairman and chief executive.


Virtue Triumphs at the Teamsters
"Goodbye to the Mafia, goodbye to concessionary contracts, goodbye to those who have lined their pockets at their members' expense." With those stirring words Ronald Carey, the apparent new president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, declared a new era for a union run mostly by thieves for the past 40 years.
Four of its recent presidents have been jailed or indicted.
Mr.
Carey represents a decisive break with that sordid record.
Mr.
Carey, unaffiliated with the union's corrupt leaders, owes his upset victory to conditions imposed by the Justice Department in a settlement of an anti-racketeering suit.
Under the agreement, the teamsters were required to conduct their elections by secret ballot, supervised by the Federal courts.
The final vote won't be known until later this week, but unofficial tabulations show Mr.
Carey running well ahead of the other two candidates, both teamsters vice presidents.


Diodes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Welcome to Riley's Believe It or Not
When Dave Checketts saw the photograph recently, the symbolism of it surprised him.
It was a team picture taken last March, when Checketts was named president of the Knicks.
Six of the 12 players in that March photograph are gone.
Former head coach John MacLeod is gone, too.


EFI Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Richard Dyer-Bennet Dies at 78; Minstrel Who Led a Folk Revival
Richard Dyer-Bennet, a singer who helped revive the art and popularity of folk music in a career of concert performances, recordings, composing and teaching, died on Saturday at home in Monterey, Mass.
He was 78 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Regulating Advisers; Big Securities Fraud Case in Iowa Spurring Move for More Oversight
The chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission told a Congressional panel last summer that the nation's 17,000 investment advisers needed to pay higher fees so they could be more closely examined by Federal regulators.
The lawmakers never acted and the chairman, Richard C. Breeden, did not push the issue because of a regulatory paradox: few abuses that might highlight the need for more supervision were ever uncovered, because Federal authorities never devoted any significant resources to looking for problems.
While the assets under the control of such advisers have grown more than threefold in the last five years, and this year exceeded $5 trillion, examinations and inspections of such companies actually declined 6 percent in that period.
Changes Are Expected&gt;
Now officials and industry executives say that is about to change because of a tip from a small Iowa town that led investigators to what could be one of the most important securities fraud cases in many years.


Eastern Environmental Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rochelle Zamore and Joshua L. Waldman Wed
Rochelle Zamore, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin A. Zamore of New York and Roslyn, L.I., and Joshua Lee Waldman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin R. Waldman of Loudonville, N.Y., were married yesterday.
Rabbi Joseph P. Sternstein officiated at Temple Emanuel of Great Neck, L.I.
The bride, 25 years old, and the bridegroom, 24, are third-year students at Albany Medical College.
They graduated from Union College.


The Old Increasingly Being Bilked By the People They Must Rely On
Investigators, prosecutors and social service agency officials say there are signs that money and property are being stolen, by trickery and coercion, from America's elderly at a disturbing rate and that a large portion of the crimes are committed not by professional criminals but by neighbors, health aides, household workers and family members.
Financial exploitation of the elderly, they say, is likely to continue growing as the number of older Americans who are most vulnerable to it, the lonely and those in poor health, rises.
The recession and drug abuse are cited by law enforcement officials as the major motivation behind the rise in such crimes.


Charter Golf reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Quotation of the Day
"No. 1, I have to worry about delivering patient care. No. 2, I worry about training doctors. I can't always get to No. 2." -- ARNOLINE JONES, executive director of Queens Hospital.  [ B8:1. ]


Giants' Biggest Mistake? Playing the Redskins.
The Redskins whipped the Giants today, soundly and embarrassingly.
For the Giants, it was almost a typical performance in an untypical season.
Minutes after the 34-17 game ended, Ray Handley, the Giants' first-year coach, lashed into his team publicly.
His players, told what he had said at his post-game news conference, did not disagree.
They even said most of the blame should be theirs and not the coach's.


Making Sense Of Labeling On Products
Stunned by the growth of products making bold claims for environmental purity -- from "nuclear free" light bulbs and "environmentally safe" socks to botanically correct shampoos -- consumer advocates have begun to insist that trendy words like "recycled" and "biodegradable" have meanings that normal people can understand.
"The marketplace has become as polluted as the landfills," said Emma N. Byrne, director of the New Jersey Office of Consumer Protection, which today will send letters to dozens of companies asking them to prove the claims they make for their products.
"How can anyone really be confident that they are getting what they are paying for?" Processors Want Rules, Too
Consumers throughout the nation have demonstrated their eagerness, even in a recession, to pay more for merchandise that promises to respect the environment, and American companies have flooded store shelves with "green" products in response.
Yet, like food labels that once used the words "light," "organic" and "natural" in almost any way a manufacturer wished, few products advertising their commitment to the earth are required to prove what they mean, and few do.


Weeks Making Most Of Net Opportunities
In his line of work, personality matters almost as much as ability.
He's a target for the opponent and the backup to his team's No. 1 goaltender.
Serendipity, not the schedule, usually determines his status on any given night.
If Glenn Healy is injured or tired or absorbing a shellacking, Steve Weeks can expect to put on his mask and go to work.
And if he has any complaints about that system, Weeks knows that keeping them to himself is just one more facet of his job description.


Dual Role Is Planned for Bush's New Chief of Staff
White House workers anxious about the arrival of a new chief of staff on Monday received a discomfiting holiday greeting last week: a memorandum from the Office of Personnel Management outlining the proper procedure for resigning one's job.
In fact, Samuel K. Skinner, who succeeds the departing John H. Sununu, has taken pains to allay fears that he plans any White House bloodletting, and personnel officials hastily insisted that the memorandum had been sent in error.


Slovaks Are Closer to Hungary Than to Czechs
To the Editor:
"As Slovak Separatism Gains, Havel Faces the Unthinkable" (front page, Nov. 20) speaks of the history of the Czech and Slovak lands as if they belonged to different cultural orbits.
The Czech lands, you write, "shared in the intellectual life of Renaissance and Enlightenment," while the land of the Slovaks had been "an integral part" of Hungary.


A Volunteer Who Doubles in Brass
This has been one of those weeks for Philip Smith.
At work in Manhattan, the boss asked him, right there in front of everyone, if he couldn't be a little quieter.
Working as a volunteer at a shopping center here on his afternoon off, Mr.
Smith wondered if he was loud enough.
The volunteer work was with a Salvation Army brass quartet.
Mr.
Smith stood for two and a half hours in his Salvation Army uniform outside a home-improvement store, playing Christmas carols and saying thank you to shoppers who dropped coins or currency in the red kettle.
After the finale -- a seamless, mellow medley of "Frosty the Snowman," "Deck the Halls" and "We Wish You a Merry Christmas" -- he packed up his instrument, drove home and took a nap.


A Bone-Rattling Roar Heralds the Christmas Season


News or Post: Which Will Fail First?
Can The Daily News emerge from bankruptcy and survive?
And if The News does survive, can The New York Post continue to publish?
Experts in the newspaper industry seem all but unanimous: the answer to each question is probably no.


CML Industries Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Subway Cutbacks Hurt Passenger Safety
To the Editor:
In response to "Poor Visibility Haunts Subway Conductors" by Richard A. Lukin (letter, Nov. 27):


Advance Circuits reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


METRO DIGEST
MAKING SENSE OF ENVIRONMENTAL CLAIMS
Stunned by the growth of products making bold claims for environmental purity -- from "nuclear free" light bulbs and "environmentally safe" socks to botanically correct shampoos -- consumer advocates have begun to insist that words like "recycled" and "biodegradable" have meanings people can understand.
B1.
NEW YORK CITY  A SAD CLASH OF MEDICAL MANDATES
To administrators at the Long Island Jewish Medical Center, Dr.
Salvatore J. Corso is a student and his patients are his textbooks.
To administrators at Queens Hospital Center, however, he is, above all, an employee who must see thousands of patients, even if his training suffers.
This dual view is the reason Long Island Jewish, a private hospital determined to be a major academic institution, announced it would end a long agreement to provide doctors to Queens Hospital Center, a public hospital struggling to meet patients' basic needs.
A1.
LAWYER FOCUS OF INFLUENCE QUESTIONS
A top lawyer in New York City's Correction Department met with senior officials over a contract to electronically monitor released prisoners despite saying a month earlier that she would not because her former employer represented a company that was seeking the contract.
Her actions are now included in an investigation of the awarding of the contract.
B3.
MUSLIM GROUP REFUSED USE OF SCHOOL
A black Muslim group was barred from using the Harlem public elementary school for a speech titled "Are Jews Hiding the Truth?" B2.
New York's cows may give Cuomo the candidate a boost. Metro Matters. B3.
A library on wheels fills a gap left by budget cuts. Bedford-Stuyvesant Journal. B3.
Gas explosion in Chinatown injures 15. B3. REGION  NASSAU LOOKS TO CUT FRILLS
Nassau County has earned its reputation as one of the country's best places to live largely through its expensive system of suburban amenities, like free concerts at the Eisenhower Park bandshell.
And as long as there was money, the system helped keep the Republican party in power.
But now that the economy has soured, Republicans are at a war with themselves as they scramble to scrap the same high-profile services, jobs and -- the Democrats say -- patronage that kept them in power so long.
B1.
NEW JERSEY TO DEBATE TAX PACKAGE
The New Jersey Senate will take up the politically volatile issue of rolling back $2.8 billion in taxes today, facing options of ending all the taxes, only part of them, or none at all.
The legislation that would let the taxes lapse next June is in five separate bills, each affecting part of the tax package enacted last year.
B7.
ALBANY MAKES A BUDGET, QUIETLY
It is standard operating procedure for state budgets to be made in the dark.
Historically, the Governor, the Assembly Speaker and the Senate majority leader meet behind closed doors to negotiate an agreement that is then quickly ratified in the dead of the night.
But even by Albany standards, the current process of negotiating an unprecedented 15-month financial plan has been uncommonly private.
B7.
A MALL AS CHRISTMAS CONCERT HALL
The Salvation Army trumpet player at a shopping center in West Paterson, N.J., performed a seamless medley of Christmas carols as shoppers dropped coins into the red kettle.
Only three people -- his wife and their two children -- knew they were hearing something more than the usual street-corner performer.
The musician, Philip Smith, was the principal trumpet in the New York Philharmonic.
B1.
LEUKEMIA VICTIMS APPEAL FOR HELP
Two young men, one black and the other Jewish, are dying of leukemia.
Yesterday, one went before the congregation at the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, the other to the Congregation Kehilath Jeshurun on the Upper East Side to appeal to people who might be able to provide bone marrow for an operation to save their lives.
They went to the churches because their best chance of finding someone compatible is within their own ethnic group.
B7.
The Traffic Map B4 The Neediest Cases B5


Review/Music; Debussy, Bach, Part And Strauss In Brooklyn
The Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra, like many other musical institutions in the city, is in transition.
Like the New York Philharmonic and the American Symphony Orchestra, it has a new musical director: Dennis Russell Davies, who offered his second concert program as principal conductor on Friday night.
And like Lincoln Center and the 92d Street Y, it is also attempting to redefine itself in changing economic and cultural times: Mr.
Davies, aside from his conductorial position, has become musical director of the Brooklyn Academy itself.
Precisely what is coming to an end and what is beginning in these changes will only become clear during the next few years.
But the appointment of Mr.
Davies was a dramatic one.
He is also principal conductor of the American Composers Orchestra and of the Cabrillo Music Festival in Aptos, Calif., and even directs the musical life of the city of Bonn.
He has demonstrated a devotion to new composition, to various strands of the avant-garde, and has displayed broader tastes and talents as well.
He has pledged to expand the loyal subscription audiences to the Brooklyn Philharmonic, to expand the stylistic range of the orchestra, and to create a distinctive voice in a city already crowded with competing cries of originality.
His efforts will be crucial for the academy too, as its acclaimed Next Wave programming begins to seem a bit like visions of the last wave.


Accidental Shooting Injures a 9-Year-Old
Brandishing a loaded .45-caliber semiautomatic weapon that he believed was a toy, an 11-year-old Brooklyn boy shot and critically wounded his 9-year-old friend as they played together Saturday afternoon, the police said yesterday.


Cowboys Gain Playoffs, Wound Eagles' Hopes
Band-Aids were issued to the 65,854 fans who strutted into Veterans Stadium this afternoon, most of those fans being Eagle rooters who were certain their team's top-ranked defense would put a hurtin' so fierce and so complete on Dallas that the Cowboys would limp away with their 10th straight loss to Philadelphia and with their playoff chances nearly ruined.
As it turned out, it was the Eagles who needed Band-Aids.


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Stocks advanced in Tokyo today.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues closed up 81.77 points, or about four-tenths of 1 percent, to 22,836.67.
On Friday, the index surged 1,042.33 points, or 4.8 percent.


American Pacific Mint reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tax Ruling Threatens Charity Contributions
To the Editor:
The Internal Revenue Service, ruling that corporations must pay a tax on contributions to the tax-exempt groups that sponsor collegiate football bowl games (sports pages, Dec. 5), has done a disservice to all charities that receive corporate support.


Brandon Systems Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Critic's Notebook; A Forum That All but Invites the Usual Responses
After years of critics' laments about the sound bites that dominate a political campaign, last night's gathering of six Democrats who want to be President turned out to be more of the same.
The format compelled it.
Ninety minutes for six men to talk about all manner of problems, one minute at a time, is not an invitation to reflection.
What it does invite are phrases that seem to have worked before.


CPT Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lights Out On Re-creation Of 1892 Game?
All Mansfield University wants to do is celebrate what it calls the 100th anniversary of the first night football game.
No big deal, right?
According to the plan for next fall, the school's red-shirted freshmen, those football players sitting out a year and maintaining a year of eligibility, would re-create the 1892 meeting in north-central Pennsylvania, against nearby Wyoming Seminary, a prep school.
ABC Sports would be invited to break away from its Monday night coverage of pro football and poke its cameras into the game; the players would wear vintage uniforms, the schools could raise some money.


Friends Don't Hit Friends Like That
Remember years ago when the National Football League asked everyone to call those summertime exhibition affairs "preseason games"?
The league never had to contend with the British.
Over there, the Evening Standard newspaper of London refers to the World League of American Football's exhibitions as "friendlies." . . .
It's hard to believe fans telephone all those instant-sports-score numbers just because they have a rooting interest.
Well, perhaps some of them do -- even computer users.
Prodigy, a computer service whose subscribers can call up the price of refrigerators at Sears as well as many other bits of information, offers an instant glance at every game being played, from the big leagues to tennis to auto racing to major college football and basketball.
Then, when the games are over, it provides line scores and stories.
There even is a daily commentary from sportswriters.


Hard Times Land On Wealthy Greens
The economic downturn is encroaching on the privileged world of the nation's private country clubs, traditionally one of the last places to feel the effects of hard times.
"Normally, country clubs are hardly touched by a recession," said Lewis Goodkin, president of Goodkin Research Corporation, a Fort Lauderdale, Fla., company that analyzes the market trends of private golf developments.
"But the white-collar sector hasn't been hit this hard since the Depression. The country club has definitely felt this recession more than any in the past."


Cube Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Acclaim Entertainment, four million shares. Volpe, Welty.


APA Optics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Woman From East Elected as Kohl's Deputy
Germany's ruling Christian Democrats, seeking to bridge an east-west gap in their ranks, chose a woman from eastern German today as Chancellor Helmut Kohl's deputy party leader.
Angela Merkel, who joined the party last year and soon became minister for Women and Youth Affairs, heaved a sigh of relief when the count showed she had won 86.4 percent of the vote.


List of AIDS Newsletters
These are some leading newsletters on AIDS, with mailing addresses, prices and other information.
AIDS Treatment News: Published twice per month.
The cost of a subscription ranges from $45 for those with low incomes to $230 for businesses and professionals.
People with AIDS who cannot afford a subscription are encouraged to call.
P.O.
Box 411256, San Francisco, Calif. 94141. (800) TREAT-1-2 or (415) 255-0588.


Boonton Electronics reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Iranian Official Visits China
The speaker of the Iranian Parliament, Mehdi Karrubi, arrived in China today for a good-will visit, the New China News Agency said.
Beijing, a major supplier of arms to Iran during its 1980-88 war with Iraq, has close ties with Teheran's Islamic leaders.
Premier Li Peng visited Teheran in July to discuss the future of the Middle East after the Persian Gulf war.


Ralph Good, 54, Dies; Helped Save Pinelands
Ralph E. Good, a biologist whose studies of the New Jersey Pinelands helped lead to the preservation of 1.1 million acres covering nearly a fourth of the state, died on Tuesday at his home in Haddonfield, N.J.
He was 54 years old.
He died of throat cancer, his family said.


Democrats Debate Over Taxes and '92 Funds
In the first nationally televised debate of the 1992 campaign, the six major candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination squabbled fiercely among themselves tonight over tax policy and the role of special interest money in the Democratic Party.
The debate, held on NBC nine weeks before New Hampshire's primary on Feb. 18, found the Democrats united in attacking President Bush's foreign policy and economic stewardship.
They asserted that Mr.
Bush had presided over economic decline at home and an uncertain, anachronistic foreign policy that had failed to adjust to the end of the cold war.


Fretter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Sports of The Times; The Jets' Tale of 3 Kickers, If Not 4
THE best place-kicker in a green Jets jersey yesterday wore No. 2.
The problem was, the place-kickers on the Jets' sideline wore No. 5 and No. 4.
By halftime of their 6-3 loss to the New England Patriots, the Jets' 40-year-old place-kicker, Pat Leahy, wearing No. 5 but weakened by a pulled hamstring and a damaged sciatic nerve in his right leg, had missed a 23-yard field goal and Luis Aguiar, wearing No. 4, had missed a 27-yard field goal after having made a 23-yarder.


People
*
Peter Warren, who resigned last year as chairman of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Europe, has been appointed a director at Abbott, Mead, Vickers, London.
Mr.
Warren, 51 years old, will be responsible for coordinating the agency's European services, as well as assisting in seeking new international business. *
Warren Fischer, an account manager at Grey Advertising, New York, has been promoted to executive vice president from senior vice president.
Nancy Axthelm, senior vice president, has been promoted to director of broadcast production from deputy director.
She assumes the responsibilities of Steve Novick, who remains executive vice president for creative services.
And in the agency's print media department, Steve Greenberger has been named vice president and director, succeeding Paul DuCharme, who joined Hachette Magazines.


U.S. Fears Spread of Soviet Nuclear Weapons
With the leadership of the Soviet military in doubt, American planning is increasingly focused on preventing the spread of Soviet nuclear weapons or expertise to the Middle East, North Korea or other developing nations that want atomic weapons, Administration officials said today.
"We've watched the situation very carefully and very closely, and up till now we've been convinced that the Soviets have been able to retain control over their systems," Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said in an interview on the NBC News program "Meet the Press."


A Satisfying Victory For Improving Patriots
When it came down to incentives, the Jets certainly had more at stake than the New England Patriots today at Giants Stadium.
Going into the game, the Patriots, unlike their opponents, had no chance to stay in the race for a playoff berth.
They had only pride and a huggable, grandfatherly head coach in Dick MacPherson -- and, for 19 of them, a contract bonus that surpassed a total of $250,000 with New England's fifth victory of the season last week, and would grow bigger with victories today and in the team's season finale against Cincinnati next week.


U.N. Yields to Plans by Germany To Recognize Yugoslav Republics
The Security Council backed away from a confrontation with Germany over Yugoslavia today after Germany's European allies on the Council decided that they did not want a major clash with Bonn.
The incident underscored Germany's growing political power in the 12-nation European Community, diplomats said.
Some added that it marked the single most visible demonstration of that power since reunification of the two Germanys more than a year ago.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Falcon Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


DCA Revamps Media Services
DCA Advertising Inc., the United States subsidiary of Dentsu Inc., the Japanese agency, is replacing its own in-house media department in New York with the services of the Western International Media Corporation, an independent media planning and buying service.
Western, which already works with Dentsu in Toyko, will provide media services to DCA clients like Canon U.S.A., Japan Airlines and Nikko Hotels.


Greenery Rehabilitation Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Michigan's Fab Five Dazzles Amid Defeat
Before Michigan's first basketball game this fall, somebody called the Wolverines' freshman recruits the Fab Five.
On Saturday, in their first real test after a 4-0 start against weak opponents, the freshmen proved the Fab doesn't stand for Fabrication.
The Fab Five combined for 64 points against defending national champion and No. 1-ranked Duke.
Michigan outshot and outrebounded the Blue Devils, but wound up losing an 88-85 overtime thriller.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
The thousands of jobs being trimmed from the nation's work force by I.B.M., General Motors, Xerox and other major corporations are never coming back, executives say.
That is the single biggest difference between the current economic slump and previous recessions.
They also say the service sector of the economy faces the same type of post-expansion pressure in coming years that manufacturing faced in the 1980's.  [ Page A1. ]
Gov.
J.
Fife Symington 3d of Arizona will be sued and accused of negligence and self-dealing by Federal regulators for his role in the collapse of a large Arizona savings and loan, Government officials said.  [ D1. ]


Question Box
Back in Seattle Again
Q.
Reports of the possible sale and relocation of the Seattle Mariners make one wonder: How many years were the Seattle Pilots in the major leagues and who was their manager?


Clinton Claims Solid, if Symbolic, Victory in Florida Democrats' Straw Poll
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas won an overwhelming victory today in a Florida Democratic Party straw poll of Presidential contenders that many political professionals dismissed as a nonbinding popularity contest.
But as the first test of any kind in the 1992 Presidential race, the voting took on symbolic significance, and the Clinton campaign sought to portray the Governor's victory as an important sign of his strength.


Angeion reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Abroad at Home; Still Little England?
Suppose that 1 of the 13 original American states had at first stayed out of the constitutional union, then reluctantly joined but repeatedly dragged its feet on great national enterprises.
Suppose that state had demanded, and won for itself, exemption from parts of the constitutional system.
That analogy, inexact though it is, gives an idea of Britain's attitude toward the European Community.
Standing aloof at first, Britain finally joined -- but continues to act as if membership were a burden, or even a menace, instead of an opportunity to share in one of the most promising ventures in contemporary history.


Essay; Buchanan's Campaign
My old comrade-in-arms from Nixon speechwriting days (he did "pusillanimous pussyfooters" for Agnew alliteration, while I did "nattering nabobs of negativism") is running for President.
To be more precise, Patrick J. Buchanan is using the Republican primary campaign in 1992 as the springboard for his long-range plan to wrest control of the party from hawkish neoconservatives and pragmatic moderates.
Right from the start, he was a Goldwater "true believer," never happy with the necessary compromises of Nixon and Reagan.


Diversified Human Resources Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; American Literature and How It All Coheres
From Puritanism to Post-Modernism A History of American Literature By Richard Ruland and Malcolm Bradbury 455 pages.
Viking. $29.95.
Near the end of their highly informative history of American literature, "From Puritanism to Post-Modernism," Richard Ruland and Malcolm Bradbury cite an observation made by T. S. Eliot in a review of the "Cambridge History of American Literature" in 1919: "It is inevitable that any work on American literature should contain a good deal of stuffing. The fault is not in the lack of material so much as in its lack of cohesion."


Assembly to Begin Debating Rolling Back Tax Package
The New Jersey Senate will take up the politically volatile issue of rolling back $2.8 billion in taxes on Monday, facing options of ending all the taxes, only part of them, or none at all.
The legislation that would let the taxes lapse, or "sunset," next June is in five separate bills, each affecting part of the tax package enacted by the Legislature last year.
The Senate bills would eliminate tax revenue ranging from $107 million, by rolling back retail taxes on alcoholic beverages, to $1.3 billion in a bill to return income taxes to the 1990 rate.


Duplex Products reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 26


Three Killed as Torrential Rains Flood Hawaiian Island


Credit Cards Cost More Than You Think
To the Editor:
Even "High Credit Card Rates: A Luxurious Necessity" (The Week in Review, Nov. 24) does not mention the unusual method of computation used by most suppliers of credit.


TRANSACTIONS
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
PHILADELPHIA 76ERS -- Placed Brian Oliver, guard, on the injured list.
Activated Mitchell Wiggins, guard, from the injured list.
FOOTBALL National Football League
DENVER BRONCOS -- Waived Barry Johnson, wide receiver.
Activated Tim Lucas, linebacker, from injured reserve.
HOCKEY National Hockey League
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Assigned Arturs Irbe, goaltender, to Kansas City of the International Hockey League.
Recalled Brian Hayward, goaltender, from Kansas City.
COLLEGE
ARIZONA STATE -- Named Ken Phelps men's assistant baseball coach.


Conwest Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Business Computers reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Industries Hoping for Relief With Tax Breaks
From Wall Street to Main Street, business executives are looking for changes in the tax system that will provide relief from the sluggish economy.
Many hope their businesses may be revived by restoration of some tax breaks lost in the 1986 tax reform bill, especially investment tax credits and a reduced capital gains tax.


INSIDE
Spotlight on Kevin Maxwell
After Robert Maxwell died, his son was questioned about what he knew of his father's wheeling and dealing.
Now it is becoming clear that several suspect transactions took place after Robert Maxwell's death.
Page D1.
Under the Gun in Peru
A decade of growing terrorism has led many Peruvian and foreign business executives to list security as their primary problem.
For fear of attack, many executives live and work behind fortress walls.
Page D1.
Ruling the Rule Makers
Behind the criticism of Dan Quayle's competitiveness council is the 200-year-old dispute of whether President or Congress controls Federal agencies.
Page B11.
Order in the White House
As John Sununu takes his leave, Samuel Skinner has two goals: to define White House plans for the economy and to mesh policy decisions with the Bush campaign.
Page B10.
Twist in Noriega Trial
A secret intelligence operation in which Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega aided American officials could boost the general's defense.
Page A16.
What Does 'Green' Mean?
Consumer advocates are insisting that words like "recyclable" on product labels have meanings that normal people can understand.
Page B1.
Arizona Governor to Be Sued
Federal regulators say J. Fife Symington engaged in self-dealing and negligence as the director of a savings and loan that failed.
Page D1.


Chargers Put Crimp in Dolphin Playoff Plans
Chargers 38, Dolphins 30
SAN DIEGO, Dec. 15 (AP) -- The Miami Dolphins had a wild-card berth virtually in their hands, but Rod Bernstine and the San Diego Chargers swooped it away.


World Bank Warns on Third World Debt
The World Bank warned today that the $1.3 trillion of third world debt was a problem far from solution.
It urged richer nations to move quickly to forgive more of the debt.
"The debt burdens of a large number of the poorer countries remain unsustainably high," the bank said in its annual review of third world debt.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A. 8th in Row for Clippers Ron Harper led the Clippers to their eighth straight victory with 26 points as Los Angeles beat Orlando, 119-104, sending the visiting Magic to their seventh consecutive loss.
The winning streak is the longest for the franchise since the 1978-79 team won eight straight. (AP) Lakers 110, Kings 94: Sam Perkins had 23 points and 13 rebounds and A. C. Green came off the bench with 20 points and 10 rebounds as the Lakers defeated Sacramento at the Forum.
The Lakers outscored the Kings by 26-8 in the first nine minutes of the third period. (AP) N.H.L.
Wings' Streak Is at 7 Steve Yzerman scored a goal and set up another, and Tim Cheveldae stopped 28 shots as the Detroit Red Wings ran their unbeaten streak to seven games with a 4-1 victory over the Oilers in Edmonton.
The Red Wings are now tied for the top spot in the overall National Hockey League standings with Montreal and Washington at 44 points.
Detroit has lost only once in its last 18 games. (AP) Blackhawks 4, Flyers 4: Brian Noonan's second goal of the game with 2:16 remaining in regulation gave Chicago a tie against visiting Philadelphia.
Noonan, who had put the Blackhawks up by 2-1 at the 1:35 mark of the final period, took a pass from Greg Gilbert and scored his fifth goal in three games. (AP) SKIING Tomba Wins Again Alberto Tomba increased his lead on the World Cup circuit yesterday when he won a giant slalom in Alta Badia, Italy, for his fifth victory in seven races this season.
It was Tomba's 23d World Cup victory in four years, one short of the record set by the four-time World Cup winner Gustavo Thoeni, now the 24-year-old Tomba's slalom coach.
Tomba clocked the fastest time in both heats yesterday for a time of 2 minutes 22.73 seconds down the steep Gran Risa track.
He leads the overall cup standing with 560 points, 30 ahead of Paul Accola of Switzerland. (AP) Merle Takes Super-G: Carole Merle, the defending World Cup Super-G champion, beat Petra Konberger by 1.15 seconds yesterday in Santa Caterina, Italy, to gain her first World Cup victory of the season.
Merle, a 27-year-old from France, said she picked up speed from a mistake in the upper part of the Cevedale track and finished in 1 minute 26.96 seconds. (AP) GOLF Mike Hill a Millionaire Mike Hill, becoming the biggest money-winner in American golf for 1991, captured the Senior PGA Tour's season-ending Champions tournament in Dorado, P.R., yesterday, collecting $150,000 for winning the event and $150,000 from a seasonlong bonus pool to finish the season with $1,065,657.
The victory was Hill's fifth this season -- the most on the senior circuit -- and virtually clinched the Senior Player of the Year award.
Hill won with a closing 67 and a 202 total, 14 under par on the Dorado Beach resort course. (AP)


Holly Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  RUSSIA ASKS FOR U.S. RECOGNITION
Russia asked the United States to recognize its independence, and that of Byelorussia and Ukraine, in effect forcing Washington to choose between President Gorbachev and the new commonwealth.
A1
Scholars' views of the Soviet disarray.  A14
Mayor Gavriil K. Popov of Moscow said he would resign.
A14  U.S.
FEARS SPREAD OF ATOMIC ARMS
American planning is increasingly focused on preventing the spread of Soviet nuclear weapons or expertise to the Middle East, North Korea or other developing nations, Administration officials said.
A15  U.N.
AVOIDS CLASH ON YUGOSLAVIA
The United Nations Security Council backed off a confrontation with Germany over Yugoslavia after Germany's European allies on the council decided to avoid a major clash.
A1  News Analysis: An unusual display of German political clout.
A12  MAXWELL'S SON UNDER SCRUTINY
Six weeks after the death of Robert Maxwell, his son Kevin is coming under increasingly critical scrutiny over conduct before and after his father's death.
D1  GROUP TO RUN IN ALGERIAN VOTING
The Muslim fundamentalist group that gained a majority in local elections in Algeria last year declared that it would take part in voting for Parliament.
A8  GUERRILLAS AIM AT PERU ECONOMY
At a time when President Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru seeks a sweeping free-market revolution, his main obstacle is terrorism by the radical leftist Shining Path movement.
D1  FERRY CARRYING HUNDREDS SINKS
An Egyptian ferry carrying 649 people sank in the Red Sea.
As many as 471 people were feared to have drowned.A3
Nigerian voting split largely along regional and ethnic lines.  A3
Shimabara Journal: Residents of a Japanese town cannot go home.  A4
A guerrilla leader arrived in the Cambodian capital.  A5
Israel imposed new restrictions on Palestinian movement.  A7
President Hussein ridiculed reports of coup attempts in Iraq.  A6
Army troops and guerrillas are joining forces in Angola.  A9
United States planes are destroying opium poppies in Guatemala.  A10
Industrial countries send toxic waste to Latin America.
A10  National A16-17, B9-11  DEBATING, AT LAST
Just seven months before their party's nominating convention, the Democrats who would be President held their first debate.
A1
In a symbolic victory, Bill Clinton won Florida's straw poll.
B10  TIDYING UP THE WHITE HOUSE
With John Sununu out of the director's chair, officials say, Samuel Skinner will tackle two main goals: to work out a clear picture of White House plans for the economy and to mesh policy decisions with the President's re-election effort.
B10  FIGHTING OVER THE RULES
Who is master of Federal agencies, Congress or the President?
That is the issue underlying the dispute involving the regulatory council headed by Dan Quayle.
B11  JOBS THAT WON'T RETURN
The biggest difference between the current recession and previous slumps is that thousands of lost jobs at big companies will never come back, executives say.
A1  PREYING ON THE WEAK
Bilking the elderly is becoming an increasingly common crime, with neighbors, family members and household workers often the perpetrators.
Investigators cite the recession and drug abuse as reasons for the surge.
A1  IN PRAISE OF JUDGES
The Bill of Rights has meaning 200 years after its creation largely because of an independent judiciary, the Chief Justice said.
B11
More than 150 Bush nominees await confirmation.  B9  GETTING THE LATEST ON AIDS
Doctors, researchers and people with AIDS use newsletters put out by the underground press to get the most up-do-date information on the disease and efforts to cure it.
A16  NORIEGA AS DRUG INFORMANT
Lawyers for Manuel Antonio Noriega, seeking to portray him as an ally rather than foe of the United States Government, may cite a secret operation in which the general worked with the United States drug enforcement officials.
A16
Park officials sue skeet shooters over cleanup of a lake.
A17  Metropolitan Digest, B1 IN HOSPITAL, MISSIONS COLLIDE
To the medical schools that staff city hospitals, patients are their textbooks.
But to hospitals, the doctors are employees coping with an ever-rising load of basic needs.
The conflict has led Long Island Jewish Medical Center to sever its ties to Queens Hospital Center, and is straining similar relations at other institutions.
A1  Business Digest, D1 Sports C1-10  Basketball: Already a happy new year for Knicks.
C1  Column: Anderson on Jet kickers.
C6  Features: Sidelines.
C2  Football: Jets beaten but stay alive.
C1  Dolphins lose chance to clinch wild-card spot.
C6  Satisfying victory for Patriots C7  Cowboys beat Eagles and gain playoffs.
C9  Golf: Country clubs feel recession's pinch.
C5  Hockey: Gartner goes one-on-one.
C3  Weeks comes through for Islanders.
C3  Obituaries D11  Richard Dyer-Bennet, minstrel  Arts/Entertainment C11-18  ISRAEL'S MUSICAL TABOO
Reopening what for many Holocaust survivors is a painful wound, the Israeli Philharmonic has said it intends to perform a program of the works of Richard Wagner, the Nazis' favorite composer.
A1  "Bugsy" does better than predicted.
C11  Theater: "Joy Solution." C14  Music: Brooklyn Philharmonic.
C11  Rock by Family Stand.
C11  Bruce Cockburn's songs.
C12  Dance: Dance in Review.
C12  Word and Image: "In the Nick of Time." C11  Tracing American literature.
C15  "Antony and Cleopatra." C18  Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials A18  Wrong Rx for health.
Virtue wins at the teamsters.
A short cheer for the I.R.S.
Puerto Ricans tilt to statehood.
Letters A18  William Safire: Buchanan's campaign.
A19  Anthony Lewis: Still Little England?
A19  John R. Bolton: Zionism is not racism.
A19  Matthew D. Shapiro: Economic stimulant -- sales tax.
A19  Neediest Cases B5


Voices of Soviet Experts: What Outlook for the Kremlin's Defunct Empire?
James Billington  Librarian of Congress, Russian historian
Gorbachev really did four great things.
One was glasnost -- he opened up the Soviet Union.
Two, he brought into being serious representative institutions.
Three, he made the decision not to use the army in East Germany.
Four, in August he made the decision not to legitimize the junta in any way.
Any one of those would have been remarkable.
All four makes for an important place in history, despite his, on balance, retrogressive role for most of the last year.


Consumer Optimism Improves a Bit
Consumer spirits, which tumbled to recession levels in November, did not slip further in December and may even have improved marginally, according to the University of Michigan Survey of Consumer Sentiment.
"The consumer is pretty depressed but not yet catatonic," Robert A. Brusca, chief economist at Nikko Securities, said Friday after the survey was released.


The Talk of Hollywood; Critics' Warm Words Dispel Predictions Of Doom for 'Bugsy'
It is the best of times and the not so best of times for Sony Pictures Entertainment.
On Saturday, the Barry Levinson film "Bugsy" won the Los Angeles Film Critics award as the best movie of the year, a triumph not only for the director but also for the star, Warren Beatty, who plays the gangster Bugsy Siegel.
Only weeks ago, the film was brushed aside by many in the film industry who hadn't even seen it.


CHRONICLE
The last time PAUL TAYLOR, the choreographer who heads his own company, tried to bring an unusual animal back from abroad -- a scarab beetle from Egypt -- he breezed right through customs.
The customs agent recognized him and said he liked to sing, "so I said would you sing for me," Mr.
Taylor recalled the other day.
"He did some operatic arias, everyone applauded and he motioned me right through."
The other day, Mr.
Taylor was returning from London, where his troupe had performed for QUEEN ELIZABETH.
He thought he spotted the same agent, and he asked him, "Are you the man that sings?"


Shimabara Journal; Tokyo Feels Unexpected Volcano Fallout: Anger
Earthquakes, typhoons and other natural disasters have been so common in Japan's history that stoicism in the face of them has become part of the national character.
Harushige Taniguchi, a weathered tobacco farmer, says that after the Mount Unzen volcano erupted in June, covering parts of this seaside town with ash, lava and gas, killing 43 people and forcing him from the land he had spent his life working, he merely began to plan how he would rebuild his life.
By no means has this been Japan's deadliest disaster, but what has made it a new kind of challenge is the fact that, six months later, Mr.
Taniguchi and more than 8,000 other residents are still unable to return to their homes, which lie in a guarded evacuation zone.
It is uncertain when, if ever, they will.
Mount Unzen remains an angry, smoldering presence above the area, with the whitish gray lava dome at its peak bulging ominously, and scientists say it is too unstable for residents to return.


Correction Lawyer's Role On Contract Stirs Scrutiny
A top lawyer in New York City's Correction Department met with senior officials over a contract to electronically monitor released prisoners despite saying a month earlier that she would not because her former employer represented a company that was seeking the contract.
The presence of the lawyer, Allison Lewis-Smith, at a Sept. 5 meeting of six senior department executives apparently is inconsistent with a statement that she made last month that "I completely removed myself from any involvement" in the awarding of the contract.
That meeting is now a new element in an investigation to determine if any department official improperly influenced the award.


Review/Television; A Miracle! Frosty New Yorkers Thawed by Santa
When it comes to Santa Claus and measuring what has come to be known as the holiday spirit, New York City is apparently the ultimate litmus test.
If Santa can make it here, he can make it anywhere.
The evidence, admittedly shaky, can be found in Christmas movies ranging from the evergreen "Miracle on 34th Street" to tonight's overly eager but reasonably charming "In the Nick of Time," a Walt Disney Television entry being broadcast on NBC at 9, a bit late for the younger audiences who would appreciate it most.
It's crisis time at the North Pole.
Because of an accounting error, Santa didn't realize that his 300-year tenure is up this year.
A new Santa must be found before Christmas Eve, and there are only four days left.
So, for no compelling reason, the old red-suited fellow heads for Manhattan, or at least a reasonable Canadian facsimile thereof, and begins his search.
"If I don't find someone to take my place," he keeps patiently explaining, "Christmas and I will die."


McAdams Forms Division To Focus on Latest Drugs
A HEALTH-CARE advertising agency that began with an account for one of the oldest remedies, cod liver oil, is forming a division to handle some of the newest high-technology drugs.
The Helix division of William Douglas McAdams Inc., a New York shop that is devoted to health-care advertising, will specialize in biotechnology drug products.
Heading the autonomous division as president is Peter L. Parks, who continues as a senior vice president and group account supervisor at the parent agency.


Honors
*
The Advertising Hall of Fame has elected three more members: Neil H. Borden, an author and advertising educator at the Harvard Business School; Richard C. Christian, an advertising educator at Northwestern University, and Theodore S. Repplier, the first president of the Advertising Council.
The trio will be honored at a luncheon induction ceremony in New York on March 31.


U.S. to File S.&amp; L. Lawsuit Against Arizona Governor
The Governor of Arizona, J. Fife Symington 3d, will be sued and accused of negligence and self-dealing by Federal regulators for his role in the collapse of a large Arizona savings and loan, Government officials said today.
Stephen J. Katsanos, a spokesman for the Resolution Trust Corporation, said the agency would file a civil lawsuit in Federal District Court in Phoenix on Monday, seeking more than $140 million from Mr.
Symington and 12 other former directors and officers of the Southwest Savings and Loan Association.


Dance in Review
Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater  City Center 131 West 55th Street Through Dec. 29
Dudley Williams is a wonder.
He has been dancing with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater for nearly three decades now, but there is still nobody like him.
It is not merely a matter of the young dancer's "pretty body" versus the "wise body" of maturity, as Rudolf Nureyev so perceptively put it in the recently released film "Cage/Cunningham." Mr.
Williams has left a distinctive mark on everything he performs.
And he was as quietly impressive as ever in Mr.
Ailey's "Reflections in D," presented by the Ailey company on Friday night at City Center.


California Amplifier Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 30


Zionism Is Not Racism
On Nov. 10, 1975, the United Nations General Assembly sunk to its moral nadir when it approved, by a 2 to 1 margin, Resolution 3379, which declared that Zionism was a form of racism.
This proposition is a vestige of a dark period now gone by, yet it remains a serious stain on the integrity of the U.N.
Today, the Assembly is to vote to renounce Resolution 3379.
The expected repeal will further reinvigorate the U.N. and help lay the foundations for the U.N. of the future.


Gallery of History Inc. reports earnings for Year to Sept 30


Review/Rock; Bruce Cockburn Sings Of Love and Politics
Among the Bob Dylan-influenced performers who proliferated in the early 1970's, Bruce Cockburn has enjoyed a steady, low-profile career that has defied the record industry's conventional boom-and-bust mentality concerning talent and trends.
Except for one single, "Wondering Where the Lions Are," which was released 11 years ago, the Canadian singer and songwriter has gone virtually hitless in the United States, yet has still been able to put out album after album on various record labels, and to maintain a small, steady following.
Working in a confessional genre many of whose major talents began to burn out after the age of 35, Mr.
Cockburn has not lost his edge as he has matured.
Now 46, he recently signed with Columbia Records, which brought out "Nothing but a Burning Light," the finest album of his career.
And on Saturday evening, Mr.
Cockburn gave a concert at Town Hall that was incandescent in its intelligence, fervor and musical balance.


BankUnited reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Justice Cites Court's Role in Bill of Rights
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist marked the 200th anniversary of the Bill of Rights today with a speech emphasizing the role of an independent judiciary in making the Constitution's first 10 amendments "the living reality that they are today."
"Lofty-sounding declarations mean little in the absence of an institutional structure to give them meaning," the Chief Justice told an invited audience at the National Archives, where the original Bill of Rights is on display along with the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution.


Jack Bober, Investment Executive, 49
Jack Bober, a former investment executive, died on Thursday at his home in New Vernon, N.J.
He was 49 years old.
He died of cancer, his family said.


Market Place; United Airlines: A Global Power
BY winning the bidding on Pan American's Latin American routes last week, United Airlines positioned itself as the world's leading international carrier, particularly strong in markets that are expected to grow faster than its domestic routes.
There is limited entry for competitors on the routes to Brazil and Argentina because bilateral treaties restrict the market.
And with the heavy business travel between those countries and the United States, those routes were money makers even for Pan Am.
"Their economies are well developed, and they have generated a lot of travel over the years," said Dan Kasper, a consultant and expert on international aviation at Harbridge House, a consulting group.
"Entry and capacity have also been restricted."


Dividend Meetings


Cimarron Petroleum reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 31


Del Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Nov 2


Visitors Met With Gentle Hue
HAYDEN FRY, the Iowa football coach, who studied psychology as well as pigskin, decided about 10 years ago to paint the visitors' locker room at Iowa City a pleasant shade of pink.
Pink, he had learned in his studies, tends to make one docile.
And there's nothing better than a visiting, docile football player.
Last year, Colorado State, impressed with the home record of Fry's teams, painted its visitors locker room pink, too.


Wheaton Wins the Bundle Of Bread
David Wheaton was surprisingly down to earth after winning $2 million today by beating Michael Chang, 7-5, 6-2, 6-4, in the final of the Grand Slam Cup here at Olympia Hall.
"This is not something I will go around flaunting because that is not the way I feel about it," said Wheaton, who had previously won $1.4 million in his professional career.


Varied Issues Delay U.S. Nominees' Confirmation
When the Senate adjourned last month until January, more than 150 of President Bush's nominees to various executive and judiciary positions were still awaiting confirmation, and an impatient White House complained about the slow pace of the confirmation process.
Some of the delays are merely logistical: it can take up to six weeks just to conduct the required background checks for a nominee.
But some nominations, especially to judicial, foreign and economic positions, become entangled in ideological feuds or policy debates that can drag on for months.


Bowl America Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Latin Nations Getting Others' Waste
About a year ago, officials of Argentina's customs office became alarmed about some of the applications that were crossing their desks.
One businessman wanted to import 5,000 tons of highly toxic industrial solvents for recovery.
Another wanted to bring in soil with low levels of radioactivity.
There were other requests to bring in tons of toxic waste from PVC plants and proposals to import hundreds of thousands of tons of waste plastics.


At Heart of Debate on Quayle Council: Who Controls Federal Regulations?
The political dust storm stirred up in recent weeks over the actions of the White House Council on Competitiveness involves more than ideology.
Behind the arguments over whether the council secretly serves as a back door for business interests seeking regulatory relief is a 200-year-old legal issue: whether Congress or the President controls Federal agencies.
The council, headed by Vice President Dan Quayle, was established by President Bush in 1989 to review regulations issued by Federal agencies, with the aim of insuring that they do not unduly harm the competitiveness of American business.


SUNY-Albany Coach Well-Schooled in Victories
JERRY TARKANIAN, don't look back. Somebody's gaining on you.
He is RICHARD (DOC) SAUERS, who took over as basketball coach at the New York State College for Teachers back in 1955, and who is now gunning for his 600th victory at the school.
These days, the school goes by the name of SUNY-Albany.


Brazilians Take Pains To Save Sea Turtles
A DECADE ago, the slaughter of sea turtles along Brazil's 4,600-mile South Atlantic coastline was a saga familiar to defenders of endangered species in third world countries.
Conservation went no further than a list of endangered turtle species kept on file at the nation's environmental protection organization, then called the Brazilian Institute for Forestry Development.


Yugoslavs Expect War to Continue
Whether European diplomatic recognition of Croatia comes within a week or a month, the two sides in Yugoslavia's war envision continuing and even intensified conflict.
Senior Croatian officials said today that regardless of when the recognition promised by Germany comes they would not bargain over territory captured by the Serb-dominated Yugoslav Army.
They added that their own military forces were prepared to wage a long war of attrition, even without the increase in arms supplies that some here asssume will follow foreign recognition of Croatian independence.


Corrections
A headline on Friday about a move by Jews into six houses in an Arab quarter in Jerusalem referred incorrectly to the status of the houses.
Ownership of two houses is in dispute, and Israeli officials have ruled that the four others are legally owned by the Jews.
A headline on Saturday about the action described it imprecisely.
It was not a raid.


EXECUTIVES
*
A.T.&amp; T., New York, said that W. Frank Blount, a group president, would retire in January to become president of the newly created Australian telephone company Australian and Overseas Telecommunication Corp. *
Express, Columbus, Ohio, a women's apparel retailing unit of the Limited Inc., named Beth Pritchard executive vice president.


Soviet Military Attends Yeltsin's Talks With Baker
In the clearest signal to date that the military is supporting the new commonwealth of former Soviet republics rather than the disintegrating Soviet Union, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia brought the Soviet Defense and Interior Ministers to a Kremlin meeting today with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d.
At a session in the same room where Soviet leaders in the past met with foreign dignitaries, Mr.
Yeltsin told Mr.
Baker that the new commonwealth would be functioning by mid-January, probably with at least 10 of the former republics as members.
He added that the commonwealth's leadership would have full control over all nuclear weapons.


Bridge
In bygone days it was not uncommon for major bridge events, like the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams or an international championship, to be dressy affairs, with tuxedoed participants dining together before an evening's play.
That is now very rare on either side of the Atlantic, but sociable evenings, with dinner and bridge but without the tuxedos, do occur.
An example is the annual dinner of the North Jersey Bridge Association, held Sunday night in Mahwah, N.J.
During the meal Paul Nickerson of Lodi, N.J., who led the organization for the past two years, transferred the presidency to Janet Packer of Clifton, N.J.
Joe Adamo of Ridgefield Park, N.J., was honored as Life Master Player of the Year.


In Chile, Galaxy-Watching Robot Seeks Measure of the Universe
SCIENTISTS at this remote mountaintop observatory have developed a new machine for measuring the distances to far-away galaxies and hence assembling a new map of the mysterious large-scale structure of the universe.
The machine, attached to one of the world's largest telescopes at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, allows astronomers to measure distances to 24 remote galaxies at a time.


Bit by Bit, More Gifts To Neediest
The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund recorded more than $100,000 in contributions yesterday, the first time it has reached that level since the 80th annual appeal began on Thanksgiving Day.
The $100,850 in new donations pushed the total amount of contributions to just under $1.6 million.
After a slow start, collections for this year's appeal is just $59,000 behind the pace of last year, when a record $4.4 million was raised.


On My Mind; Letter From Moscow
Every day here is so full of fear and hope, rising and fading, so many startling things happen so erratically, the present is so taut and the future so murky that life sometimes seems like the day itself -- cold, fogged over, too suddenly dark.
The city and its people seemed hard and remote at first.
Then I remembered the habit I had as a foreign correspondent -- trying to jump out of the limitations of my own head by thinking local.
So I practice thinking like a Russian -- not masses of Russians but just one, say a teacher in a high school.


Bush Wisely Goes Slow on Economic Change; Concern in This Season
To the Editor:
"White House Memo: Adrift in Bush's Circle Seeking the Common Man" (Dec. 1) reports:


Debut for Mercury-Nissan Mini-Van
The Ford Motor Company will introduce the Mercury Villager mini-van on Tuesday in the hope of giving Mercury dealers a much needed way to attract families to their showrooms.
And the model, built by Ford but designed by the Nissan Motor Company, further raises the competitive stakes for the Chrysler Corporation, whose dominance of the mini-van market may be further eroded.
Frank J. Buban, sales manager of Bob Dusseau Lincoln-Mercury in Farmington, Mich., said the Mercury Sable station wagon had attracted some families, "but if they have three or more children, they tend to want a mini-van."


Soldier Honored by a Prince Is Under Inquiry
A month ago, Sgt.
Robert Snow, wounded by a bomb explosion not far from Saudi Arabia's border with Kuwait, was basking in the national spotlight after Prince Bandar bin Sultan, Saudi Arabia's Ambassador to the United States, gave him $100,000 as a wedding present in gratitude for his role in the Persian Gulf war.
Now, Sergeant Snow is under investigation by the United States Army and may face disciplinary action.
It seems his injury was caused by a small American-made M-42 bomb he may have picked up as a souvenir, contrary to Army regulations, and stowed in his duffel bag, only to have it blow up one night, injuring him and two other soldiers in his tent.
The investigation was reported on Saturday by a Connecticut newspaper, The Journal Inquirer of Manchester.


New York Debate On Smoking Bill
The New York City Council's health committee begins hearing testimony today on a measure that proposes mandatory antismoking public service ads on city-owned property.
The Tobacco Product Regulation Act, sponsored by the City Council Speaker, Peter Vallone, and supported by Mayor David N. Dinkins, would require that for every three cigarette ads in buses, bus stop shelters, telephone booths and subway stations, a similar space be provided free-of-charge for an antismoking ad.
The agencies that sell the space to the tobacco companies would be responsible for offering the free space.


Giants Hire Robinson
BILL ROBINSON, the former Mets' coach and a big league outfielder for 14 seasons, has been been named manager of the San Francisco Giants' Class AA Shreveport team in the Texas League.
Most recently, Robinson was a baseball analyst for ESPN. (AP)


Jets Seem Stuck, but Coslet Sticks With O'Brien
Coming off a 6-3 loss to New England on Sunday in which the Jets' offense did absolutely nothing, and going into a game this Sunday with Miami that will determine which team makes the playoffs, Jets Coach Bruce Coslet feels more comfortable staying the course than embracing a philosophy of viva la difference.
So, for better or worse, Coslet has placed the Jets' chances of beating the Dolphins in the hands of quarterback Ken O'Brien, who seems incapable of doing the things that Coslet's offensive scheme requires.
It is a dicey situation, but one that the Jets have lived with all season because there are no viable options.


Market Place; A Popular Bond Under Tax Threat
A POPULAR financing vehicle that has enabled companies to save huge sums in taxes, and provided investors with a relatively safe way to play the stock market, is being threatened by a tax dispute.
The Internal Revenue Service, in a case involving the A. E. Staley Manufacturing Company, has challenged the tax advantages of zero-coupon convertible bonds, best known among investors by the acronym LYON, which stands for liquid yield option notes.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.62
4.00
7.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.15
4.15
6.76
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.16
4.18
6.74
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.71
6.72
7.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.75
7.76
8.17
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.80
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.80
6.83
7.44
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


GATT Talks Near End
The head of the Geneva-based General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Arthur Dunkel, has ordered that the seven negotiating groups working on a new international trade pact wind up Wednesday, Carla A. Hills, the United States trade Representative, said today.
Mr.
Dunkel had previously announced he would propose a compromise on Friday; the earlier deadline is to permit time to prepare a draft agreement.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business on Sunday about the General Motors Corporation rendered incorrectly a spokesman's statement about possible changes in top management.
The spokesman said no management changes would be announced on Wednesday, when details of a cost-cutting plan are to be released.


Less Clout for Esposito Means More for Steinbrenner
The Canadian-dominated winter sport of ice hockey will make its debut next October in sunny Florida with major financial backing from Japanese investors and significant involvement from two well-known, strong-willed New York sports figures: Phil Esposito, a former player, broadcaster, coach and general manager of the Rangers, and George Steinbrenner, the exiled owner of the Yankees.
Phil and George don't necessarily see eye to eye.
In the year since the expansion franchise was conditionally awarded to Tampa, Steinbrenner's influence has grown while Esposito's power has diminished.
Their future relationship, and how it affects the team, could be interesting.


Blue Jays' Key Suffers Broken Right Ankle
Toronto Blue Jays left-hander JIMMY KEY broke his right ankle Sunday during an accident outside his home in Tarpon Springs, Fla., and will be in a cast for the next four weeks.


Classical Music in Review
Delores Ziegler
Weill Recital Hall
Delores Ziegler's mezzo-soprano has been busy dealing with bigger venues than the one she appeared in on Friday night.
Indeed, Weill's 268-seat space demanded tactics perhaps different from the ones this young American has had to employ in the major opera houses of New York and Paris.


Mayors Report a Rise in Hunger
America's cities have more hungry and homeless people than they can feed and house, and the situation is getting worse, the United States Conference of Mayors said today.
In a report on a survey of 28 cities, the conference also said that officials in nearly half of those cities reported evidence of a public backlash against homeless people.


Jets' Dawkins Hurt in Crash
Jets receiver Dale Dawkins fractured his right leg when the car he was driving struck a tree on the Northern State Parkway in Roslyn, L.I., at 4:05 A.M. today.
Dawkins was charged by the New York State police with driving while intoxicated and will be arraigned Jan. 27 at Nassau County court.


Accounting Rule for Assets
Public companies will have to disclose updated information about many of their assets and liabilities in the footnotes to their 1992 annual reports, under an accounting rule issued yesterday by the Financial Accounting Standards Board.
The new rule was passed by the six-member board on Nov. 27.
It is one response to the criticism that part of the savings and loan crisis could have been averted if institutions had included more relevant information in their regular financial reports.


G.M. Woes Add to Pressure on Saturn
Detroit's pronouncements ricochet around Spring Hill, Tenn., like bullets off a tin fence.
On the other side of a knoll in the tiny town south of Nashville, the nation's No. 1 auto maker is feeling its way into the future of car manufacturing and trying -- sometimes fitfully, sometimes earnestly -- to shake off the sins of the past.
So it is not surprising that an ominous announcement from General Motors' headquarters last Wednesday raised tensions at G.M.'s Saturn factory.
As the corporation braces for a major round of plant closings and layoffs at its 32 North American assembly plants, the pressure builds for Saturn to deliver on its promise to efficiently build high-quality cars and to teach G.M. the ways of the future.


For Evening, Anything Goes (Almost)
Some women do their celebrating close to home.
Others head south for a week or more in the sun.
For many, the festive period between Christmas and New Year's Day brings an urge to dress up, whether the occasion is an office party or a formal dinner.
It's a time for self-expression, since there are even fewer rules about party clothes than there are for day wear, all fashion being in a permissive phase.


Wegman Is Honored
BILL WEGMAN, winner of 15 games for the Milwaukee Brewers after missing most of the previous two seasons with arm troubles, yesterday was named the 1991 winner of the Hutch Award, presented annually for the last 27 years to a player who overcomes a form of physical adversity to prolong or restore his career.
Last season, Wegman had a 15-7 record and a 2.84 e.r.a. (AP)


Egyptians Find Statues
Egyptian construction workers digging for a foundation for a post office in a town about 300 miles south of Cairo found a granite statue of Ramses the Great, antiquities officials say.
Egyptologists then uncovered the face of a second statue nearby.
The antiquities director for Middle Egypt's Sohag district said the first statue had the markings of Pharaoh Ramses II, whose 67-year rule ended in 1225 B.C.


Giving Users the Gift of Comfort
WHAT last-minute gifts are appropriate for the computer user in your life, yourself included, besides a gift-wrapped bottle of aspirin, some eyedrops, a wrist splint (currently made fashionable by the singer Michael Jackson) and a neck massage?
Seriously, some of the most considerate and loving gifts for computer users are those that address the increasingly common physical complaints associated with prolonged computer use.
Some scientific evidence shows that the association exists, and anyone who uses a computer regularly for hours at a time has probably felt the aches and pains and aggravations that fall under the broad category of repetitive strain injuries.


Suspension for Malone
KARL MALONE of the Utah Jazz was suspended yesterday for one game without pay and fined $10,000 for a flagrant foul against ISIAH THOMAS that caused a 40-stitch slash above Thomas's eye.
Malone committed the foul in Saturday night's 102-100 victory against Detroit.
He will miss tonight's game against Charlotte.


U.N. Repeals Its '75 Resolution Equating Zionism With Racism
The United Nations General Assembly voted overwhelmingly today to revoke the bitterly contested statement it approved in 1975 that said "Zionism is a form of racism and racial discrimination."
The official count found 111 nations in favor of repealing the statement and 25 nations, mostly Islamic and hard-line Communists, voting against.
Thirteen nations abstained.
Seventeen other countries, including Egypt, which recognizes Israel, and Kuwait and China, did not take part in the voting.  [ Roll-call, page A12. ]


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Richard Wins in Hawaii  Deb Richard won the first two holes and led thereafter in beating Kris Tschetter, 2 and 1, in yesterday's final of the $500,000 Ladies Professional Golf Association World Match Play Championship in Princeville, Hawaii.
Richard won $100,000.
Richard beat Michelle Estill, 2 and 1, and Tschetter beat Betsy King, 3 and 1, in semifinal play.  (AP) N.B.A.
Dumars Leads Pistons  Joe Dumars scored 13 of his 27 points in the fourth quarter as the short-handed Detroit Pistons pulled away for a 103-89 victory last night over the Denver Nuggets at Auburn Hills, Mich.  (AP) Trail Blazers 119, Timberwolves 104: Clyde Drexler scored 17 of his 24 points in the third quarter as Portland, playing at home, extended Minnesota's losing streak to eight games.
Tony Campbell led the Timberwolves with 25 points.  (AP) N.H.L.
Canadiens Regain First  Stephan Lebeau and Mike Keane scored second-period goals as the Montreal Canadiens beat the St.
Louis Blues, 4-2, last night and regained first place in the league.  (AP)


Topics of The Times; The Steamtown Steamroller
A second-rate collection of trains on a third-rate site.
That's the way many historians and museum curators describe Steamtown National Historic Site in Scranton, Pa. -- a costly example of Congressional pork-barreling run amok.
Steamtown owes its existence to a power play by Representative Joseph McDade, a 15-term Republican from Scranton and the ranking minority member on the House Appropriations Committee.
Near the end of the legislative session in 1986, Mr.
McDade quietly inserted a provision appropriating money for the park.
The authorizing committees that normally review such proposals were bypassed.
So was the usual review by the National Park Service, which had earlier rejected the same collection of trains as having no historical significance.


Lawmakers' Constituents Complain About Economy, and Congress Itself
When Representative Rick Santorum went back to his constituents in a Pittsburgh suburb last week, he heard an angry message that politicians were indifferent to American workers and not tough enough on foreign competition.
In western Massachusetts, Representative Richard E. Neal was told that scared bankers and timid regulators were blocking the commercial loans that might give the economy a lift.


In SUNY Student Election, Charges Fly and the Ballot Box Is Chained
Graduate students are ordinarily a quiet insular lot, engrossed in esoteric pursuits.
But here at the State University of New York, they are engaged in a vitriolic political drama with enough intrigue and scandal to rival Washington.
A special election today to determine whether to oust the president of the Graduate Student Organization culminates weeks of charges of sexual harassment, countercharges of racism and allegations of power-grabbing.
Last week, a similar election was interrupted when a masked man swiped the ballot box and sped off in a stolen car.
Today, the ballot box is chained down.


Democrat Gets Top Trade Post
President Bush announced today that he had appointed Don E. Newquist, a Democrat, to become the chairman of the International Trade Commission, resolving an 18-month dispute with Congress over who should fill the job.
The commission, an independent agency that reviews anti-dumping and other cases, has three Democratic commissioners and three Republican commissioners, with the chairmanship alternating between the two parties.
But the chairmanship has been vacant since June 1990, when the term of Anne E. Brunsdale, a Republican, expired and she moved to the post of vice chairman.


ABC to Interview Smith's Accuser
The woman who accused William K. Smith of rape in the case that ended with Mr.
Smith's acquittal last week is to be interviewed for the Thursday night broadcast of the ABC News program "Prime Time Live."
Diane Sawyer, a co-anchor of the program, to be broadcast at 10 P.M., is to tape the interview in the next two days.


Topics of The Times; Banning the Latin Bomb
Brazil and Argentina have now agreed to open all their nuclear sites to full inspection by the International Atomic Energy Agency, thereby helping to insure that The Bomb will stay banned in Latin America.
In so doing, they show the way to others in the third world who want to limit nuclear arms races.
And they provide testimony that prestige need not rest on bomb-building.
It can be gained by putting technology to more peaceful and productive uses.


Tumult Tearing Yugoslavia Is Echoed In Serbs and Croats of Chicago Area
When the Rev.
Mark Kozina arrived in the United States 40 years ago, he entered a Franciscan seminary "to forgive and forget" the miseries he experienced in wartime Yugoslavia, above all the execution by Serbian forces of his father, a Croatian soldier accused of complicity in atrocities committed by the Nazi collaborators who ruled Croatia in Hitler's stead.
Now, at 58 years of age, Father Kozina struggles with a bad heart and with a Roman Catholic parish in a South Chicago neighborhood where Mexican, Polish and Italian immigrants outnumber the shrinking Croatian community that settled there in the 1890's.
In addition, the priest has contended for years with the social and economic fallout from the rusting steel mills, mostly silent now, that dominate the industrial wasteland running down Interstate 90 as it curls around Lake Michigan toward the Illinois-Indiana state line.


Traders Await Sign From the Fed
Prices of Treasury securities and interest rates were little changed yesterday, as dealers waited to see if the Federal Reserve Board would push short-term interest rates down again.
The Fed's Open Market Committee is scheduled to meet today in Washington amid speculation that it will lower its target for the overnight Federal funds rate by a quarter of a percentage point and drop its discount rate by half a point.


6 in Search Of an Image; Democrats Strain To Be Presidential
Republicans were chortling today over Sunday night's debate, asserting that the six major Democratic Presidential contenders, as a class, seemed unpresidential.
When reporters asked President Bush who won the debate, he pointed to himself.
Republican smugness aside, the first major debate of the 1992 campaign showed that the Democrats are still learning how to use a critical shot at prime time.
The group portrait was contentious at best, the individual performances varied widely, and no one seemed to make a significant break from the pack, in the view of many political professionals.


Handley Muses About a Season of Late Hits and Misses
Ray Handley continued to berate the Giants today for their lethargic and what he called undisciplined season.
He said, in effect, that he would no longer be Mr.
Nice Guy, and any player who did not like that might be happier elsewhere.
Last week, Handley, the Giants' first-year coach, accepted the responsibility for the disappointing season.
On Sunday, after a crushing 34-17 loss to the Redskins in Washington, Handley said the Giants' discipline had disappeared.
Today, at a news conference, he said this had been a wasted year.


Jets Get on the Phone to Allegre
Raul Allegre spent four full seasons kicking with the Giants, from 1986-89, and eight weeks with them this season, but in all his time in New York, he never ventured onto Long Island.
"I've been out there to the airport," he said.
"But that's not even on the island, is it? So, I guess I've never been out there. There never really was a reason for me to be out there."


A Maxwell Flagship in Bankruptcy
The Maxwell Communication Corporation, the publicly held corporate flagship of Robert Maxwell, tonight became the latest domino to fall in his crumbling publishing empire when it announced that it had filed for bankruptcy protection from creditors in New York.
In a statement issued late tonight, the company, which owns several American businesses -- including Macmillan Inc., the big publishing house -- said an important reason its board had decided to seek protection in the United States was because "the bulk of its revenue and operating profit is generated by businesses located in the United States."


Citing Bill of Rights, Bush Praises Limits On the Government
In a speech commemorating the 200th anniversary of the Bill of Rights, amid references to high principle and power, President Bush today threaded his own election-year argument: that the principles of limited Government adopted by the Founding Fathers were reflected in the policies of the Bush Administration.
Speaking at Montpelier, the majestic hunt-country estate of President James Madison, the foremost drafter of the Bill of Rights, Mr.
Bush made no explicit pitch for votes or blunt attacks on his Democratic challengers.
His major point was that the Bill of Rights, the first 10 amendments to the Constitution, was not so much a declaration of freedoms as "a set of legally enforceable constraints" that set out "stark" limits on government power.


CHRONICLE
"Happy birthday, dear park," 160 partygoers sang last night as they circled Gramercy Park on its 160th birthday.


Parcells Undergoes Procedure On Artery
Bill Parcells, the Giants' head coach for eight years until he resigned last May 15, underwent an angioplasty procedure yesterday to clear a blocked artery leading to his heart.
Dr.
Michael Kesselbrenner, attending cardiologist at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood, N.J., said last night that the procedure was successful.
"Mr. Parcells tolerated the procedure well and is now listed as stable," Kesselbrenner said.


ISRAELIS HOLD FIRM ON TERMS OF TALKS
Hopes that the Middle East peace talks would move from procedural disputes to substantive negotiations were set back today when the Israelis rejected as "talkbusters" two new proposals from the Palestinians.
The Palestinian delegation accused Israel of "pushing us toward an impasse" that could scuttle the peace process.


Reporter's Notebook; Pack Is Off and Spinning With First TV Debate
In the universe of spin control, the performance after Sunday night's debate was less than stellar.
Men and women in rumpled suits stood at the center of small crushes of reporters trying to be emphatic about why their candidate had bested the others.
But with the crush of activity, everyone seemed to have trouble being heard.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a Presidential straw poll conducted at the Florida state Democratic Party convention misidentified the candidate being supported by one delegate.
The delegate, Charles H. Purdy, supports Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, not Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.


Review/Ballet; Usual Suspects: Mice, Toys, Humans
The chance to see a performance by Diana Perez, a gifted young gold medalist at the Jackson International Ballet Competition in 1990, drew balletomanes to the Eglevsky Ballet on Sunday afternoon at Queensborough Community College in Bayside.
But the Eglevsky's "Nutcracker," in which Ms.
Perez danced the Sugar Plum Fairy, turned out to be as impressive as its teen-age guest ballerina.
Though smaller-scale, the ballet rivals the better-known productions of the New York City Ballet and the


Stocks Rise Broadly as Dow Gains 4.69
Stocks closed slightly higher yesterday, posting gains across the broad.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 4.69, closing at 2,919.05.
It was the third consecutive session in which prices advanced solidly while investors awaited more economic news.
Traders said market sentiment that the Federal Reserve would cut interest rates further after a meeting of its policy-setting Open Market Committee today had a positive impact early in the day.


Morris Narrows Search
JACK MORRIS, the most valuable player of the World Series, has scheduled meetings with the Toronto Blue Jays tomorrow and the Boston Red Sox on Thursday as he narrows his search for a new team.


Specific Antibodies Made in Test Tube Without Animal Cells
SCIENTISTS mimicking the immune system in a test tube say they have made specific human antibodies, the body's front-line defense against disease, without using cells from immunized animals.
The work marks a significant advance in attempts to design more effective ways to invoke immune responses to fight off disease, scientists say.


Nike Profit Rises by 6%
Nike Inc.'s earnings rose 6 percent in the second quarter of the fiscal year, setting record levels for profits and sales, the athletic shoe manufacturer said today.
Earnings for the three months ended Nov. 30 totaled $61.5 million, or 80 cents a share.
In the comparable period last year, Nike earned $58 million, or 77 cents a share.


Bush Wisely Goes Slow on Economic Change; His Failures Abroad
To the Editor:
We must dispel the myth that George Bush has been exemplary in his conduct of United States foreign policy, which you repeat in "The Partial President" (editorial, Nov. 24).
In reality, his foreign policy has been as disastrous as his domestic policy.


A CITY IN ROMANIA FACES NEW ENEMY
Timisoara, the western Romanian city that stood up to the dictatorship of Nicolae Ceausescu, has new and daunting burdens: indifference and hopelessness.
"After the 1989 uprising, there was a euphoric mood here," said Arpad Gazda, a journalist for a Hungarian-language newspaper based here.
Referring to the leader who replaced President Ceausescu, he continued:


Experts Seek Ways To Destroy A-Bombs
For nearly a half century, the atomic bomb makers of the East and West hid behind a veil of secrecy as they worked on the weapons that kept the world on edge.
But now they are sitting down together to undo their handiwork.


Cancer Clinic Operator Faces Prison for Fraud
A former operator of a cancer clinic who was convicted of defrauding patients who came to him seeking a cure was sentenced today to nearly two years in prison.
Judge Filemon Vela of Federal District Court sentenced the man, James Gordon Keller, to four 179-day prison terms for using interstate communications to defraud cancer patients.
He was also fined $18,000 and put on probation for five years.


MCI's President Adds Chief Executive's Title
The MCI Communications Corporation, the nation's second-largest long-distance carrier and the company that helped introduce competition into American telecommunications, yesterday named Bert C. Roberts Jr., its president and chief operating officer, to the additional post of chief executive.
He replaces William G. McGowan, the company's founder, who continues as chairman.


The Synagogues Found Unemployment Nearby
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 7 front-page report that 8.5 million Americans are unemployed is painful news.
It is even more distressing for New Yorkers, with a rate higher than the national average and more than 440,000 jobs lost in this state in the last two years.


NORIEGA DEFENSE REQUESTS RECESS
Lawyers for Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega today asked a Federal judge in the trial of the former Panamanian dictator to order an immediate recess, saying they needed time to analyze documents about a secret intelligence operation by the United States Drug Enforcement Agency that was disclosed to them only last week.
General Noriega cooperated with the drug enforcement investigation, Federal prosecutors acknowledged today at a hearing before Judge William M. Hoeveler of Federal District Court here.
The covert American operation, called Operation Negocios, was carried out for several years in the mid-1980's and relied in part on information supplied by the Panama Defense Forces, which General Noriega then commanded.


Budget Showdown With Cuomo Set Up By G.O.P. in Albany
The Republicans who control the New York State Senate set up today a major confrontation with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo over the state budget, even as his political aides let it be known that they had gathered the documents needed for him to enter the Presidential primary in New Hampshire before Friday's deadline.
The Republicans said that if the Democratic Governor had not reached a budget agreement with them by Tuesday, which seemed unlikely, they would pass their own plan to close a nearly $5 billion gap in the state budget.
That would deepen the fiscal stalemate, which Mr.
Cuomo has said he needs to resolve before he can announce a Presidential candidacy.


BRIEFS
*
Belmac Corp., Tampa, Fla., a drug company, said it had agreed to buy Rimafar S.A., a Madrid-based pharmaceutical company, for $3 million. *
Cellular Transplants Inc., Providence, R.I., a maker of membrane products for the treatment of disease, said it had changed its name to Cytotherapeutics Inc.
The change is effective immediately.


Mummified Man in Ice Is Tied to Neolithic Age
THE mummified man discovered in a melting Alpine glacier last September is older than first believed, dating from the late Neolithic rather than the Early Bronze age, scientists and historians say.
Two independent tests of radiocarbon dates have been conducted on pieces of grass from a woven mat found with the man.
They show he died at least 4,600 years ago, or about 2,600 B.C., said Sigmar Bortenschlager, director of the Institute of Botany at the University of Innsbruck, which commissioned the datings.
The two datings, whose results varied by about 20 years, were done at laboratories in Uppsala, Sweden, and in Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
Historians then discovered that an ax found with the man is of nearly pure copper, not bronze, as first believed, said Markus Egg, a prehistorian from the Romisch-Germanisches Zentralmuseum in Mainz, Germany, where the man's equipment is being studied.
"Axes of pure copper were no longer used in the Bronze Age," Mr.
Egg said.
Advantage of Bronze
Indeed, the main technological development around 2000 B.C. in Central Europe was that man learned how to make bronze, an alloy of copper and tin, both of which are found in nature.
Bronze is harder and more useful than copper, and its melting temperature is lower, making it easier to work.
The man was first believed to be from the Early Bronze age because the ax is of a style common to that time.
But Mr.
Egg said the style was also used in the Neolithic Age and had been found throughout Europe.
Although the two dating tests are not disputed, scientists say pieces of the body, which is being kept in Innsbruck, will also be dated at laboratories in Zurich and at Oxford's Radiocarbon Accelerator Unit in England.
Examination of the body, which is the oldest naturally preserved corpse ever found, has been stalled because of a dispute over its ownership.
Geographers determined in October that the man, who was discovered at 10,500 feet by mountain climbers on the Similaun glacier, was actually on Italian territory.
Werner Platzer, director of the Anatomy Institute at the University of Innsbruck, said Austrian and Italian officials were expected to sign a contract this week giving the University of Innsbruck the right to conduct research on the body.
Archeologists and other scientists from many countries are expected to be involved in the research when it gets under way early next year, Mr.
Platzer said.
The objects found with the man, including a bow, quiver and arrows, a flintstone knife, a flint lighter and kindling in a leather pouch, are being cleaned and studied by Mr.
Egg's team at Mainz.
About 30 scientists from Germany, Austria, Sweden, France and Switzerland are taking part in the studies, Mr.
Egg said.
In the meantime, evidence now suggests that the man was a shepherd who was caught in a snowstorm on his way over the mountains.
"Not one arrow was prepared for shooting," said Mr.
Egg, who noted that a hunter would most likely have been ready to fire his weapon.
"This means that he didn't feel threatened."
But he added that the man had with him all the necessary arrowheads and feathers and a type of putty to attach them to the arrow's shaft.
Botanists say fields of meadow as high as 9,200 feet in two valleys nearest to where the man was found have been used for grazing sheep and goats for 5,000 years.
But until now, there had never been any material remains of the people who worked and lived there during the summer, when the herds were brought up from the valleys to graze, said Mr.
Bortenschlager, who hopes that analysis of the plants and pollen found on and in the man will show how long he had been up so high in the mountains.
For glaciologists, a major question is how the man's body could have been preserved under a glacier for nearly 5,000 years, said Gernot Pazelt, a professor at the Institute for Alpine Research at the University of Innsbruck.
He said the area above the narrow trench in which the body was discovered was vulnerable to wind and probably never had more than 75 feet of snow on top of it, which was not heavy enough to crush the corpse.
In addition, the trench trapped the man and the ice so it did not move along with the glacier as it descended the mountain.
"It was an absolutely unique position," said Mr.
Pazelt, who noted that the man could have been with companions who died on spots that did not allow their bodies to survive the tremendous weight and pressure of the glacier.


Lawsuit, Lawsuit, Please Go Away
The lawsuit Leonard Kleinman brought against Commissioner Fay Vincent and major league baseball has not gone away.
So, for the moment, George Steinbrenner lurks outside the less-than-pretty picture that comprises the Yankees.
To burst back into it, he may have to oppose Kleinman, the team's chief operating officer and a close friend.
That's no pretty picture either.
Until Kleinman rescinds the 15-month-old lawsuit that accuses baseball of unlawfully depriving him of the chance to become general managing partner of the Yankees in August 1990, or until it is settled sometime in late 1992 or 1993, Steinbrenner cannot come back.


State Budget Cuts Could Double Its Tuition, Stony Brook Warns
In the latest cry for help over proposed cuts in the New York State budget, the State University of New York at Stony Brook said yesterday that it might be forced to eliminate 550 of its 3,000 jobs or double its undergraduate tuition to more than $4,000 a year.
The dire predictions came amid intense budget negotiations in Albany, in which many state agencies are lobbying hard to hang on to past levels of financing during the fiscal crunch that is assured for 1992.


Reputed Mobsters Are Summoned for a Chat, but Most Refuse to Talk


As the Mets Turn: Plot Heats Up
The Mets were a bad television program in 1991, a 161-episode flop.
As a soap opera, they were dishwater dull.
As a sitcom, they were humorless.
So in came the new executive producer, Al Harazin, trying to be the Brandon Tartikoff of baseball, turning around his series as Tartikoff overhauled NBC's prime-time schedule.
He has brought in new cast members like Barry Bonilla, Bret Saberhagen and Eddie Murray to complement Doc Gooden and Howard Johnson.


Judge Rules Against Rapper in 'Sampling' Case
In the rhyming, pulsing world of rap music, when someone appropriates a small piece of someone's else's music without permission, it is referred to as "sampling."
But a Federal judge in Manhattan ruled yesterday that it was outright theft and referred a case in which he said it happened to the United States Attorney for criminal prosecution.


Sandoz Buys 60% Stake In Systemix
Sandoz Ltd., the big Swiss drug and chemical company, announced yesterday that it had agreed to pay $391.8 million for 60 percent of Systemix, a genetics science company started by Stanford University researchers.
The deal valued the four-year-old company at about $650 million.
Systemix's stock rose $19.75 a share yesterday to close at $53 in over-the-counter trading.


High Court to Weigh Redistricting Case
Acting with unusual speed, the Supreme Court agreed today to hear the Federal Government's appeal of a little-noticed lower court decision that has cast constitutional doubt on the Congressional redistricting process taking place in many states.
Two months ago a special three-judge Federal District Court panel in Montana declared unconstitutional the Federal law that for the last 50 years has determined the allocation of Congressional districts.
Under the formula by which that law automatically adjusts the allocation after every census, 19 states are each losing at least one seat in the House of Representatives.


Stocks Fall in Tokyo
Stocks gave up their early gains to close lower here this afternoon.
The Nikkei index of 225 issues ended at 22,736.29, down 100.38 points, or 0.44 percent.
About 260 million shares were traded.
Futures-related buying and bargain-hunting lifted the Nikkei to just below 23,000, traders said, but share prices fell in late trading on press reports that tighter regulations would be announced on futures and options trading.


4 Leaders of Daily News Unions Named to Creditors' Committee
Acceding to a request by The Daily News's unions, a United States Trustee yesterday appointed union leaders to 4 of the 13 positions on the committee representing the bankrupt paper's creditors.
And union leaders have effectively asked James P. Willse, the paper's editor, and Larry L. Bloom, the chief operating officer, who are also members of the paper's board, to seek a replacement for Kevin Maxwell as the paper's publisher and the board's chairman.


Horatio Luro, 90, Horse Trainer; Had 2 Kentucky Derby Winners
Horatio Luro, the Argentine-born horseman who trained the Kentucky Derby winners Decidely and Northern Dancer, died Sunday of pancreatic cancer at his home in Bal Harbour, Fla., the New York Racing Association reported yesterday.
He was 90 years old.
Senor Luro, as he was known in thoroughbred-racing circles, was noted for favoring foreign-bred horses and for shaping up horses that needed attention.
One was Princequillo, who had been shipped out of Ireland in 1941 but was claimed by Mr.
Luro for $2,500 in 1942.
Princequillo went on to win the Jockey Club Gold Cup and to sire such successful horses as Round Table and Dedicate, while also becoming a grandfather to Secretariat.


ABC to Interview Smith's Accuser
The woman who accused William K. Smith of rape in the case that ended with Mr.
Smith's acquittal last week is to be interviewed for the Thursday night broadcast of the ABC News program "Prime Time Live."
Diane Sawyer, a co-anchor of the program, to be broadcast at 10 P.M., is to tape the interview in the next two days.


Classical Music in Review
Westchester Symphony Orchestra
Performing Arts Center State University College at Purchase, N.Y.
If Anthony Aibel, the 23-year-old music director of the Westchester Symphony, looks close to home for piano soloists, who can blame him?
Both of Mr.
Aibel's parents, Olegna Fuschi and Howard Aibel, are concert pianists.


The Price of a $600 Million Gaffe
The failure of New York City's Environmental Protection Department to approve contracts for $600 million in badly needed repair work deals the city a further blow.
Mayor David Dinkins has wisely called for closer supervision of the department, and the Environmental Commissioner, Albert Appleton, has belatedly made some management changes.
Nonetheless, the $600 million gaffe raises serious questions about Mr.
Appleton's stewardship.


A South African Group Boycotts Talks on Transition to Democracy
In a setback to hopes for black unity, the militant Pan-Africanist Congress announced today that it would boycott a convention of political parties scheduled to begin in four days to lay the groundwork for negotiations on South Africa's future.
The Pan-Africanist Congress had walked out of preparatory talks on Nov. 30 after its proposals were rejected by other parties.
It was widely expected to return after consulting with its membership.


A Club of a Higher Caliber
In places like Arizona and Kansas and New Jersey, it is said, doctors relax by playing golf on Wednesday afternoon.
In Manhattan, where golf courses and free afternoons are scarce, a group of doctors say they have found a better way to unwind.
You can find them any Tuesday evening at the Downtown Rifle and Pistol Club.
A self-consciously up scale shooting range, the club draws stockbrokers, lawyers, doctors and other professionals who come straight from work, in jacket and tie, to shoot their semiautomatic pistols.


Nassau Board Votes Budget Of Austerity
The Nassau County Board of Supervisors, in a sweeping repudiation of both higher taxes and the incumbent County Executive, adopted a budget today that sharply curtailed spending and called for thousands of layoffs.
The $1.9 billion budget eliminated $122 million, three-quarters of a tax increase proposed by the County Executive, Thomas S. Gulotta, last month, but at the expense of programs and amenities that residents of this affluent suburb have come to take for granted.


U.N. Repeals Its '75 Resolution Equating Zionism With Racism
The United Nations General Assembly voted overwhelmingly today to revoke the bitterly contested statement it approved in 1975 that said "Zionism is a form of racism and racial discrimination."
The official count found 111 nations in favor of repealing the statement and 25 nations, mostly Islamic and hard-line Communists, voting against.
Thirteen nations abstained.
Seventeen other countries, including Egypt, which recognizes Israel, and Kuwait and China, did not take part in the voting.  [ Roll-call, page A12. ]


Patterns
Armani. Air Kisses. Cash.
They came, they bought, they reconnoitered.


CHRONICLE
Letters written to Santa Claus are not going unheeded this year.
On Seventh Avenue, for example, fashion designers, executives, employees and models have been wrapping hundreds of gifts and sending them to children and families who wrote the letters.


Devils Sign Emma
DAVID EMMA, the 1991 college player of the year, yesterday signed a multiyear contract with the Devils.


U.N. Roll-Call On Zionism
Following is the 111-to-25 roll-call vote today by which the General Assembly adopted a resolution revoking the 1975 resolution equating Zionism with racism: IN FAVOR -- 111
Albania
Antigua &amp;  Barbuda
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bahamas
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Britain
Bulgaria
Burundi
Byelorussia
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African  Republic
Chile
Colombia
Congo
Costa Rica
Cyprus
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Estonia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Germany
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Ivory Coast
Jamaica
Japan
Kenya
Latvia
Lesotho
Liberia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mexico
Micronesia
Mongolia
Mozambique
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
Norway
Panama
Papua  New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Rwanda
St. Kitts &amp; Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent the Grenadines
Samoa
Sao Tome  Principe
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Solomon Islands
Soviet Union
Spain
South Korea
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Thailand
Togo
Ukraine
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela
Yugoslavia
Zaire
Zambia AGAINST -- 25
Afghanistan
Algeria
Bangladesh
Brunei
Cuba
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Jordan
Lebanon
Libya
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
North Korea
Pakistan
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Syria
United Arab  Emirates
Vietnam
Yemen ABSTENTIONS -- 13
Angola
Burkina Faso
Ethiopia
Ghana
Laos
Maldives
Mauritius
Myanmar
Tanzania
Trinidad-Tobago
Turkey
Uganda
Zimbabwe ABSENT OR NOT VOTING -- 17
Bahrain
Chad
China
Comoros
Djibouti
Egypt
Equatorial Guinea
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kuwait
Morocco
Niger
Oman
Senegal
South Africa
Tunisia
Vanuatu


Biologists May Grow Spare Parts for Eye
THROUGH luck and persistence, scientists have at last learned how to coax nearly every type of cell found in the human eye to grow in a laboratory dish.
The achievement, attained in a handful of laboratories, promises to usher in a new era of eye cell transplantation.
Many degenerative eye diseases occur because of just one type of cell that runs amok, the researchers say, so it makes sense to replace those cells alone.


New Pact for LaValliere
Catcher MIKE LaVALLIERE, who last week accepted a salary-arbitration offer from Pittsburgh, yesterday agreed on the money for a three-year contract worth $6.3 million, but the language for the deal is still being negotiated.
LaValliere hit .289 with 3 homers and 41 runs batted in last season in 108 games. (AP)


Classical Music in Review
Juilliard Symphony
Alice Tully Hall
No one who has admired Robert Mann's work as first violinist of the Juilliard String Quartet over 45 years will be surprised to learn that Mr.
Mann is a versatile and well-rounded musician.
In fact, he was represented in two other roles at the Juilliard Symphony concert on the evening of Dec. 10, conducting the premiere of his own Concerto for Orchestra, completed this year.


Finding Romania, By Way Of Queens
What was the most ironical obstacle in finding the perfect cast for "Mad Forest," the critically praised new play by Caryl Churchill?
That would be the fitness gap.
"So many actors we saw were in such peak condition," said Mark Wing-Davey, the director of the play presented by the New York Theater Workshop.
"They looked as if they were just out of the gym. Which was not exactly the look we needed for a work about the crisis in Romania."
"So you chose only the wastrels, did you?" asked Mary Shultz, who plays five different characters in "Mad Forest." She raised a laugh from Mr.
Wing-Davey and two of her acting colleagues.
They had gathered on the silent stage of the Perry Street Theater in Manhattan on a recent afternoon to talk about the play that has had its run extended to Jan. 25.


The News, Close to the Edge Again
At The Daily News it is sinking in that Robert Maxwell, the man who promised to save the newspaper that practically invented tabloid journalism in the United States, has actually brought it to the brink of disaster -- again.
It is the "again" part that really hurts.


Bronx Shooting Leaves 3 Dead And 2 Injured
Three people were killed and two others were wounded when two men sprayed gunfire along at least a quarter of a block in the South Bronx last night, the police and neighborhood residents said.
Four police officers arriving at the scene were injured, though none seriously, when one of the victims apparently ran out into the street, causing two patrol cars to collide.


Huge Budgets to Continue For 'The Addams Family'
MAUREEN WEINER, a 9-year-old fourth grader in New York, has seen "The Addams Family" twice with her pals.
On her recommendation, Maureen's 13-year-old sister, Jenny, took their parents.
They all liked it.
That is a movie studio's dream -- a film that appeals to both children and parents and keeps some youngsters going back.
Paramount Pictures is reaping the benefits of such a hit.
"The Addams Family," a spoof based on the Charles Addams cartoons, has taken in about $73 million at the box office since it was released just a month ago.


Cray Computer Is Behind Schedule
The Cray Computer Corporation said today that it was making slower than expected progress on the Cray-3 supercomputer system.
Cray Computer, the company spun off from Cray Research Inc. by its founder and chief scientist, Seymour Cray, said that it still expected to have two prototypes constructed by the end of the year, but that testing of the systems was not expected to be complete.


Just When You Thought the Souvenir Stand Was Safe
Although this season's National Hockey League expansion team plays in a building called the Cow Palace, a hockey player wouldn't look all that fierce with a cow on the front of his shirt, even if the cow was chewing a hockey stick instead of his cud.
So what we have instead is a team called the San Jose Sharks, whose distinctive cartoon logo -- showing a shark biting a stick in half -- is being worn wherever sports fans gather.
The team, which played the Rangers last night at Madison Square Garden, has the worst record in the 22-team league, but its merchandise, especially its greenish-blue shirts, has become the hot souvenir of 1991.


The Party of Isolationism
Do the Democrats now vying for the Presidency have a foreign policy?
On the strength of their public statements the answer, sadly, is no.
During the televised debate on Sunday, the candidates touched on defense spending, foreign aid and relations the new Soviet entity; but they did so only in response to questions from the moderator, Tom Brokaw, and even then tentatively and without much enthusiasm.
Left to their own devices, they barely discussed international issues at all, save in the context of trade.
This fall, in New Hampshire and Iowa, one could sit through hours of speeches without hearing half a dozen sentences on global issues.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A new pessimism on the economy is evident in Alan Greenspan's recent comments, suggesting that the chairman of the Federal Reserve now believes that new efforts to lower interest rates will not necessarily revive the economy, as they have in the past.
So additional measures might have to be tried, like Federal spending or tax cuts.
News Analysis.  [ Page A1. ]


Carbide Planning Spinoff Of Its Industrial Gas Unit
The Union Carbide Corporation said yesterday that it would spin off its industrial gases division to shareholders as an independent company and sell about $500 million in assets over the next two years to reduce debt and increase the parent company's appeal to investors.
The gases division had sales of $2.38 billion in 1990, about one-third of Union Carbide's total.
Without the unit, Union Carbide will have about $5 billion in sales concentrated in basic chemicals, like ethylene glycol, and plastics, like polyethylene, along with a range of specialty chemicals.


The U.N. Expunges a Smear
The United Nations hardly deserves applause for waiting 16 years to rescind a disgraceful declaration that should never have been adopted.
Still, it is a mark of different and better times that the General Assembly yesterday repealed Resolution 3379, which assailed Zionism as "a form of racism and racial discrimination." The pity is that most Arab states, including those ostensibly seeking peace with Israel, voted yet once again to impugn the very birthright of the Jewish state.
Passage of Resolution 3379 was mindlessly destructive of the U.N. itself.
Israelis saw its enactment as proof of the U.N.'s incurable bias.
It offended Americans of every creed, as evidenced by its unanimous denunciation by the U.S.
Senate.
And the tainted origins of the resolution compounded fears about Soviet orchestration of third-world majorities in the General Assembly.


U.N. Hostage Envoy Sets Out
Giandomenico Picco, the Secretary General's envoy on hostage releases, said he was leaving today on another mission to the Middle East.
He declined to give details or disclose his destination.
Mr.
Picco is believed to be seeking freedom for two German captives, Lebanese prisoners and an Israeli airman held in Lebanon and information on other missing Israelis.


Daniel M. Holland, 71, An Expert on Taxation
Daniel M. Holland, a former professor of finance at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and an expert on taxation and public finance, died Sunday at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
He was 71 years old and lived in Lexington.
Dr. Holland died of a heart ailment.


Corrections
A picture caption on Dec. 9 about a multi-ethnic festival in Brooklyn misidentified the Sac and Fox Indian storyteller.
She is Donna Couteau; Cross is her husband's name.


Classical Music in Review
'Idomeneo'
Metropolitan Opera
Mozart's "Idomeneo" suffered not at all from the wholesale cast changes at Saturday night's performance.
Dawn Upshaw and Susanne Mentzer became Ilia and Idamante.


Boeing 757 Order By China Airline
The Boeing Company said today that Shanghai Airlines, China's five-year-old independent airline, had ordered five 757's, worth about $275 million.
As configured for Shanghai, the 757's will carry 200 passengers: 12 in first class, 26 in business and 162 in economy.
The planes will be used to increase flight frequency and expand Shanghai's service to new destinations in China and Southeast Asia.


U.S. Alters Rules on People With H.I.V.
The Bush Administration has devised new rules intended to speed Social Security benefits to people disabled by infections with the virus that causes AIDS even if they do not suffer the full effects of the disease.
Such people may now receive benefits, but the process of reviewing applications may take a year or longer.
Under the proposed rules, applicants who can furnish some medical evidence of disability may receive immediate benefits for up to six months while the Government reviews their applications.


Q&amp;A
Planetary Alignment
Q.
What would happen on Earth if the planets lined up in a straight line?
A.
The chief result would be "a lot of amateur astronomers going crazy staying up to look at it and take pictures," suggested Dr.
Sally Stephens, an astronomer with the Astronomical Society of the Pacific in San Francisco.
The planets are very small, relative to the Sun, and very far away, so their combined gravitational effect on Earth is pretty small.


Barenboim Defends Decision But Passions on Wagner Are High
Anguished memories of the Nazi Holocaust came alive once more, and so did appeals for artistic freedom, as Israelis today debated a decision by the country's leading orchestra to perform a program of music by Richard Wagner, the German composer and Nazi icon.
There was no public talk of disrupting Israel's first Wagner concert, scheduled by the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra for Dec. 27.
But philharmonic musicians said they would hardly be surprised if there were protests in the concert hall over their vote the other day to break a decades-old taboo here against playing Wagner because of his importance as a Nazi symbol.


Winning Rangers Ask, What Took So Long?
The indignity of it all was not lost on Mark Messier, who was red-faced and irritable and, after hitting the post instead of tying the game during a third-period power play, was busy spouting expletives in place of his customary pep talks.
A visit last night from the last-place San Jose Sharks, an expansion team that usually demonstrates no bark or bite on the road, was taken a little too casually by the Rangers, who are fourth in the overall league point total.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS VS. GIULIANI: ACT II, SCENE I?
Almost two years before the next New York City election, Mayor Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani have already begun a kind of campaign, with Mr.
Giuliani charging that the Mayor "retreats into black victimization" and the Mayor accusing his rival of seeking "to inject race" into the contest.
B3.
UNION TO CONSIDER FURLOUGHS
Retreating from a long-held stance, the city's largest municipal labor union has agreed to consider seasonal furloughs to avert the imminent layoffs of about 600 highway workers.
B3.
AFTER WORK, ON THE RANGE
The Downtown Rifle and Pistol Club, a self-consciously upscale shooting range, draws professionals who come straight from work to shoot their semiautomatic pistols.
Tuesday is doctors' night.
B3.
Judge calls rap musician's "sampling" outright theft. B2.
New trial for man imprisoned for rape. B3. REGION  BUDGET DRAMA IN ALBANY
In a day of fast-paced drama at the Capitol, Senate Republicans announced that they would almost certainly pass their own plan today to close a gap of nearly $5 billion in the state budget.
That set up a major confrontation with Governor Cuomo, who desperately needs a consensus on the state budget by Friday if he is to join the Presidential race in time to run in the New Hampshire primary.
The newest major player in the budget talks, Saul Weprin of Queens, was sworn in as Assembly Speaker, succeeding Mel Miller, who was convicted of Federal fraud charges last week.
A1 and B8.
IVORY TOWER INTRIGUE
Graduate students are often a quiet lot, engrossed in esoteric pursuits.
But at the State University of New York in Binghamton, they are engaged in a political drama with enough intrigue and scandal to outshine Washington.
B6.
AFTER AN ARREST, UNCERTAINTY AND PAIN
Two days before Thanksgiving, the Rev.
Patrick M. Hurley, a 51-year-old parish priest from Linden, N.J., was charged with buying cocaine from a drug ring that operated out of a transmission shop.
These days in Linden, a small city bound up with church, family and friendship, the pain is palpable because Father Hurley was special, a man who gave comfort and offered certainty in uncertain times.
B6.
TAX VOTE DELAYED IN TRENTON
Senate Democrats in New Jersey postponed a vote on five bills that would dismantle the largest tax increase in state history.
Instead, they approved amendments that would create a tax study commission, change the effective date of the income-tax reduction and combine all of the rollback legislation in an all-or-nothing vote on the $2.8 billion tax package.
B6.
STONY BROOK CRIES FOR HELP
In the latest cry for help over proposed cuts in the New York State budget, the State University at Stony Brook said it might be forced to eliminate 550 of its 3,000 jobs or double its undergraduate tuition.
B8.
From gulf war hero to target of an Army investigation.
B7.
Neediest Cases B5  Our Towns B9


European Ties for Slovenia and Croatia
Following the lead of Germany, the 12-nation European Community unanimously agreed early today to recognize Yugoslavia's two breakaway republics by Jan. 15, officials said after a meeting of community foreign ministers here.
In winning the accord, Germany compromised by backing away from its insistence on recognizing the republics by Christmas; it agreed to wait for a time to see if peacekeeping efforts of the United Nations and European Community would work.


Restoration of a Painting Worries Dutch Art Experts
When a canvas by the American painter Barnett Newman was repeatedly slashed by a vandal at the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam five years ago, many in the Netherlands feared that what had become virtually a national treasure was ruined beyond repair.
Now, having seen the results of a 4-year restoration by a New York City conservator that cost more than $300,000, some fear that it is the repair that has ruined the painting.
A commission from the Amsterdam city council is scheduled to meet tomorrow to consider taking action against the conservator, Daniel Gold reyer.
Last week the council received a report from a Government forensic laboratory, which the city-owned Stedelijk had asked to analyze the restoration.
The report concluded that Mr.
Goldreyer covered Newman's original oil paints with a quick-drying alkyd coating that is virtually impossible to remove.


Washington Talk; Happy End to Tale of Mass Transit Aid
On the same day in November that Congress promised to almost double spending on mass transportation, the Office of Management and Budget produced a memorandum proposing that it be cut nearly in half instead.
Poorly coordinated White House staff work?
A devious maneuver intended to thwart the intent of Congress?


P.&amp; G. Shifts Its TV Buying
The Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the nation's largest network television advertiser, is consolidating its estimated $650 million in national television buying with two of its agencies: D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, and Wells Rich Green BDDP Inc., New York.
The move narrows the number of agencies handling P.&amp; G.'s national television buying from five to two, eliminating Ayer, New York; Leo Burnett, Chicago, and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, New York.
The company's in-house advertising staff will no longer handle any national televsion buying.


The Letters of Mozart As the Theme for a Play
"Mostly Wolfgang," a play with music by the poet Jon Swan based on the letters of Mozart, will be presented by the New York Art Theater Institute at 8 P.M. tomorrow at Goethe House, 1014 Fifth Avenue, at 82d Street.
The letters used in the play are those between Mozart, his father, his mother and his cousin during a time when the family pooled its resources to send the young prodigy on a tour through Germany and France.


CHRONICLE
What better way for B. GERALD CANTOR to mark his 75th birthday than to celebrate the opening of three more galleries bearing his name and that of his wife, IRIS, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art?
Mr.
Cantor is the president of Cantor Fitzgerald Inc., a financial holding company.


Books of The Times; How People Hid the Holocaust With the Mundane
Tales of the Master Race By Marcie Hershman 223 pages. HarperCollins. $20.
At first glance, the people in Marcie Hershman's startling first novel might live in any small town.
Their concerns are ordinary: bringing up families, conducting love affairs, working hard at their jobs.
A clerk in the local police station loses his wife to his commanding officer.
Two children play hide-and-seek.
A woman tries to juggle her affections for her husband and her lover.
A man worries that his wife will never completely recover from a stroke.


Fall of a Beloved Priest; Linden Pastor Arrested on Drug Charge
When a virtuous man stumbles, others feel the pain.
And in this small city bound up with church, family and friendship, the pain is palpable these days because the man was special, one who gave comfort and offered certainty in uncertain times.
He was a 51-year-old parish priest, the Rev.
Patrick M. Hurley, an associate pastor at St.
Elizabeth's Roman Catholic Church and the chaplain for the police and fire departments.


0.4% Skid in November Industrial Output
After three months of negligible change, industrial output skidded four-tenths of 1 percent in November, suggesting that the economy may now be contracting, Federal Reserve figures showed today.
Although the automotive sector was particularly weak, the decline was broadly based, and analysts said it made further cuts in interest rates increasingly likely when the Federal Reserve's Open Market Committee meets Tuesday for its last regularly scheduled session on monetary strategy this year.


Injunction for Intel In Patent Dispute
The Intel Corporation said today that it had been granted a preliminary injunction halting shipments of a math processing computer chip made by ULSI System Technology of San Jose, Calif., which Intel is suing for patent infringement.


High Court Letting U.S. Keep The Names of Haitians Secret
The Supreme Court ruled today that the State Department can withhold the names of Haitians interviewed by American officials after they had been denied refuge in the United States and forcibly returned to Haiti.
The decision overturns an appeals court ruling in a suit brought by a Miami lawyer on a Freedom of Information Act request in 1990.
The lawyer, Michael D. Ray, then represented three Haitians seeking asylum and was seeking to determine what happened to other Haitians who had been returned.


Saturn Stands Out Brightly Amid the Car-Sales Gloom
A retired Navy officer from California recently drove to the Saturn plant in Spring Hill, Tenn., to let workers know how much he loved his car and offer suggestions for future models.
Another buyer liked her new Saturn so much she went to work for a dealership.
Though it's early, the Saturn car seems to be attracting an almost cult-like following.
Sales, which have been strong, will grow when more cars are available and more dealers are in operation, the company says.


Maurice Brigadier, 89, Lawyer and Teacher
Maurice C. Brigadier, a lawyer in New Jersey since 1923, when he also began to teach what became the state's prime bar review course, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 89 years old and lived in Manhattan.
A law graduate of New York University, Mr.
Brigadier was the original partner of what is now the Jersey City firm of Margulies, Wind, Herrington &amp; Katz, where he was of counsel at his death.


Russians Really Need Management Help
To the Editor:
Right before leaving for Kennedy Airport to catch my Aeroflot flight home to Moscow, I read "Help Russia Now" by Anders Aslund and Richard Layard (Op-Ed, Dec. 5).
I hope this article influences those who can help in ruble stabilization.
The matter is of utmost importance: the unstable Russian economy will undoubtedly lead to political upheaval and send waves around the world.
But a growing Russian economy, with markets open to Western trade and employment, will stimulate Western economies.
Western help now will reap great dividends in the nearest future.


Clarification on Abdul-Jabbar
If Kareem Abdul-Jabbar attempts a return to professional basketball, it will not happen until at least March, his publicist said yesterday.
The publicist, Lorin Pullman, said in a telephone interview from Los Angeles that the 44-year-old Abdul-Jabbar plans to play in his scheduled one-on-one exhibition game against Julius Erving in late February.
After that, Abdul-Jabbar will evaluate his physical condition and make a decision.


INSIDE
Europe to Recognize Croatia
The European Community agreed to recognize the breakaway Yugoslav republics of Croatia and Slovenia by Jan. 15, an official said.
Page A3.
When H.I.V.
Spells Disability
The Government introduced new rules to speed Social Security benefits to more people disabled by the virus that causes AIDS.
Page A16.
Threat to Redistricting
The Supreme Court agreed to hear the Government's appeal of a lower-court ruling that could disrupt Congressional redistricting.
Page A18.


Harvey Royden Jones, Broker, 88
Harvey Royden Jones, a retired Wall Street broker, died on Thursday at Lahey Clinic Medical Center in Burlington, Mass.
He was 88 years old and lived in Plainfield, N.J., before moving to Miami Lakes, Fla.
A native of Piscataway, N.J., Mr.
Jones began his brokerage career in 1923 at the Garvin Bantel Corporation and retired in 1973 as its board chairman.
He moved to Florida in 1978.


Accord to Give the Eskimos Control of a Fifth of Canada
The Canadian Government announced today that it had agreed in effect to grant political domain over 770,000 square miles, an area equal to a fifth of Canada, to the 17,500 Eskimos who live there.
Under the agreement, the Government accepted the creation of a new political subdivision in Canada to be known as Nunavut, an Eskimo term meaning "our land," and approved carving it out of the eastern reaches of what is now known as the Northwest Territories.
The Eskimos hope that Nunavut will eventually become a province, but for the time being it is to have territorial status.


Nuclear Designers From East and West Plan Bomb Disposal
In a first no less remarkable than others of late, nuclear bomb makers of East and West are sitting down together this week to seek ways to undo their handiwork and destroy their creations.
The enterprise comes nearly a half century after the race to develop nuclear weapons began in an undertaking that for years commanded the best scientific and technical talents of both East and West.
The disabling of nuclear warheads is uncharted territory.
Recent arms treaties have spelled out how delivery systems, like rockets and cruise missiles, should be crushed, burned, cut up or otherwise reduced to rubble.
But none has addressed the most basic challenge of all, destroying the nuclear warheads that have kept the world on edge for so long.


Unpaid Furloughs Weighed To Avert Highway Layoffs
Retreating from a long-held stance, New York City's largest municipal labor union has agreed to consider unpaid furloughs to avert the layoffs this winter of about 600 city highway workers, city officials said.
The layoffs were scheduled for yesterday, but they have been delayed until Dec. 29 while negotiations continue between the city and District Council 37 of American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, James F. Hanley, the city's Commissioner of Labor Relations, said.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-14 U.N. REVOKES ANTI-ZIONIST VOTE
By an overwhelming vote, the United Nations General Assembly revoked the bitterly contested statement it approved in 1975 that "Zionism is a form of racism and racial discrimination." A1  ARAB-ISRAELI TALKS BOG DOWN
Hopes that the Middle East peace talks would move from procedural disputes to substantive negotiations were set back when the Israelis rejected as "talkbusters" two new proposals from the Palestinians.
A13  YELTSIN MEETS WITH BAKER
President Yeltsin told Secretary of State Baker that the Commonwealth of former Soviet republics should be functioning by mid-January and that its executive council would control all nuclear weapons.
A1  Lenin's body, if not his union, is well preserved.
A14  Russia backed down from its threat to expel Erich Honecker.
A14  EUROPEAN DECISION ON YUGOSLAVIA
The European Community agreed to recognize the breakaway Yugoslav republics of Croatia and Slovenia by Jan. 15, the Belgian Foreign Minister said after a meeting.
A3  The war in Yugoslavia is likely to continue, and even intensify.
A3  TERRITORY FOR CANADA'S ESKIMOS
Canada cleared the way for the creation of a vast new Arctic territory that will give the Eskimos effective political control over a fifth of the country.
A1  CHINA'S ECONOMY IS BOOMING
The economy of China, governed by hard-line Communists, is booming.
It has a 6 percent growth rate, low inflation, increased foreign investment and record-high exports and foreign exchange reserves.
A1  GROUP SHUNS SOUTH AFRICA TALKS
In a setback to hopes for black unity, the militant Pan-Africanist Congress announced that it would boycott a convention of political parties to lay the groundwork for negotiations on South Africa's future.
A5  I.R.A.
BOMBS LONDON RAIL JUNCTION
The Irish Republican Army stepped up its attacks in England, setting off a small bomb near the country's busiest railroad junction before morning rush hour.
A8  Apathy now burdens the cradle of Romania's 1989 revolution.
A11  Damascus Journal: President Assad's re-election is acclaimed.
A4  The Supreme Court upheld the withholding of Haitians' names.
A6  NATIONAL A16-19, D19-20  SLASH IN WEAPONS PLANTS
Reflecting what it called a sharply reduced need for a huge nuclear arsenal, the Government announced plans to trim the nation's nuclear weapons industry to four plants in the South and Midwest and a test site in Nevada.
A1  FED CHAIRMAN SHOWING PESSIMISM
News analysis: A new pessimism, evident in Alan Greenspan's recent comments, suggests that he now believes that new efforts by the Federal Reserve to lower interest rates will not necessarily revive the economy.
A1  NEW RULES ON BENEFITS
The Government devised new rules to speed Social Security benefits to people disabled by the virus that causes AIDS.
A16  ECHOES OF CIVIL WAR
The civil war in Yugoslavia reverberated in Chicago and other Midwestern steel centers where Serbs and Croats immigrated in the late 19th century.
A16  MILITARY AND JOBS
The Supreme Court upheld the right of military reservists to take unlimited leaves of absence from their civilian jobs.
A18  RETHINKING REDISTRICTING
In a move that could lead to disarray in redistricting, the Supreme Court agreed to decide whether Congress must change the formula for allocating House seats.
A18  PICKING OUT A WINNER
News analysis: In assessing who won the '92 Presidential campaign's first televised debate, many pointed to someone who wasn't even there -- President Bush.
D19  Images after the debate.
D19  Mario Cuomo and the New Hampshire primary, the latest step.
D19  BUOYED ON TRANSPORTATION
In past years transportation agencies across the United States often saw the White House budget office as Scrooge, but they expected that to change dramatically with the arrival of Samuel Skinner, the former Transportation Secretary, as the President's new chief of staff.
D20  TROUBLES BACK HOME
Visiting their home districts, three Congressmen heard a persistent chorus of complaint about the economy, sometimes laced with ideas for improvement but other times just seeking action.
D20  President Bush praised the Bill of Rights.
D20  General Noriega's lawyers asked for a recess.
A19  A woman was awarded $7.34 million for a faulty breast implant.
A16  METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 G.O.P.
SETS UP CONFRONTATION
The Republicans who control the state Senate warned Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo that they would pass their own budget plan if he has not reached an accord with them by tomorrow, setting up a major confrontation.
A1  Neediest Cases B5  BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Science Times C1-13  Experts from East and West join to destroy nuclear warheads.
C1  Biologists hope to grow spare parts for the eye.
C1  A galaxy-watching robot seeks the measure of the universe.
C1  Arts/Entertainment C15-20  Restoration of a painting worries Dutch art experts.
C15  Barenboim defends decision to perform Wagner.
C15  Making "Mad Forest." C15  Word and Image: "Tales of the Master Race." C19  ABC's "Prime Time Live" to interview Smith's accuser.
C20  Fashion Page B10  For evening, anything goes.
Patterns  Obituaries D21  Horatio Luro, horse trainer  Sports B12-18  Baseball: Kleinman blocking Steinbrenner.
B18  Basketball: Nets' Anderson wants to play.
B13  Columns: Berkow on Conrad McRae.
B13  Football: Coslet staying the course.
B13  Hockey: Rangers beat Sharks.
B15  Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  Digging past political pearls.
The U.N. expunges a smear.
Price of a $600 million gaffe.
Topics: Steamtown.
Letters A20  A. M. Rosenthal: Letter from Moscow.
A21  Rose Gottemoeller: Comrades in arms (cont'd.).
A21  L. Paul Bremer 3d: Iran and Syria -- keep the bums out.
A21  Michael Bailey and Richard Pillard: Are some people born gay?
A21  James Traub: The party of isolationism.
A21


Australian Media Group
The Canadian publisher Conrad Black today won a battle for control of the John Fairfax Group, Australia's oldest and second-largest media group.
Tourang Ltd., Mr.
Black's Canadian company, will pay $1.5 billion (Australian), or $1.16 billion (United States), for the bankrupt Fairfax, which owns The Sydney Morning Herald, The Age of Melbourne, and the national Australian Financial Review as well as smaller newspapers and magazines.
Its holdings once included radio and television stations.


Hard Line in Beijing Fails to Kill Boom
Jiang Lianxiang has a modest living room, with a sofa, a television, a refrigerator that doesn't fit in her dollhouse-sized kitchen, and an abiding faith that her son will be richer than his parents.
Here, it almost seems as if the 1989 Tiananmen crackdown on dissent had never happened.
"Our incomes are still going up," said Ms.
Jiang, a relaxed and smiling woman of 41, as she sipped tea in her living room and watched her son practice his calligraphy in a corner.
"We have most things we could want. Of course, the boy wanted an electric fan for the summer, but if you open the window it's really not so hot. And we talked about getting a video player, but then we were afraid that might disturb the boy from doing his homework each evening. So we pretty much have what we need."


Computing The Means To Enjoy Retirement
RETIRE ASAP is described as software for baby boomers, a financial planning program in a box.
You tell it how you are doing now, and it tells you what you have to do to enjoy a comfortable retirement.
Unlike other financial planning programs, Retire ASAP deals strictly with retirement; it will not balance a checkbook or figure the interest on a loan.
Elizabeth Kernan, the president of Calypso Software of Redmond, Wash., the publisher, is a graduate of the Sloan School of Management at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


Witnesses Free Sex-Case Suspect After 16 Months
In the frosty darkness outside the Queens Criminal Court Building in Kew Gardens, a 26-year-old man emerged from a basement exit last night and jubilantly fell into the arms of weeping, whooping relatives and friends.
The man, Richard Tchilinguirian, had spent the last 16 months in prison after being convicted of attempted rape.
But yesterday a judge ruled that the jury might well have acquitted him if it had had all the evidence in his favor.
The judge threw out the conviction and ordered Mr.
Tchilinguirian freed until a new trial.


By Design; Shearling: Warmth With Style
If you spot a smartly bundled-up woman bustling along the city streets this winter, she's probably snuggled into something made of shearling.
More popular than ever, shearling coats do two things at once.
They are warmer than other wools, or leather or most furs.
And because of their rough-wear origins -- shearling was first worn for the hardy outdoor life -- today's shearlings are usually cut to look sporty.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
NBA -- Fined Karl Malone, Utah Jazz forward, $10,000, and suspended him for one game for committing a flagrant foul against Isiah Thomas, Detroit Pistons guard, during a December 14 game.
Fined Darrell Walker, Detroit Pistons guard, $5,000, for leaving the bench area in an attempt to fight Malone.
Fined Isaac Austin, David Benoit, Mike Brown, Tyron Corbin, Eric Murdock and Delaney Rudd of Utah and William Bedford, Mark Aguirre, Brad Sellers, Lance Blanks, Bob McCann and Charles Thomas of Detroit $500 for leaving the bench during the incident.
INDIANA PACERS -- Activated George McCloud, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Randy Wittman, guard, on the injured list.
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Claimed Tom Garrick, guard, off waivers from the San Antonio Spurs.
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Signed John Morris, outfielder, to a one-year contract.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Agreed to terms with Junior Ortiz, catcher, on a minor-league contract.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Named Brad Weitzel scouting supervisor for Florida. National League
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Signed Clemente Nunez, pitcher, to a minor league contract.
Named Fernando Arroyo pitching coach of their Gulf Coast League team and Marty DeMerritt pitching coach of Erie of the New York-Penn League.
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Named Bill Robinson manager of Shreveport of the Texas League.


ABC to Interview Smith's Accuser
The woman who accused William K. Smith of rape in the case that ended with Mr.
Smith's acquittal last week is to be interviewed for the Thursday night broadcast of the ABC News program "Prime Time Live."
Diane Sawyer, a co-anchor of the program, to be broadcast at 10 P.M., is to tape the interview in the next two days.


Senate Democrats Delay Tax Vote as Assembly Stalls
Senate Democrats postponed a vote on five bills today that would dismantle the largest tax increase in state history.
Instead, they approved amendments that would create a tax study commission, change the effective date of an income tax reduction and link all of the rollback legislation into an all-or-nothing vote on the $2.8 billion tax package.
After the three amendments were approved 21-to-10, with every Republican opposing them, the Senate President, John A. Lynch, rescheduled a vote for Thursday.


Chris Kazan, 52, Dies; Writer and Professor
Chris Kazan, a novelist and screenwriter, died on Saturday at his home in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 52 years old.
He died of cancer, said his father, the director Elia Kazan.


New Way to Find Cervical Cancer Gives Hope of a Quick, Simple Test
RESEARCHERS have developed a technique for detecting cervical cancer and its precursor conditions that they hope could lead to a quick and inexpensive diagnostic method to replace the Pap test.
The new approach to the detection and diagnosis of abnormal cervical cells is based on looking at the infrared light signatures of the cells, which appear to be unique at different stages of the transformation from normal cells to cancerous ones, they said yesterday.
But they cautioned that so far they had only used ideal samples, and it remained to be seen whether the technique would work with randomly selected cells.


Preserving Lenin, the High-Tech Icon
The one thing in the state Lenin founded that is not breaking down, Sergei S. Debov believes, is Lenin.
Dr.
Debov should know.
He is the man in charge of Lenin's body, and he is proud that in almost 40 years he has spent faithfully inspecting, bathing and monitoring the relic, it has not changed a bit.
That's more than can be said for the Soviet state.


I.R.A. Bombs a London Rail Yard After Weekend of Other Attacks
Making good on a threat to step up its attacks in England, the Irish Republican Army set off a small bomb near the country's busiest railroad junction in South London before rush hour this morning.
A caller to a television station identified himself as an I.R.A. member and said that a bomb had been planted at one of London's main rail terminals.


Corrections
A report on Dec. 1 about the wedding of Hugh Garris Jasne gave the bride's name incompletely and misidentified the bridegroom's late father.
The bride was Gail Susan Altsher; Mr.
Jasne's father was Louis J. Jasne.


Classical Music in Review
Chamber Music Society
Alice Tully Hall
The Chamber Music Society's Sunday afternoon program wandered back and forth between the Baroque and songs much closer to our own time.
There was also a stop off on the way for Mozart's Quartet for Flute and Strings.


Digging Past Political Pearls
No, Sunday night's six-way Democratic debate was not as revealing as it might have been.
But compared with what?
The 90-minute program pushed political television past the dutiful standard of past debates, a clear benefit for the candidates, struggling to be heard, and for the public, with the first primary now just seven weeks away.
The ideal goal of any such exercise is to dig more than one answer deep, to get past the easy oratorical pearls that competent candidates can polish on demand on any subject.
On occasion the debate did that, digging two or three answers deep in a way that was often impossible in the past.
But it also suffered from shallow questions, a lesson for the next six debates in this welcome series.


Damascus Journal; Fist May Be of Iron, but Is Assad's Hand Weak?
At nightfall a huge lighted sign, perched on Kassioun Mountain overlooking Damascus, blinks on with the message, "Congratulations to the People."
The newest addition to the capital's landscape celebrates the results of a recent referendum that gave President Hafez al-Assad 99.9 percent of the vote, extending his 21-year rule by seven more years.


Nets' Anderson Is Looking for a Shot
Frustration, long losing streaks and sitting on the bench were things Kenny Anderson knew little about before he joined the Nets.
When New Jersey selected Anderson with the No. 2 overall pick in the June draft, the franchise and area fans looked forward to the flamboyant point guard's arrival with excitement and expectation.
Six months later, that excitement has been replaced by harsh reality.


Albany Junk Mail Flows On Like the Hudson
To the Editor:
It is almost laughable, the picture you paint in "El Al D'Amato" (Topics of The Times, Dec. 4) of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato feeding twice at the franking trough from 35,000 feet aloft.
Aboard an El Al plane returning from a look-see mission during the Iraqi war, he had the political sensitivity to draft one letter to his Jewish constituents and a different one to the rest.
It's a long flight, after all.
Both were mailed at public expense.


Brooklyn's Mob War Interrupted With a Quiet Day in Court
Confronted with five recent murders in the city's biggest mob war in three decades, the Brooklyn District Attorney's office rolled out its legal artillery yesterday and summoned a parade of reputed mobsters, trying to get them to do what the Mafia hardly ever does -- talk about it.
Collars up, heads lowered, faces blank behind sunglasses, a few chewing on toothpicks like underworld extras in a grade-B movie, 28 reputed associates of the Colombo crime family -- men from both sides in an internecine war -- showed up with their lawyers at a grand jury room at State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.


Man in the News: Saul Weprin; A Quiet Conciliator
"This is not the way I wanted to become Speaker," Saul Weprin told his colleagues this afternoon after being elected the 117th Speaker of the New York State Assembly.
For the 64-year-old Democrat, who has spent a political lifetime in Queens and Albany rising quietly through the ranks, that brief comment amounted to a deft reference both to his ambition -- he sought the Speaker's post five years ago -- and to his friendship with the man who had bested him, Mel Miller.


Ruling Finds Harassment of Female Officer
The New York City Human Rights Commission has ruled that the Police Department harassed and discriminated against a female officer because of her involvement in a class-action suit against the department.
The woman, Beraldine Kalra, was awarded more than $200,000 in damages and more than $100,000 in pension payments in the case.


Getting Cuomo's Entry Form, Just in Case
It is said that in America, anyone can run for President.
In New Hampshire, though, the rules are more restrictive.
Anyone can run, provided that they make up their minds by Friday, the filing deadline for the state's Feb. 18 primary.
Yesterday, Joseph Grandmaison, the former chairman of the New Hampshire Democratic Party, picked up a primary form for Mario M. Cuomo, in case the Governor of New York, who says he is still thinking about it, reaches a decision about running by the end of the week.
The form is being mailed to the chairman of the New York State Democratic Party, John A. Marino, who has been organizing a shadow campaign organization for Mr.
Cuomo even as the Governor insists that he has not yet decided whether to enter the race.


Sports of The Times; A Solution For McRae Vs. N.C.A.A.
ALL we need in order to understand that lumbering ox called the National Collegiate Athletic Association is to observe how it has handled the case of Conrad McRae, a lengthy junior at Syracuse University.
McRae is more visible than most Syracuse students because, first, he stands 6 feet 10 inches; second, he is often seen before crowds of 20,000 at the Carrier Dome as the center on the school basketball team, and, finally, he has recently been the center of a legal battle that puts the whole absurd world of college big-time sports in focus.


Supreme Court Roundup; Court Rules Reservists in Training Have Unlimited Job Leave
The Supreme Court ruled today that military reservists and National Guard members who entered full-time military training programs were legally entitled to unlimited leaves of absence from their civilian jobs.
Voting 8 to 0, the Court overturned a ruling by a Federal appeals court that Congress had implicitly required such leaves to be of "reasonable" duration.
That decision, issued in 1990 by the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit in Atlanta, held that a Birmingham, Ala., hospital could reject as "unreasonable" a Guarsdman's request for a three-year leave of absence to serve in a full-time position as Alabama's top enlisted Guardsman.


Pessimism at the Fed; For First Time, Greenspan Is Suggesting Rate Cuts Alone May Not Revive Economy
A new pessimism, evident in Alan Greenspan's latest speeches and in other recent comments, suggests that the chairman of the Federal Reserve now believes that new efforts by the Federal Reserve to lower interest rates will not necessarily revive the economy, as lower rates have in the past.
So additional measures might have to be tried, among them Federal spending or tax cuts.
For months, the Federal Reserve confidently said that an economic upturn was just around the corner.
Now, for the first time, Mr.
Greenspan is suggesting that he has no clear idea when the economy's current stagnation might end: by spring, by Election Day, by early 1993 or perhaps not until later in the decade.


What's All the Rumbling in L.A.?
The losing has stretched across three cities and three decades, but suddenly and finally, it seems over.
The Los Angeles Clippers smile and mean it.
Six weeks into the six-month season, the Clippers are soaring at unusual heights.
They still aren't the best team in town, but as the week began, they had a winning streak that even the Lakers would envy: eight consecutive victories, the second longest in franchise history.


U.S. PLANS BIG CUTS IN ITS PRODUCTION OF NUCLEAR ARMS
Nearly half a century after a secret atomic experiment led to the development of a mammoth Government nuclear weapons industry, the Bush Administration announced plans today to slash the complex to four production plants in the South and Midwest and a test site in Nevada.
The new configuration means that an enterprise that once produced 5,000 to 6,000 nuclear warheads a year will, by 1996, be mainly responsible for maintaining the shrinking stockpiles and cleaning up the pollution it produced, Energy Secretary James D. Watkins said.


Huge Windstorms Seen in Upper Atmosphere
A SATELLITE launched by a space shuttle has discovered surprisingly violent, continent-size windstorms in a part of the atmosphere that is rarely studied.
"They're like large ocean waves," said Paul Hays, a scientist in charge of an instrument on the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite.
Mr.
Hays described the storms as being the size of the United States and larger.


Travel Giant Is on Brink of Big Step
American Express is on the verge of signing an agreement to buy the Lifeco Travel Services Corporation, the nation's fifth-largest travel agency, for about $100 million in a move that would greatly expand its corporate travel business and probably increase its bargaining power with the airlines, an executive close to the negotiations said yesterday.
The travel agency division of the American Express Company is already the nation's largest, with 1,700 offices.


Quotation of the Day
"The future of the body -- that's a purely political question. But it should be resolved rationally. There's a tendency to destroy everything. I would be sad if this was destroyed." -- DR.
SERGEI S. DEBOV, the scientist in charge of preserving Lenin's body.  [ A14:1. ]


Bush Wisely Goes Slow on Economic Change; Waiting for Prosperity
To the Editor:
"White House Isolation" (news analysis, Nov. 22) comments that White House officials "concede that they have been unable to find a way to turn 'just wait' into an attractive message for voters" on economic policy.
Most voters are deciding they have waited long enough for the decline in their real income since 1981 to be reversed.


How Aces Was Trained For His Special Calling
ON a sunny April day in 1990, six wet Labrador retrievers were born in a special kennel here.
Their parents had been carefully matched for a variety of desirable traits.
The first born was a sturdy, all-black little fellow that was quite quiet.
Even more than his matching brothers and sisters, this dog liked to investigate everything within his sniff zone.
But when anyone praised him, this dog's sharp hazel eyes lit up and his oversized tail took on a life of its own, wagging uncontrollably into an eager, black blur that shook his chunky little body.
Of course, a lot could happen as this dog passed through the lives of several people before a special gray day this month.
But the early signs were good for the unusual calling that awaited this dog named Aces.


G.M. Cancels Holiday Party
The General Motors Corporation, caught in a swirl of publicity about huge financial losses from its North American operations and the likelihood of layoffs, has abruptly canceled its traditional holiday reception for news reporters.
The reception was to have been held on Wednesday at the Detroit Press Club, only hours after a scheduled news conference at which Robert C. Stempel, the chairman of G.M., is expected to announce widespread cutbacks and plant shutdowns to help stem the losses.


Bush Wisely Goes Slow on Economic Change
To the Editor:
The day after the election of 1988, President Bush met the press and recalled the name of Martin Van Buren, the last sitting Vice President to be elected to the Presidency 152 years before.
The recollection was somewhat ominous, since Van Buren was a one-term President, defeated in his bid for re-election by the inferior William Henry Harrison.
Van Buren is rated by some competent judges as one of our cleverest and best chief executives.
Certainly, his autobiography is a most remarkable document in American political history.


For Playoffs, It's Back to the 80's
The National Football League's parity and cyclical change in playoff participants are two ingredients it heavily relies on for appeal.
With Dallas, Detroit and Atlanta having clinched playoff berths on Sunday, the league offers a fresh menu of playoff participants, and the new entrants are gushing over the idea that the 90's will offer more of the same for them.
Atlanta is in for the first time since 1982.
Detroit is in for the first time since 1983.
Dallas is in for the first time since 1985.
"It's what makes our league so much fun, the idea that just when dynasties appear to be in the making, here comes along some teams that jostle the order," said Jerry Jones, the Dallas owner, smiling broadly in his team's locker room in Philadelphia on Sunday.
The Cowboys had just defeated the Eagles, 25-13, and rebounded all the way back from that horrendous 1-15 season three years ago, the first season for Jones and Coach Jimmy Johnson.
The Falcons, the Lions and the Cowboys were forced to rely on backup quarterbacks during the season to make the grade.
Who can forget Billy Joe Tolliver's last-gasp touchdown pass to Michael Haynes that lifted the Falcons over the 49ers?
Tolliver replaced the injured Chris Miller on Oct. 13 in that thrilling victory, but Miller was at the helm when Atlanta beat Seattle, 26-13, on Sunday and hit 14 of 27 for 160 yards, two touchdowns and no interceptions.
Detroit lost its starter, Rodney Peete, to injury in the eighth game, but since then Erik Kramer has been steady if not spectacular.
Kramer connected on 14 of 29 passes for 131 yards, two touchdowns and had no interceptions in the Lions' playoff-clinching, 21-17 victory at Green Bay, the Lions' first triumph outdoors this season in five games.
Among the more remarkable backup feats leaguewide is what Dallas's Steve Beuerlein has accomplished while replacing the injured Troy Aikman.
Beuerlein has not been intercepted in victories over Washington, Pittsburgh, New Orleans and Philadelphia.
He was awful early and spectacular late against the Eagles and showed why Johnson said, once the Cowboys acquired him from the Raiders, "I've been able to sleep at night."
Beuerlein showed promise at Notre Dame and with the Raiders, but in Dallas this season he has flourished.
He said he knows his role.
"There is no quarterback controversy in Dallas," Beurlein said.
"As soon as Troy is healthy and ready, the job is his. I'm just grateful for the opportunity to contribute. I think everyone here realizes we're a stronger team. When something happens to Troy, they have confidence in the backup here now. That's the mark of a playoff team, especially in the 90's." McKyer Speaks Out on Pro Bowl
Players' votes for Pro Bowl honors will be tallied this week, and one voter who hopes he makes the list but doubts he will do so is Tim McKyer, the Falcons' cornerback.
In each of his four seasons with the 49ers, McKyer made the playoffs.
In one season with Miami, last year, he made it again.
Now he is in again with the Falcons.
He does not believe this streak is a coincidence.
"I think the record speaks for itself," said McKyer, who made his sixth interception this season on Sunday.
"It's a team game, but I believe what I bring to the table helps to make the team, especially the defense, a better defense.
"Writers and players around this league look at the way I say things and not what I'm saying and they hold it against me. The Pro Bowl is supposed to be based on your play. It isn't and it's unfair.
"As long as I keep making the playoffs, I'll keep getting chances to win the Super Bowl. And as long as I get to Super Bowls, I'll have chances for another ring. That will become my Pro Bowl. And that's a trade a lot of guys who are in the Pro Bowl would make." Moon Gets Venomous Calls
Recently we heard from Bruce Smith, Buffalo's All-Pro defensive end, about racist mail he received while he was injured and missed action this season.
Now comes Warren Moon.
Moon thought the nastiest questions were behind him.
After he led Washington to a Rose Bowl victory in 1983, few N.F.L. teams believed in his talent.
He went to the Canadian Football League, set numerous records and entered the N.F.L. in 1984 believing his toughest personal challenge was behind him, the destroying of the myth that black quarterbacks are losing quarterbacks.
All Moon did to raise the ire of some Houston fans was be the quarterback in consecutive losses to Pittsburgh and Philadelphia before Houston beat Pittsburgh in a rematch and earned a divisional title and then Cleveland on Sunday to improve to 11-4.
Moon said his organization geared toward raising money for charities and scholarships -- the Crescent Moon Foundation -- received racist calls after those consecutive losses.
"I've been accused of being on cocaine, on crack, that I've got AIDS, that my wife left me," Moon said.
"The rumors were flying. To tell you the truth, I never got it directly. I don't think those type of people are brave enough to tell it to your face. You'd think we were a team that was 2-12 or something as opposed to being a team in first place, having a divisional title and the third-best record in football."


Chinese Pay Is Meager, But a Little Buys a Lot
One of the most misleading statistics about China is that its per capita income is $350 a year.
In fact, families like Jiang Lianxiang's live much better than such figures would suggest.
China's officially reported per capita gross national product, which is approximately the same as per capita national income, is at the level of India's, Haiti's and Kenya's.
But that is partly because low prices prevail in China, bringing down the statistics.


Chess
It's still not easy for the average grandmaster to make a living at chess, but for top players the monetary rewards are increasing all the time.
And it is not just a matter of the several-million-dollar purses for the world championship match.
A recent illustration of this was given by the Trophee Immopar quick chess tournament in Paris in early November.
Sixteen world-class players contested a knockout event at the rate of 25 minutes each for a game, no matter how many moves it took.


New President and Chief For Pacific First Bank
Pacific First Bank F.S.B. said yesterday that it had elected John C. Dean president and chief executive, effective immediately.
A wholly owned subsidiary of Royal Trustco Ltd. of Toronto, Pacific First operates retail and mortgage banking offices throughout Washington, Oregon and California.


Accounts
*
Jerome Foods, Barron, Wis., to Carmichael Lynch Inc., Minneapolis, for its delicatessan foods division, following a review with four other agencies.
Billings have not been determined because the company is planning to expand its advertising, an agency spokeswoman said.
Carmichael Lynch had previously handled advertising for the division and other Jerome products.


Review/Television; How Fake Art Is Created and Discovered and Why
"The Fine Art of Faking It" provides step-by-step instructions on how to create a 16th-century German masterpiece and how to determine that the one you were sold was made just yesterday.
The enterprising report from "Nova" at 8 tonight on Channels 13 and 49 also tries, with less success, to explain why it matters if a Rembrandt turns out to be not quite a Rembrandt.
The focus here is on the Cleveland Museum of Art's 1974 purchase of a painting of St.
Catherine by the 16th-century German artist Matthias Grunewald.
Since there was only one other Grunewald in the United States, St.
Catherine was considered well worth the $1 million the museum paid for her.


Truck Hauling Nuclear Fuel Has Collision in Massachusetts


Careers; Programs For Foreign Managers
AMERICAN business educators are busy training managers from abroad.
Programs at Duke University and at the University of Pittsburgh and one sponsored by half a dozen Wall Street investment firms and commercial banks are educating foreigners in American techniques.


Race Issue Reignites Giuliani-Dinkins Feud, but Both Deny Lighting the Match
Almost two years before the next New York City election, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani have already begun a kind of campaign, with Mr.
Giuliani charging that the Mayor "retreats into black victimization" and the Mayor accusing his rival of seeking "to inject race" into the contest.
The latest debate began when Mr.
Giuliani said, on a television talk show on Sunday, that Mr.
Dinkins seemed too willing to discern a racial motive in criticism of his stewardship.


People
*
H.
Weller (Jake) Keever, executive vice president-sales for the ABC Television Network, will retire next year.
Mr.
Keever, 64 years old, will remain with the company as a consultant.


Concerts of Music of Columbus's Time
To commemorate the quincentenary of Christopher Columbus's first voyage to America, the Waverly Consort, an early-music ensemble directed by Michael Jaffee, is to present a series of three concerts on Saturdays at 8 P.M., at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, in Manhattan.
The series, "Musical Reflections on the Year 1492," highlights three aspects of European music in the age of Columbus.


Electronic Data Gets G.E. Job
The General Electric Company awarded a contract to the Electronic Data Systems Corporation to manage purchases of personal computers, software and related products for G.E.'s global operations as well as the computer service business that G.E. provides to customers, the companies said today.
Seymour Merrin, president of Merrin Information Services, a research firm in Palo Alto, Calif., said the five-year deal would be worth at least $30 million a year.
Stephen Clancy, an analyst at Ledgeway/Dataquest, a research firm in Framingham, Mass., estimated revenues at close to $100 million a year.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday about Marsha A. Martin's appointment to the Dinkins administration misstated her responsibilities.
She is chief adviser to the Mayor on homelessness, not merely on homeless women.


Commerce Dept. Losing One More Top Official
Michael R. Darby, the Under Secretary of Commerce for Economic Affairs, announced his resignation today in the agency's latest high-level departure.
Mr.
Darby, whose responsibilities included overseeing the 1990 Census, becomes the third of the Commerce Department's six under secretaries to take a new job this year.
His announcement today that he would return to teaching to avoid losing a tenured faculty position coincides with speculation in Washington over who will replace Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher when he resigns to become chairman of President Bush's re-election campaign.
Work Done by Staff
But the high turnover rate has had limited effect, because so much of the department's daily work is done by the staff.
Mr.
Mosbacher has concentrated this year on domestic political and economic policy making at the White House and on urging business leaders to export more, rather than on promoting the department's role in interagency decision making.
The State and Defense Departments, for example, are increasingly influential in export control regulations.


Will Holyfield Proceed With Tyson Not in Mind?
Judge Patricia Gifford last week turned down a request by lawyers for Mike Tyson to push back the date of his Jan. 27 trial in Indianapolis, where he stands accused of raping an 18-year-old beauty pageant contestant.
So what does that mean to Evander Holyfield, the undisputed heavyweight champion?


The U.N. Today
General Assembly  COMMITTEE ON PALESTINIAN RIGHTS -- 10 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Johnson in Center? Mets Entertaining the Notion
Manager Jeff Torborg, thrilled by the overhaul of the Mets but haunted by concerns about the team's defensive shortcomings, is considering a plan that would send Howard Johnson to center field.
The latest blueprint, said by Torborg to be in the earliest stages of development, would shift Vince Coleman from center field to left and land Bobby Bonilla in right.


Dow Rally Ends With A 16.77 Fall
Stocks took modest losses in heavy trading yesterday, with some traders seeing disappointment at the Federal Reserve's failure to move quickly to lower interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 16.77 points to close at 2,902.28.
After opening higher, then surrendering those gains, stocks moved lower in choppy trading, as investors waited to see if the Fed, after its Open Market Committee meeting, would make another rate cut.


Academic Standards May Be on the Rise
It may be premature to conclude that the nation's football factories have finally become serious about academics, but consider the following: Florida State's leading rusher and two University of Georgia defensive standouts have been dropped from their schools' bowl teams simply because they flunked their course work.


Investment Manager Faces Charges of Securities Fraud
Steven M. Wymer, an investment manager for cities, counties, pension funds and banks in 13 states, was arrested today and charged with securities fraud and mail fraud in the handling of his clients' accounts.
Mr.
Wymer was arraigned in Federal District Court in Los Angeles, but did not enter a plea.
He was led into the courtroom by marshals, then led away again to a cell, where he will await a bail hearing on Thursday.


New Rule Poses Stiff Test In Gaining Accreditation
The Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, one of the nation's six regional accrediting organizations, has adopted new rules requiring colleges and universities to take greater responsibility over their athletic programs in order to retain their academic certification.
The new rules, which take effect Jan. 1, represent the first serious attempt to use academic accreditation as a weapon to halt abuses in college sports.


China's Divided Economy
About 60 percent of China's labor force is engaged in agriculture, where farmers essentially grow and sell their produce on the principle of private enterprise.
In 1990, agriculture accounted for about 33.3 percent of national income.
Farmers do not own the land but since the early 1980's they have been given the right to use individual plots.
They must sell a certain part of their produce to the state, but then can sell the rest on a relatively free market.


Fed Appoints Chief Of Currency Markets
William J. McDonough, a former vice chairman of the First Chicago Corporation, was named yesterday to direct the Federal Reserve's intervention operations in world currency markets.
The job puts him at one of the key pivots in the $600-billion-a-day foreign exchange market.


Cars Don't Increase Central Park Safety
To the Editor:
The notion that the presence of cars in Central Park promotes safety there ("Cars for Company," letter, Nov. 30) is impressionistic at best.
Does overwhelming traffic slow crime on New York City streets?
Indeed, drivers use the park road because it's faster than the surrounding streets: it has fewer stop lights and pedestrian crossings.


Dinkins Rescinds Pay Cuts For Himself and 800 Others
After announcing with great fanfare last year that senior city officials would do their part to ease New York City's fiscal problems by taking 5 percent pay cuts, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday rescinded the cuts for himself and about 800 other officials who are paid more than $70,000 a year.
Mr.
Dinkins said in a statement that the cut, which he imposed on Oct. 21, 1990, and extended on July 1, was intended to be temporary and that the main reason for ending it now was to avoid potential problems with the pension rights of the city officials.


Soldier in Battle for the Retarded
Rob Davies stays busy making revolution.
He is helping to empty New York State's institutions for the retarded.
He hopes to be done by the year 2000 -- shut them all, while providing every one of these institutionalized New Yorkers a decent place to live in the community.
The prospects look good.
He is a man in a terrible rush.


Theater in Review
Finkel's Follies  John Houseman Theater 450 West 42d Street Manhattan Conceived by Fyvush Finkel; adapted and directed by Robert H. Livingston; music by Elliot Finkel; lyrics by Phillip Namanworth; scenery and costumes, Mimi Maxmen; lighting, Bob Bessoir; musical director, Mike Huffman; production stage manager, Robert Lemieux; Presented by Eric Krebs.
WITH: Mr.
Finkel, Mary Ellen Ashley, Laura Turnbull and Avi Ber Hoffman.
Fyvush Finkel has a face that could launch a thousand shticks.


Albany Brinkmanship: G.O.P. Strategy and Goals
Whether the Republican-led State Senate is motivated by fiscal ideology, local political concerns or a scheming desire to undermine Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's Presidential aspirations, it is now clear that it has embarked on a strategy of confrontation with him over the state budget.
Ignoring angry warnings from the Democratic Governor that it could "kill this state," the senators shunned all negotiations this afternoon and took the politically symbolic action of passing their own budget bills.
They include cuts in welfare, Medicaid and other social services that the Governor and the Democratic-controlled Assembly have rejected as an unconscionable assault on the poor.


As Costs of New Drugs Rise, Hospitals Stick by Old Ones
When the CIBA-Geigy Corporation came out with a new arthritis drug two years ago, it filled medical journals with advertisements, hired Mickey Mantle with his arthritic knees as a spokesman and deployed representatives across the nation to leave free samples of the drug, Voltaren, in hospital doctors' lounges.
But at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, the campaign fell flat.
The hospital's pharmacy committee decided that older, less expensive drugs were just as effective.
The hospital's pharmacy would not stock Voltaren, the committee decreed, and its doctors should not use it.
The hospital prohibited company representatives from promoting the drug on hospital premises or even mentioning it.


Rockland County Village Accused of Bias in Zoning
Federal officials yesterday charged a newly created village in Rockland County and the town it was carved out of with discriminating against Orthodox Jews by preparing to adopt zoning restrictions intended to keep them out.
The accusations were included in a civil damage suit filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan by William P. Barr, the United States Attorney General, and Otto G. Obermaier, the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York.
The suit also charged "that other individuals acting at the behest of the defendants have engaged in a pattern of harassment against Orthodox Jews in the village."


Soviet Union's Last Rites: New Year's Eve the Goal
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev conferred privately today on the now anticlimactic issue of how and when to dispose of the remnants of the Soviet Union.
Mr.
Yeltsin's spokesman said later that New Year's Eve would be soon enough and a rousing final lowering of the red flag from atop the Kremlin would be as good a manner as any.


Plan for Razing On Ellis Island Prompts Protest
A National Park Service proposal to demolish 12 buildings on Ellis Island, making way for the construction of an international conference center, drew sharply conflicting reactions at a hearing last night.
Proponents hailed the center, which would be privately built and owned, as a boost to the regional economy, while critics condemned the $145 million plan as a violation of the character of the island and the memory of millions of immigrants who passed through it.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Agreed to terms with Bob Kipper, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Signed Morlon Wiley, guard.
Waived Avery Johnson, guard, and Jud Buechler, forward.
Activated Terry Cummings, forward, from the injured list.
Continental Basketball Association
CBA -- Named Alex Vergara vice president of marketing.
FOOTBALL National Football League
NFL -- Fined Seattle defensive back Eugene Robinson $5,000 for using the crown of his helmet to strike San Francisco wide receiver John Taylor in the chest in a game Dec. 8.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Placed Lewis Billups and Rod Jones, cornerbacks, and Paul Jetton, guard, on injured reserve.
Signed Jay Koch, tight end, Tom Walton, linebacker, and Mel Waters, running back, to the practice squad.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Re-signed Steve Pelluer, quarterback.
Waived Troy Sadowski, tight end.
NEW YORK JETS -- Placed Dale Dawkins, wide receiver, on the non-football injury list.
Agreed to terms with Raul Allegre, placekicker.
HOCKEY National Hockey League
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Sent Joe Day, center, and Chris Tancill, right wing, to Springfield of the American Hockey League.
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Recalled Peter Lappin, right wing, and Rick Lessard and Pat MacLeod, defensemen, from Kansas City of the International Hockey League.
HORSE RACING
GARDEN STATE PARK -- Named Larry Lederman track announcer. COLLEGE
ARMSTRONG STATE -- Announced the resignation of Doug Riley men's basketball coach.
Named Griff Mills men's basketball coach.
FLORIDA -- Agreed to terms with Steve Spurrier, football coach, to a contract extension through the 1997 season.
LINFIELD -- Announced the retirement of Ad Rutschman, football coach.
MINNESOTA -- Named McKinley Boston men's athletic director.
NAVY -- Named Pat Owen golf coach.
TEXAS -- Named Cleve Bryant, wide receiver coach.


Missouri U. Chief Quits In Face of Budget Cut
Just over a month after Missouri voters overwhelmingly rejected a $385 million tax package to support education, the chancellor of the University of Missouri at Columbia has announced his resignation, saying he did not want to have to enforce budget cuts that would shrink the university.
"My dream for this university has not been to reduce its scope," said Haskell Monroe, who has been chancellor of the University since 1987.
His resignation announced yesterday is effective Dec. 31.
The university provost, Gerald Brouder, will serve as interim chancellor until a replacement is named.


Alumnus Gets Post
McKINLEY BOSTON, a University of Minnesota defensive tackle on the Gophers' last Big Ten football champion in 1967, returned to the university yesterday when he was named men's athletic director.
He served as athletic director for the last three years at the University of Rhode Island.


Review/Film; Connecting Shostakovich's Music to His Times
"Testimony," Tony Palmer's grandiose portrait of Dmitri Shostakovich, succeeds where many film biographies of composers fail; it evokes a visceral connection between musical creation and its historical moment.
Periodically in the film, astutely chosen excerpts from Shostakovich's symphonies, played by the London Symphony Orchestra, underscore news film of two world wars and Stalin's purges to convey a sense of the blood-soaked stampede of European history in the first half of this century.
The 1988 film, which is having its American theatrical premiere at the Film Forum, stars a glittering-eyed Ben Kingsley as the composer, who at his death in 1975 had completed 147 works, including 15 symphonies.
Shot mostly in black and white with color used sparingly for jarring dramatic effect, "Testimony" is much less a straightforward biography than an expressionistic montage that interweaves surreally imagined scenes from the composer's life with documentary film in a chronological sequence.
With visual leitmotifs, the two-and-a-half-hour film also aspires to be a visual equivalent of the composer's Fifth Symphony, whose grinding, sarcastic, brass-heavy strains powerfully underscore scenes of Russian heavy industry and the gearing up of the Soviet war machine.


Film Critics Honor 'Silence of Lambs'
"The Silence of the Lambs," the chilling tale of a brilliant psychopath and a shrewd F.B.I. trainee who joined forces to catch a serial killer, was voted the best film of 1991 by the New York Film Critics' Circle, a 25-member group representing magazine and newspaper critics from the New York area.
"The Silence of the Lambs" swept the voting by winning awards for its director, Jonathan Demme, and its stars, Jodie Foster and Anthony Hopkins.
The group's best screenplay award went to "Naked Lunch," David Cronenberg's freewheeling adaptation of William S. Burroughs's novel, a film that will not open until next week.
The cinematography prize went to Roger Deakins for his work on "Barton Fink," Joel and Ethan Coen's droll, nightmarish look at Hollywood in the 1940's.
Judy Davis was named best supporting actress for a total of three performances in these two films.
She plays two different women in the hallucinatory "Naked Lunch." Samuel L. Jackson was voted best supporting actor for his performance as a drug addict in Spike Lee's "Jungle Fever." 'Europa, Europa' a Winner
"Europa, Europa," Agnieszka Holland's film about the remarkable experiences of a real Jewish Holocaust survivor among Nazi soldiers, was voted the year's best foreign film.
The group's documentary prize went to Jennie Livingston's "Paris Is Burning," which explores the competitive world of transvestite voguing and regards it as a reflection of society at large.
The group voted John Singleton the year's best new director for "Boyz N the Hood," a drama about Los Angeles gang wars.


Service on Subways Is Disrupted by Fires
Subway service was disrupted yesterday morning on several lines because of a series of 15 trash fires, apparently unconnected, on station platforms and subway tracks, New York City officials said.
The most serious disruption took place on the Lexington Avenue line, when a track fire in Grand Central Terminal caused transit officials to shut down the line for 45 minutes at 8:30 A.M., the peak of the morning rush.
Tens of thousands of commuters had to scramble for alternative ways to get to work.


Ex-Convicts Are Serving Blintzes Instead of Time
San Franciscans are dining these days at a new restaurant where the chefs used to be junkies, the waitresses prostitutes, the busboys burglars and the wine stewards pimps.
The restaurant is the newest enterprise of the Delancey Street Foundation, a 20-year-old self-help organization that resurrects hard-core criminals and addicts by teaching them work habits, values and skills.


U.S. Eases Spending Rules In Presidential Primaries
Newly adopted Federal regulations have greatly loosened restrictions on how much Presidential campaigns can spend in each state.
The changes will allow candidates in the 1992 primary season to pump unusually large amounts of money into the early states.
The regulations, which took effect last month, are expected to end a 16-year tradition of political trickery in which candidates foiled the intent of Federal election laws by following an unwritten code of conduct: stretch the rules to pour as much money as possible into states with early contests.


Public &amp; Private; The Glass Eye
The bogeyman of privacy zealots was powerfully evoked in a single sentence in George Orwell's "1984": "Big Brother is watching you." It was the idea that soon we would all be under the constant watchful eye of government, our every move catalogued.
We still sometimes feel this keenly, when we discover that there is an F.B.I. file on someone we know, or when we receive a report from a credit agency and see a late payment on a car loan from 1986 duly noted.
What we never expected was turnabout, and yet that is what we have seen in the last year.
We are the ones who are watching.
The Palm Beach rape case, the Judiciary Committee hearings -- the unforgiving eye has been our own, thanks to the television cameras.


Gorman Picks Sampras
PETE SAMPRAS, beaten twice in the Davis Cup finals against France earlier this month, has been named to the United States team for 1992 by the captain, TOM GORMAN.


U.S. Insists on Holding Meeting on Soviet Aid
Despite opposition by President Francois Mitterrand of France, the United States will convene an international conference of industrialized nations next month to coordinate aid to the former Soviet Union, the White House said today.
It is unclear whether France will attend the ministerial-level conference, or how successful the conference will be if France is not represented.
But the White House says coordination is necessary to avoid duplication or gaps in the many sources of aid involved.


INSIDE
Expelling Haitians Is Blocked
A judge again banned the Government from sending back Haitians who were picked up at sea, this time until friday.
Page A3.
Money for Doomed A-Plants
The Energy Department plans to keep spending hundreds of millions of dollars a month on weapons plants that are to be closed.
Page B8.
Lesbian Wins Guardianship
After a seven-year legal battle, a Minnesota appeals court granted guardianship of a brain-damaged woman to her lesbian partner.
Page A26.
Macy Reports Big Loss
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company reported a surprisingly big $155.4 million quarterly loss.
Executives called Christmas sales disappointing.
Page D1.
A Christmas Appeal: The Neediest Cases
A working mother finds that childcare leaves her behind on rent.
Charity officials say many are staring at eviction notices this winter.
Page B7.


Dolphins Aren't Exactly Shy About Expressing Confidence
The Miami Dolphins are operating this week on the theory that Jets quarterback Kenny O'Brien's completing 18 of 24 passes against Miami in the teams' last meeting was more an aberration than the norm.
"At times, it looks like they have problems communicating with each other," Dolphins inside linebacker Mike Reichenbach said today.
"I don't know if their timing is off or not. But when they're off, they look real bad.


Sharp Images for Desktop Publishers
Although the desktop-publishing industry has revolutionized the way printed materials are produced, its drawbacks have included the images' relative lack of sharpness and the vast amount of computer memory required in storing complex graphics on a computer disk.
In search of a solution, QPL Inc., an industrial photography laboratory and consulting firm in Ramsey, N.J., and the Eastman Kodak Company of Rochester have created a process that allows images created on a Macintosh computer to be enhanced on a computerized Kodak system and reproduced on high-resolution film.
The process takes much of the computer-processing load off the Macintosh, the desktop machine widely used by professional design studios, advertising agencies and corporate and commerical art departments.


A Base for Post-Apartheid Profits
Among all the departures of American companies from South Africa, perhaps none has had such a spectacular aftermath as the disinvestment of the Mobil Oil Corporation in 1989.
The facilities it left behind have provided the catalyst for one of the more remarkable success stories in Africa's petroleum industry.
Mobil's oil refining and marketing operation was purchased for a little more than $230 million, a fraction of its value, by Gencor Ltd., the mining and industrial conglomerate.
Since the birth of the new subsidiary, Engen (an abbreviation of Energy Gencor), in July 1989, the oil operation has generated such profits that Gencor could recoup its investment before the end of 1992.


Public &amp; Private; The Glass Eye
The bogeyman of privacy zealots was powerfully evoked in a single sentence in George Orwell's "1984": "Big Brother is watching you." It was the idea that soon we would all be under the constant watchful eye of government, our every move catalogued.
We still sometimes feel this keenly, when we discover that there is an F.B.I. file on someone we know, or when we receive a report from a credit agency and see a late payment on a car loan from 1986 duly noted.
What we never expected was turnabout, and yet that is what we have seen in the last year.
We are the ones who are watching.
The Palm Beach rape case, the Judiciary Committee hearings -- the unforgiving eye has been our own, thanks to the television cameras.


Quotation of the Day
"This could be the Willie Horton issue of 1992. It's going to force all the Presidential candidates to address welfare and its related problems." --LAWRENCE MEAD, a political scientist, on a move to tighten welfare restrictions in California.  [ A1:1. ]


De-Recognize Yugoslavia
The U.S. and many other nations have long tried to persuade Yugoslavia's warring republics to live together in peaceful confederation.
But that noble idea is dead, killed by the Yugoslav Army and the leaders of Serbia.
Now it's up to Washington to acknowledge that fact by withdrawing diplomatic recognition from Belgrade.
At the same time, a companion step urged by Germany -- diplomatic recognition of the breakaway republics of Croatia and Slovenia -- is premature.
Other members of the European Community got it right: They're ready to acknowledge Balkan reality by dealing directly with these republics.
But they are withholding formal diplomatic recognition of statehood until the republics demonstrate a willingness to end ethnic strife.


McCaffrey &amp; McCall Top Creative Post
McCaffrey &amp; McCall Inc., seeking to keep two prominent accounts now in review, is naming a top creative executive to replace John Doig, who announced last month that he would join Earle Palmer Brown Advertising.
Mr.
Doig's successor, who will be deputy chairman and chief creative officer, will be Michael Robertson, 43 years old, an executive vice president and senior creative director at Young &amp; Rubicam New York.
There, he supervised creative work on about $300 million in billings for products like Certs ("Two mints in one") and Rolaids ("How do you spell relief?").


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
A Saturday afternoon and I am in Manhattan from White Plains for a Metropolitan Opera performance of "La Traviata." Before the overture I am standing on line -- as usual, a very long line -- for the ladies' room.
Nearby, the men's-room line is short and fast-moving.
No one is unhappier about this state of affairs than the woman in back of me.
Not only is she unhappy, she is quite pregnant.


J. Max Bond Sr., 89, an American Who Headed Liberian University
J.
Max Bond Sr., a retired American educator who was president of the University of Liberia in the early 1950's, died on Sunday at his home in Washington.
He was 89 years old.
The cause of his death was not immediately clear, but he had been suffering from prostate cancer, said a granddaughter, Ruth M. Bond.


A.T.&amp;T.'s Telegraph Is Only a Name Now
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it had closed down the service that gave the company its last name -- its 104-year-old telegraph service.
The business was a victim of better and less expensive telecommunications, like electronic data processing and quite probably facsimile machines.
The huge teletype machines that were the outgrowth of Samuel F. B. Morse's revolutionary 1844 invention were used by governments, businesses and newspapers to send numbers and texts over long distances.


For Christmas Toasting Time, Have a Beer, but Not Just Any
FOR that holiday spirit, this may be the year for beer.
With Champagne prices through the roof (and eggnog full of fat), beer certainly suits leaner times.
But not just any beer.
And certainly not an ordinary six-pack of something industrial -- suitable when your team has won, perhaps, but not for Yuletide toasting.
For the holidays, there are other, more appropriate choices: the seasonal Christmas brews.
If you consider the special Christmas bottles of Coca-Cola, the special Christmas blend from Starbuck's Coffee -- even the Christmas brandy made by Germain-Robin in California -- it makes sense that brewers are also cashing in on Christmas.


Matthew Rapf, Producer, 71
Matthew Rapf, a film and television producer, died last Wednesday at his home in Malibu, Calif.
He was 71 years old.
He died in his sleep after being ill with the flu, his family said.


Jersey City Mayor Is Convicted In Fraud Case and Faces Ouster
Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City was found guilty of 15 counts of fraud and income tax evasion today, setting the stage for his removal from office when the verdict becomes final at his sentencing in a few weeks.
He also faces a possible prison term and substantial fines.
Mr.
McCann seemed angry and shaken as he hurried from the Federal courtroom here moments after the jury of nine women and three men found him guilty.
He was convicted of defrauding a Florida savings and loan of more than $260,000 in connection with a plan to build a marina at Liberty State Park in Jersey City, and of then doctoring income tax returns to hide the crime.
Appeal Planned
The reading of the verdict was made more dramatic when the jury found the 41-year-old Mr.
McCann not guilty of the first of 16 counts, eliciting a muffled cheer from one of the Mayor's supporters.
The jury foreman, Robert Laidlaw, then announced the 15 consecutive guilty verdicts.
The jury had deliberated about 10 hours.


20 Peasants Reported Killed in Colombia by a Gang of Gunmen


Brews From Near and Far
HERE are just a few of the Christmas beers out now.
Many, the fruits of micro breweries, are sold only in specific parts of the country.
Most are available until the end of the year or through mid-January.
ANCHOR BREWING SPECIAL ALE, Anchor Brewing Company, San Francisco, Calif.
This medium-amber ale makes a good head and has a toasty aroma and rich, mellow, slightly winey flavor.
Available nationally.


Food Notes
To-Stay Food, to Go
Carmine's, a family-style Italian restaurant on upper Broadway, has just opened a takeout shop.
Now, instead of waiting for hours for a table and taking home the leftovers, customers can skip the restaurant and buy the food to go.


U.N. TO CENTRALIZE ITS RELIEF EFFORTS
Under attack for its ineffectual efforts to help persecuted Iraqi Kurds, the starving millions in the war-torn Horn of Africa and the victims of Liberia's civil strife, the United Nations agreed today to appoint a single humanitarian aid coordinator with authority to deal with governments that deny assistance to suffering people.
The agreement, reached in the early hours of this morning after weeks of difficult negotiation, represents a victory for the United States and the 12 European Community countries, which had called for such a reorganization of United Nations relief operations as well as the establishment of a clearer right of humanitarian intervention, particularly in zones of civil strife.


Hudson Valley Reels Under Impact of I.B.M. Cuts
I.B.M. isn't merely a prime mover of the economy here in Dutchess County.
With some 20,000 workers -- 10 times as many as the next largest private employer -- I.B.M.
is
the economy.
And now that the International Business Machines Corporation is pulling in its reins, each tug seems to spread anxiety across the soft hills of this rural county at the edge of the suburbs.
"Every family must have at least one member who works for I.B.M.," said Ellen Grogan, who counts two nephews, a brother-in-law and a future son-in-law there.
"Rumors plague the area. People are scared. The security is gone -- the sense that I.B.M. will support us."


Spurrier Pact Extended
Coach STEVE SPURRIER of Florida has agreed to a contract extension which runs through 1997, athletic director BILL ARNSPARGER said yesterday.


Bush's Time to Act; Passive Approach on the Recession Collides With Harsh Political Reality
At one extreme, President Bush is being urged to propose a rebate in income taxes due April 15.
This might be good politics, but it is probably bad economics.
At the other extreme, Mr.
Bush is being counseled to sit tight and ride out the recession.
This could be good economics, but it is terrible politics.


California Plan to Cut Welfare May Prompt Others to Follow
All year it has been simmering: a movement to pay welfare mothers less and change their behavior through financial threats and rewards.
It came to a boil last week when Gov.
Pete Wilson of California proposed to cut welfare grants by as much as 25 percent, tie teen-age mothers' grants to their school attendance and refuse extra money for additional children.


Bankruptcy Explanation By Maxwell
A main reason the board of the Maxwell Communication Corporation took the unusual step of seeking bankruptcy protection from creditors in the United States was to try to avoid a piecemeal selloff of its businesses by its bankers, the company's leaders said today.
This helps explain why bankers are furious that the heavily indebted British publishing company filed in New York for protection under Chapter 11 of the United States Bankruptcy Code on Monday night.
The filing came after a meeting between Maxwell Communication and the eight-member steering committee of the banks on Monday afternoon.
At that meeting, according to both sides, the company's executives did not mention the possibility that they might file for Chapter 11.


The Jets Sign Up Allegre
Raul Allegre, an airline ticket jacket sticking up in the breast pocket of his shirt, was asked today if he found any irony in the fact that he might wind up kicking field goals for the Giants and the Jets in the same year.
"Irony? No," said Allegre, who pointed out that the plane ticket was for a round trip but had an open return.
"But I might be the answer to a trivia question someday."


Abortion Doctor Is Accused of Using Dirty Tools
A former receptionist of Dr.
Abu Hayat, the Lower East Side doctor facing accusations that he botched several abortions, testified yesterday that the doctor re-used equipment tainted with dried blood and that she never saw him sterilize his instruments, state health officials said.
The receptionist, Marjorie Andrade of Brooklyn, testifying in a New York State Health Department hearing in Manhattan, also said Dr.
Hayat kept a 6-month fetus in a freezer for weeks.
A Health Department lawyer said the law requires such a fetus be sent to a pathology laboratory.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Dole Food Co., Los Angeles, said it had arranged through the Bank of Hawaii for a $90 million revolving credit for its Castle &amp; Cooke Properties and Castle &amp; Cooke Development Corp. units.
PREFERRED STOCK


Giants Are Packing It In With One Game to Play
It's a common scene around the National Football League this time of year.
But not around the Giants.
In these last days of the regular season, the losers bring in outsized plastic garbage bags to pack their six pairs of shoes, their unanswered mail, their posters and effluvia accumulated during the year.


Helping Hand For Homeless In Job Quest
Many of the sad tales of the Neediest Cases touch New Yorkers' hearts, prompting donations, calls and offers of help.
None this year has brought more than did a brief mention of a program that provides jackets and ties to homeless men to wear on job interviews.
An auto worker in Wilmington, Del., made up a package of clothes when he was struck by the idea that so little might be needed to turn someone's life around.


Jays-Red Sox Rivalry: Bids for Top Pitchers
This will be a critical day in the immediate future of two pitchers who between them have pitched 366 victories, 807 games and 5,629 innings.
Jack Morris and Frank Viola, veteran free agents both, are the dual targets of a dual pursuit, and at least one decision could clarify the pursuit at least in part today.
The Toronto Blue Jays and the Boston Red Sox, who have fought each other for the American League East championship several times in recent years, are both trying to sign Morris or Viola.
Morris is scheduled to visit Toronto today and will very likely accept what one baseball official familiar with the Blue Jays' plans said was an offer of more than $10 million for two years.


Disabled Woman's Care Given to Lesbian Partner
After a seven-year legal battle that became a rallying cause for gay rights groups, a Minnesota appeals court yesterday granted guardianship of Sharon Kowalski, a 35-year-old woman left brain-damaged and quadriplegic in a 1983 car accident, to her lesbian lover.
"This seems to be the first guardianship case in the nation in which an appeals court recognized a homosexual partner's rights as tantamount to those of a spouse," said M. Sue Wilson, the lawyer for Ms.
Kowalski's lover, Karen Thompson.


Hitting the Slopes In the Fast Lane
There was a time this past summer when C. J. Mueller thought about the 1992 Albertville Olympics every day.
This was not an altogether pleasant experience because it got to the point his thoughts were interfering with why he was thinking about the Olympics in the first place.
As the fastest speed skier in the United States, Mueller had earned a place on the Olympic team, something he could have scarcely imagined when his competitive career began more than 20 years ago as a downhill racer with more aspirations than talent.


Washington Mideast Talks to Adjourn, Israel Says
With Israeli and Palestinian delegations still meeting on a couch in a State Department corridor, and little substantial progress made in separate talks with the Syrians and Lebanese, Israeli officials said today that they would leave Washington on Wednesday.
But they insist that the Middle East peace process has not broken down, and that it will go on as planned in another round of talks in January, at a place and time still to be decided.
Israel wants to move the talks to the Middle East.
The Arabs want to stay in Washington or go to Europe.


U.S. Oversight Is Advocated In Fish Market
Charging that six unlicensed companies dictate how fish and seafood can be brought into the Fulton Fish Market, a Federal administrator urged yesterday that a new agency under Federal control be established to supersede New York City in regulating the market.
The administrator, Frank H. Wohl, asserted that the six companies have a stranglehold over how fast supplies are unloaded and what prices are imposed on wholesale fish distributors and trucking companies that operate in the market.


Corrections
An entry in the Dance listing of the Arts and Leisure Guide on Sunday included an erroneous schedule provided by Marymount Manhattan College for the Ramon de los Reyes Spanish Dance Theater.
The company will perform at 8 P.M.
Friday and Saturday (not tomorrow), at the college's theater at 221 East 71st Street in Manhattan.


First Security President
The First Security Corporation of Kentucky said it had appointed William R. Hartman as its president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
Hartman, who is president and chief operating officer of Banc One, Dayton, Ohio, will replace William Rouse, who will continue as chairman.
Bank One, Dayton, is a unit of the Banc One Corporation, which has agreed to merge with First Security.


Republican Officials in 2 States Drop Duke From Their '92 Primary Ballots
Republican party officials in Georgia and Massachusetts took steps this week to keep David Duke's name off Presidential primary ballots while party officials in some other states weighed what they would do when it came time to decide who will be on their ballots.
Thirty-eight states are scheduled to have Presidential primaries, and debates surrounding attempts to get Mr.
Duke, a Louisiana State Representative, on the ballot have already surfaced in five of them.
In addition to Georgia and Massachusetts, disputes have arisen in Maryland, Michigan and Rhode Island.
Duke campaign officials said they might try to enter as many as 28 primaries, raising the possibility that the disputes will multiply as deadlines for setting those primary ballots approach.


Books of The Times; Naval Collision Course Meeting at World War I
Dreadnought  Britain, Germany and the Coming of the Great War  By Robert K. Massie Illustrated. 1,007 pages.
Random House. $35.
"Dreadnought," a strongly researched volume filled with anecdotal nuggets as well as numerous diversionary longueurs, comes across as two wandering stories in search of a single theme.
The first is a history of the naval race between Britain and Germany that contributed so heavily to the beginning of World War I. The second is a parade of royal and military personalities: peacock rulers who were jealous, wealthy, vainglorious and, almost to a man, more thick-skulled than heroic.
Their actions would lead to the demise of the two dominant European empires and, far worse, cause the deaths of tens of millions of soldiers and civilians.


Stanley Earl Cowan, Composer, 73
Stanley Earl Cowan, a composer, author and publicity agent, died on Saturday at his home in Granada Hills, Calif.
He was 73 years old.
He died of heart failure, said Miriam Levin, a spokeswoman for the family.


Networks Question Spot Using Bush
A public service announcement for the Small Business Administration featuring President Bush is having difficulties making it onto the television networks because the networks fear it could be misconstrued as an election-campaign spot.
An article in this week's issue of the trade publication Inside Media reported that NBC had refused to broadcast the 30-second commercial, while CNN and ABC had expressed reservations.
CBS has accepted the spot, the article said.


CHRONICLE
When the officers of Americans for Peace Now, the United States branch of the Peace Now movement in Israel, began planning an evening with ABBA EBAN, they expected 50 or so people to show up.
As it turned out, more than 150 accepted invitations to hear the former Israeli foreign minister speak last night, so JOSHUA MAILMAN, the host, simply cleared out the furniture from a second room in his Fifth Avenue apartment.


In Moscow, Too, a Liberal Mayor Feels Besieged
Gavriil K. Popov, the liberal economist elected Mayor of Moscow last spring on a wave of democratic euphoria, is running into hard times.
His city of nine million is short of food and money, its streets are filthy, its politics are in disarray, and his own popularity is sinking fast.
Now, on the eve of a dramatic increase in prices, something bound to further inflame the public mood, Mr.
Popov has said he cannot take it anymore and has offered to resign -- again.
But even his resignation threats are being shrugged off by a bitter electorate, which has found life under a democrat worse than under the now-departed Communists.


Bam! Pow! Margins! Sales Mix!
Will Marvel Entertainment Group's shareholder reports become collector's items?
Yesterday, the comic book publisher released its first quarterly report since Marvel became a public company in July.
The report came out in the form of a four-page comic book, with Spider-Man and the Incredible Hulk, two of the company's comic characters, bragging to each other about just how wonderful a quarter it was.


Public &amp; Private; The Glass Eye
The bogeyman of privacy zealots was powerfully evoked in a single sentence in George Orwell's "1984": "Big Brother is watching you." It was the idea that soon we would all be under the constant watchful eye of government, our every move catalogued.
We still sometimes feel this keenly, when we discover that there is an F.B.I. file on someone we know, or when we receive a report from a credit agency and see a late payment on a car loan from 1986 duly noted.
What we never expected was turnabout, and yet that is what we have seen in the last year.
We are the ones who are watching.
The Palm Beach rape case, the Judiciary Committee hearings -- the unforgiving eye has been our own, thanks to the television cameras.


STREET CRIME HITS PRAGUE DAILY LIFE
This city is still one of the most beautiful and beguiling in central Europe, but with something new since Communist rule ended two years ago -- street crime.
"It happens all the time," said a receptionist at the Jalta Hotel, which has become a favorite haunt of pickpockets, thieves and prostitutes on Wenceslas Square.
"People return to the hotel without their wallets or handbags. People are surprised. They don't expect that here.


Islanders on the Move With Subtle Approach
Quietly, the Islanders continue to improve, which may be the tack to take when sneaking up on people.
After trailing by 2-0 early tonight, they methodically beat the Whalers, 4-2, before a small and often hushed audience at the Civic Center.
While it would be unfair to say the Islanders bored the home team to death with a steady effort of checking, it is true that they did little to rile the Whalers.
The game had only nine minor penalties and took only 2 hours 25 minutes.


YELTSIN REBUFFED BY ASIAN REPUBLIC ON NUCLEAR ARMS
The President of this Central Asian republic made it clear today that in advance of negotiations with Russia and other republics on the details of the new commonwealth, he was not ready to cede any advantages to the larger, more powerful Russian republic.
Speaking to reporters accompanying Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d on a visit here, the President of Kazakhstan, Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, took issue with the comments made on Monday by the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, that eventually all Soviet republics would eliminate nuclear weapons except Russia.
Mr.
Nazarbayev declared today that Kazakhstan would retain its nuclear missiles as long as Russia did.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL North Carolina Rallies George Lynch scored 20 of his 24 points in the second half last night, helping ninth-ranked North Carolina erase a 13-point deficit and take a 98-87 victory over Jacksonville.
Lynch, a 6-foot-7-inch junior, did not start because of his poor play against Florida State on Sunday, but enjoyed a perfect shooting half last night, hitting eight goals and four free throws without a miss.
He scored 8 of his points during an 18-0 run that gave North Carolina a 68-61 lead while Jacksonville, playing at home, went 6 minutes 11 seconds without a point.
Eric Montross added 21 points and 12 rebounds and Hubert Davis added 20 points as the Tar Heels (7-1) bounced back from Sunday's Atlantic Coast Conference home loss to Florida State.
James Fuller, a reserve, scored 28 points for Jacksonville (1-7), hitting 10 of 15 shots, including 6 of 10 from 3-point range.
Kelly McKinnon added 21 points. (AP)
Michigan St. 75, Ill.-Chicago 51: Dwayne Stephens scored a career-high 19 points and Anthony Miller and Mike Peplowski scored 14 each as Michigan State, playing at home in East Lansing, routed Illinois-Chicago.
The Spartans (7-0), after leading by only 32-31 at halftime, pulled away in the second half in large part because of miserable shooting by Illinois-Chicago (2-5).
The Flames, who shot just 35 percent in the first half, made only 3 of 29 shots in the first 15 minutes of the second half. (AP) SKIING Jagge Edges Tomba Finn Christian Jagge of Norway, competing on the home course of Alberto Tomba, edged the Italian star by 9-hundredths of a second in the men's slalom yesterday at Madonna di Campiglio, Italy, for his first World Cup victory.
The 25-year-old Jagge, who considered retiring in 1989 after tearing ligaments in his right knee, finished fifth and fourth in the season's two opening slaloms in the United States last month.
He finished second to Tomba at Sestriere, Italy, last week.
Jagge had the fastest first heat of 43.03 seconds down the steep Miramonti track, finishing 31-hundredths of a second ahead of Tomba.
Tomba turned in the fastest second heat at 45.16, but it was not enough to overtake Jagge, who finished third in the heat at 45.38. (AP)


Edberg and Seles No. 1
The International Tennis Federation named the United States Open champion, STEFAN EDBERG of Sweden, as its men's world champion yesterday.


Charles A. Levine, 94, Is Dead; First Trans-Atlantic Air Passenger
Charles A. Levine, who became aviation's first trans-Atlantic passenger in 1927 when he sponsored an attempt to beat Col.
Charles A. Lindbergh to Europe, died Dec. 6 at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington.
He was 94 years old and had moved to Washington from New York City this fall.
His family said he died after a brief illness.


Lame-Duck Backers Cancel Incinerator in Oyster Bay
The lame-duck Republican town government in Oyster Bay today canceled a $150 million garbage incinerator that it had championed for years, amid growing public opposition, as a solution to the town's waste disposal problems.
The unexpected 5-to-2 vote came at the last scheduled town board meeting of the year before an audience of about 20 people who had come to pay tribute to the Republican Town Supervisor, Angelo A. Delligatti, who was defeated in November, in part because of popular opposition to the incinerator.


Solidarity Lawyer Gives Up Effort To Form New Polish Government
Jan Olszewski, the former Solidarity lawyer who was nominated as Prime Minister 12 days ago, resigned today and said his efforts to form a government had failed.
President Lech Walesa had appointed Mr.
Olszewski when a center-right coalition of five parties supporting him appeared close to mustering a majority in the widely splintered lower house of Parliament.


Republicans Can Keep Duke Out of Primaries
To the Editor:
If the Republican Party feels so strongly that David Duke should not run for President as a Republican, why doesn't the party simply tell him he cannot run in the 1992 primaries as a Republican?
That's what the Democratic Executive Committee of Alabama told Strom Thurmond in 1952, when he tried to run for President on the Democratic ticket -- and the Supreme Court upheld the right of the Democratic Party of Alabama to exclude Mr.
Thurmond (and his candidates for Presidential electors) from the Alabama Democratic primary (Ray v. Blair, 343 U.S. 154, 214, April 3 and April 15, 1952).


Review/Rock; With the Guitar as Star, the Black Rock Coalition
If guitar notes were words, the guitarists in the Black Rock Coalition would have spoken more than the entire recorded history of Bob Dylan.
On Sunday night at the Manhattan Center, the Coalition, which promotes the breakdown of racial barriers between different types of music, offered a parade of guitarists for its Christmas concert.
They included Eric Gales, Jean-Paul Bourelly and Kelvyn Bell with his group, Kelvynator.
The progressive-funk ensemble Defunkt played a reunion set in which former members Vernon Reid, Mr.
Bell, the guitarist Ronnie Drayton and the bassist Melvin Gibbs performed onstage together.
Sonny Sharrock and the rapper D-Nice were also on the bill as guests in a group called the Crunch.
These were guitarists with something to say, and they said it loudly.
"Sound man! Turn it all the way up!" shouted Eugene Gales of the Eric Gales Band midway through the band's set, which began the evening.
Wearing a Stevie Ray Vaughan flat-brim hat, Eric Gales led the trio in a hard-metal onslaught of complex drumming, meaty bass lines and guitar whizzing.


A Search for Suspects and Answers in Shooting Deaths in Bronx Neighborhood
The drug trade that has devastated the Mott Haven section of the Bronx, where tenants have resigned themselves to rat-a-tat-tat gunfire in the middle of the night and where teen-agers test-fire each other's weapons as casually as test-driving a car, claimed four more lives late Monday, the police said yesterday.
At least one was a bystander, shot for no reason, officials said.
A fifth person was shot and survived.


Kerrey Concern Violates Laws On Child Labor
The Labor Department said today that on Friday it had assessed a $64,650 fine against a restaurant chain partly owned by Senator Bob Kerrey for violations of the child labor laws.
The company, which is one-third owned by the Nebraska Senator, acknowledged the violations.
The Labor Department's regional office in Kansas City, Mo., said that in an unannounced sweep of businesses in four states, including Nebraska, it had found by far the most numerous violations at seven Grandmother's Inc. restaurants in Omaha and Lincoln that Mr.
Kerrey, a candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination, founded 19 years ago with his brother-in-law, Dean Rasmussen.


McRae to Kentucky?
If CONRAD McRAE loses his two-pronged fight to play for Syracuse, the 6-foot-10-inch junior center could end up playing for the University of Kentucky.


The Pop Life
Metallica in the Diamond
Metallica is coming to the Nassau Coliseum tonight through Friday and the big debate in rock circles is whether anybody should bother to lock the doors.
When it first broke on the scene in the early 1980's, Metallica played in the grand rock tradition of excess.
Its music was loud, fast and complicated, inviting lots of slam-dancing and hair-waving.
This year, though the band's album "Metallica" (Elektra) has been firmly lodged in Billboard's top 10 for the last 5 months, the complexities of the music are gone and fans and critics suspect that the band may have sold out.
Yesterday's outrages become today's banalities.


Accounts
*
Physicians Formula Cosmetics Inc., City of Industry, Calif., a division of the French cosmetics company Pierre Fabre Inc., to Scali, McCabe, Sloves Inc., New York, for a line of hypoallergenic skin-care products.
The account had previously been handled by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS/Pacific, Torrance, Calif.
Billings were not disclosed.


Economic Scene; North American Currency Links?
SHOULD the United States, Mexico and Canada, follow Europe's lead and move toward a North American currency area as well as a freer regional trade zone?
The question is not on any official agendas.
But the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas and the Mexican central bank are quietly studying coordination to dampen swings in the peso-dollar rate.
Some hard-pressed Canadian exporters are urging the Canadians to peg the Canadian dollar to the United States dollar.
And the former Federal Reserve chairman, Paul A. Volcker, recently predicted that "in five years, you will find a fixed exchange rate among the peso, the U.S. dollar and the Canadian dollar."


Defendant in Kahane Murder Trial Is Portrayed as a Victim and an Assassin
Summing up yesterday in the Meir Kahane murder trial, prosecutors portrayed the defendant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, as a wily but ill-fated assassin while defense lawyers depicted him as the victim of an inept investigation and witnesses who could not be believed.
A defense lawyer, Michael Warren, told the jury in State Supreme Court in Manhattan that the prosecution had failed to prove the case against Mr.
Nosair beyond a reasonable doubt.
"And beyond that," he said, "Mr. Nosair is totally innocent."


Foreign Affairs; The TV Debate Fiasco
The Brokaw-Meets-the-Democrats show on Sunday did only one useful thing: It showed that Jerry Brown and Douglas Wilder aren't up to the level of the other candidates and should bow out now.
Almost everything else about the NBC-sponsored event was ill conceived and poorly executed.
The format, which had Tom Brokaw alternately playing quizmaster and scold, made the four credible contenders -- Tom Harkin, Bill Clinton, Bob Kerrey and Paul Tsongas -- look like bickering and posturing schoolchildren.


Judge Grants Delay in Start Of Defense at Noriega Trial
The Federal judge presiding over the trial of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega granted a defense motion for an immediate recess today, citing Government delays in producing files on an undercover Drug Enforcement Administration operation in which the deposed Panamanian dictator cooperated.
Judge William M. Hoeveler of Federal District Court took the action after the lead prosecutor, Michael P. Sullivan, announced that the Government would rest its case after three months of testimony from 46 witnesses.
In practical terms, his decision means that the trial, which had been scheduled to adjourn on Thursday and resume Jan. 6, went into its Christmas recess two days earlier than planned.


Moshe Castel, 82, Dies; Innovator in Israeli Art
Moshe Castel, an Israeli artist who made contemporary imagery from ancient Jewish and Arabic letters and archeological artifacts of the Middle East, died on Thursday in Tel Aviv.
He was 82 years old and also maintained studios in Paris and New York.
The cause of his death was not released.
Born in Jerusalem in 1909, to a Jewish family of Spanish descent that had lived in Palestine since 1492, Mr.
Castel studied art in Israel and Paris.
His early work reflected the School of Paris influence.
Fleeing Paris at the outbreak of World War II, he settled in Safed, an artists' community in what was then Palestine.
He helped to found the New Horizons group, which had an important impact on the modernization of Israeli art.


Controlling Stake In Toy Company
Dakin Inc., a maker of stuffed animals, said Robert G. Solomon had bought a controlling interest in the company.
Terms of Mr.
Solomon's purchase were not announced.
A company spokeswoman put Dakin's sales at about $75 million a year, but the company was laying off people the last two years.
Mr.
Solomon will become Dakin's chairman, chief executive and president.
Until earlier this year, he had been president and chief executive of Applause Inc., another gift and toy marketer.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
"For all practical purposes, the recession continues," the White House said, abandoning its effort to persuade voters that the economy is recovering.  [ Page A1. ]  By acknowledging what voters have perceived, Bush is inclined for the first time to act rather than let the economy take care of itself.
News Analysis.  [ D21. ]
Housing starts fell 2.1 percent in November, all but assuring builders of their worst year since the end of World War II.  [ D1. ]


IN SHARP REVERSAL, WHITE HOUSE TELLS OF BLEAK ECONOMY
Executing an abrupt about-face in response to dismal polls and bad economic news, the White House today abandoned its effort to persuade voters that the economy was recovering and acknowledged that "for all practical purposes, the recession continues."
White House officials said the political reversal was driven by Samuel K. Skinner, President Bush's new chief of staff, who has moved quickly in his first two days on the job to forge a new public relations strategy intended to stop Mr.
Bush's political slide as the 1992 Presidential campaign begins.


Miami's Patton Indicted In Theft of Credit Card
Just 15 days before the University of Miami goes for an unofficial national football championship in the Federal Express Orange Bowl, its starting fullback, Martin Patton, has been charged in a three-count Federal indictment involving the alleged use of a stolen credit card, according to a person in law enforcement with knowledge of the indictment.
Indicted on three counts with Patton, a 21-year-old, third-year sophomore, was Solomon Moore, 20, son of the longtime Miami Dolphins offensive tackle Wayne Moore.
Jason Treco, 24, an employee at Burdines, a Miami department store, was indicted on one count -- allegedly using the stolen credit card.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.62
4.62
7.31
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.11
4.15
6.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.16
4.16
6.59
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.71
6.71
7.79
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.74
7.75
8.08
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.80
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.79
6.80
7.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


60-Minute Gourmet
AMERICANS have developed a new-found passion for legumes and grains.
In restaurants these days, I find a great range of salads and appetizers made with lentils, chick peas, white beans and black beans.
I recently had a main course of roasted duck with delectable little wheat berries, which have a faintly sweet flavor.
Then there are couscous, kasha, barley and the nutty tasting quinoa
Being French, I am most familiar with lentils, which are traditionally served with sausages, in soups and with certain types of game.
Here is one of my favorite recipes for French lentil soup, a winter soul warmer if there ever was one.
Onions, garlic and thyme are the principal seasonings.
Rice lends the soup a secondary texture and thickens the broth.
Served with a fresh chunk of country style bread, this is a soothing cold-weather lunch.


Dep to Withdraw Stock Offering
The Dep Corporation, a Los Angeles-based maker of hair and skin-care products, said yesterday that it planned to withdraw its registration statement involving an offering of 1.7 million common shares.
Robert Berglass, the chairman and president, cited "poor market conditions and the current price of the company's stock" as the primary considerations in the company's decision.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the repeal of a United Nations resolution equating Zionism with racism misstated the vote of the Philippines and Singapore when the resolution was adopted in 1975.
Both countries abstained.


Brutalizing the Helpless; They Also Imperil Community Mental Health
Albany's budget maelstrom threatens to wipe out hard-won services for the mentally ill.
This needless loss would have particularly destructive consequences for New York City.
The latest deficit projections require the State Department of Mental Health to reduce its $1.3 billion annual budget by 15 percent, or $195 million.
A bill advanced by Republicans in the State Senate would "save" $28.5 million by canceling new residential programs for the homeless mentally ill and for psychiatric emergency room services.


ISRAEL RAIDS BASE IN SOUTH LEBANON
Israeli fighter bombers destroyed a Palestinian guerrilla base in southeastern Lebanon today in their first action against targets in this country in a month, security officials said.
Three guerrillas were wounded in the air raid, the officials said, and two Lebanese news cameramen suffered slight leg wounds afterward, when time bombs dropped by the Israeli jets exploded.


Give Connecticut Tax More Credit for Fairness
To the Editor:
"Connecticut's Tax Brawl, Cont'd" (editorial, Dec. 3) describes the new Connecticut state income tax as 4.5 percent "on all income above a basic exemption." You grossly exaggerate the bite on most taxpayers by ignoring the substantial "tax credits" available to them.


Marlins Sign Whiz Kid
The Florida Marlins have signed their first player, and at first glance he hardly seems like major league material, even for an expansion franchise.
The first Marlin is EDMUNDO BORROME, a right-handed pitcher from the Dominican Republic whose fastball has been clocked at 87 miles an hour.


REBEL GROUP ENDS UPRISING IN INDIA
In the face of an Indian Army crackdown, a major insurgent group in the northeastern state of Assam that has sought independence announced a unilateral, indefinite cease-fire today.
The brief announcement by Arabind Rajkhowa, the chairman of the United Liberation Front of Assam, did not give reasons for the move, which followed the release of six hostages the rebels had held captive for more than five months.


Review/Music; Andre Watts at Carnegie Hall, With Attention to Manners
We usually think of virtuosity as the ability to play an extraordinary number of notes in a short time with great accuracy and grace.
And by that standard, there was no mistaking the virtuosity of Andre Watts on Monday night at Carnegie Hall.
As always with Mr.
Watts, there could also be few complaints about the attention he lavished on musical manners, tapering phrases off to pianissimos, or expertly playing octave runs.
His technique has the sleek, polished facility of someone born to the instrument.


Graduate Students Oust Their President
The president of the Graduate Student Organization at the State University of New York here was expelled from office tonight in a special vote, with 226 students voting in favor of his removal and just 11 votes against.
The deposed president, James Caldwell, a 40-year-old graduate student pursuing a masters degree in African-American studies, had angered student senators, who described his political style as adversarial and iron-fisted.


Review/Television; A Tyrannical Widow And Her 5 Daughters
Suffocatingly enclosed, Federico Garcia Lorca's "House of Bernarda Alba" exudes the inexorability of classical tragedy.
The freshly widowed Bernarda, wielding tyrannical control over her five unmarried daughters, virtually shuts her house to the outside world, even as her shrewd old housekeeper warns that "there's a storm brewing in every room and the day it breaks we'll all be swept away." The scene is a small church-dominated Spanish village, not far from Granada.
The fates of the characters are unalterable.
Garcia Lorca wrote the play in 1936, shortly before he was executed by Franco's fascists.
In exploring the explosive ramifications of sexual repression, the poet was also obviously alluding to the dangers of political and cultural suppression.
The play has the ferocious intensity of white heat.
In 1986, Nuria Espert, Spain's distinguished interpreter of Garcia Lorca, directed a London version of "Bernarda Alba" starring Glenda Jackson and Joan Plowright.
That acclaimed production, with the same two stars, has now been adapted for television by the director Stuart Burge ("The Rainbow").
Offered as a "Great Performances" presentation, it is on Channel 13 at 9:30 this evening.


Scaling Back Growth at Harvard's Kennedy School
The John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, which takes pride in advising governments how to run better, is being overhauled itself after more than a decade of spectacular growth.
The task is delicate because the Kennedy School was the most cherished legacy of Derek C. Bok, Harvard's president for 20 years until he retired last June.
Mr.
Bok wanted it to create "a new profession" of public service, and he had sought to make it the equal of Harvard's gradudate schools of law, medicine and business.


Estate Loses Suit to Control Plays on Janis Joplin
Four months after a play based on the life of the singer Janis Joplin was closed because of a lawsuit by the Joplin estate, a Federal judge here has ruled that the production is a protected form of free speech.
The ruling on Monday, by Judge John C. Coughenour of Federal District Court in Seattle, is one of the few nationwide in which a court has tried to define the commercial rights of a celebrity's estate.
Joplin, the Texas-born blues and rock artist, died of a heroin overdose in Hollywood in 1970 at the age of 27.


L.A. Gear Picks Ogilvy for Account
L.A.
Gear, the country's third-largest athletic shoe marketer, has awarded its estimated $30 million advertising account, previously handled in-house, to Ogilvy &amp; Mather in New York and Los Angeles, the company announced yesterday.
Advertising executives said that L.A.
Gear had narrowed the field in a review, which began in early November, to Ogilvy and Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco.
The review had also included the in-house ad department; Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos, Boston; Lintas New York, and Stein, Robaire, Helm, Los Angeles.


Theater in Review
I Won't Dance  American Cabaret Theater Theater at St.
Peter's 619 Lexington Avenue (at 54th Street) Manhattan Text by Steve Ross and Michael Sommers; musical arrangements by Walter Harper; additional arrangements by Mr.
Ross and Bruno David Casolari; set design by Jean Valente; lighting by Matt Berman; sound by Cynthia Daniels; production supervisor, Mr.
Sommers.
Presented by American Cabaret Theater, Peter Ligeti, producing director.
WITH: Mr.
Ross, Mr.
Casolari and Brian Cassier.
Among contemporary cabaret performers who have been inspired by Fred Astaire, none have cultivated the style of Hollywood's greatest song-and-dance man more assiduously than the singer and pianist Steve Ross.
And in "I Won't Dance," his evening-length tribute to the star, Mr.
Ross, in white tie and tuxedo, looks every inch the debonair society blade as he and his keyboard partner, Bruno David Casolari, whisk through dual-piano arrangements of some 40 songs associated with Astaire.


Finding a Mutual Enemy On Both Sides of the Bars
THERE is this glorious scene in Erich von Stroheim's 1923 masterpiece, "Greed," in which Zasu Pitts lets her adoration of money consume her.
She lays out her stolen gold coins on a bed, sensuously disrobes, then flings her nude body midst the coins she so worships.
At the Bayview Correctional Facility at 12th Avenue and 20th Street, there are women who understand completely.
They meet weekly to battle their addiction to money.
Some are addicted to spending it, some to hoarding it, some to wagering it.


Those Lights in Big Cities Get Brighter, Census Finds
The Census Bureau reported today that three in four Americans -- 20 million more than a decade ago -- live in cities or the suburbs around them, more than ever before.
Final calculations have yet to be made on the urban-suburban-rural population breakdown from the 1990 census, but Larry Long, a Census Bureau demographer, estimated today that 23 percent to 24 percent of the nation's population lives in rural areas, slightly more than 25 percent in central cities and the remaining 50 percent in suburban communities.


Senator Dole Enters Hospital For Prostate Surgery Today
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, was admitted to Walter Reed Army Medical Center today for surgery for a prostate condition.
Mr.
Dole, 68 years old, is scheduled for surgery Wednesday.
A spokesman for the Senator said his doctors regard it as "a standard procedure." He is expected to be hospitalized for about a week.


Christmas Stockings Packed With Food Make the Day Scrumptious and Bright
THOSE born before World War II usually found a fresh orange in the toe of their Christmas stocking, a tradition that dates from the time when oranges were a winter luxury.
Of course, by now the Christmas orange has gone the way of the nickel candy bar.
Today, a ripe tomato or a small jar of caviar might be more appreciated; but while the former is a bit fragile for the stocking, the latter is, well, a bit obvious.
A more intriguing gift, perhaps, is a bottle of white truffle oil, an exotic orange spiced tea or a jar of wild rosemary.
For the right recipient, it's not difficult to assemble an all-food stocking to hang on the chimney.


Putting the Unemployed Back to Work
To the Editor:
Unemployment is at its highest in a decade.
Many corporations are still cutting back their staffs and becoming overcautious about plans that involve expansion and rehiring.


Family Rituals Dickens Could Hardly Imagine
MENTION Christmas in most American households and visions of seasonal rituals dance like sugarplums.
Decorating the home, last-minute gift shopping and creamy eggnog dusted with nutmeg top a long list of things associated with the Christmas season, that traditional time of homecoming and cheer for Christians and many non-Christians alike.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Alaska Airlines Inc., Seattle, received approval from the Transportation Department for nonstop service between Seattle and the Mexican cities of Mazatlan and Puerto Vallarta. *
First Bank System Inc., Minneapolis, a holding company, agreed to acquire Siouxland Bank Holding Inc.
The purchase price was not disclosed.


Panel Weighs Requirement For Free Anti-Smoking Ads
The New York City Council held hearings yesterday on an anti-smoking bill that would require public service messages on billboards in subways and bus shelters to counter the seductive influence of cigarette advertisements on the young.
The measure would also outlaw smoking by anyone, adult or juvenile, in public schools during school hours and would require buyers of cigarettes to prove that they are older than 18 by showing a driver's license or state identification card.


Croats Are the Victims of Serbian Harassment; 'We Live in Hell'
To the Editor:
When the splendid Operation Desert Storm started, I watched Cable News Network day and night, and I was excited and happy.
On the global level, there was a state ready to protect people in danger: the United States.
A practical demonstration of the new world order.
As a human being I felt protected and reassured.


9 Towns Spare No Effort to Snare New Plant
At a time when most regions have been battered by the recession and many manufacturing industries are shrinking, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation is offering a potential economic bonanza to some lucky community: a new aircraft plant that could ultimately create 10,000 or more jobs.
But as it examines nine competing sites from Alabama to Arizona, McDonnell Douglas is looking for a lot in return.
In addition to 600 acres adjacent to an airport, the company is seeking hundreds of millions of dollars in financial aid from state and local governments, including tax breaks and worker-training programs.
The company also wants to avoid the heavy regulation and high costs of doing business in the current home of its jetliner business, California, which it has ruled out as a site for the new plant.


Sports of The Times; John Starks Remembers Safeway
HE was making $3.35 an hour, the minimum wage, at a supermarket back home in Tulsa.
He was "a checker and a stock boy," Starks recalled yesterday.
"I mean, a stock person. It showed me what hard work was."
John Starks did something about it.
He enrolled in a junior college, not to play basketball, but to continue his education, to become a man "with a jacket and a tie and an attache case."


U.S. Is Spending Millions on Repairs At Nuclear Plants It Plans to Close
One day after the Bush Administration announced it would drastically shrink the nation's nuclear weapons industry, the Energy Department said today that the Government must continue to spend hundreds of millions of dollars a month to repair parts of the complex it planned to close.
Energy Department officials said they were unable to halt the flow of money because repairs and construction programs already in progress were under contract and difficult to end immediately.
But critics noted today that the gap between a political decision to halt a program and the actual end of the project in the Energy Department often took years and wasted enormous amounts of money.


Looking at a New Divisional Lineup
Let's face it: whether baseball allows George Steinbrenner to return to the Yankees is rapidly becoming a boring issue in New York and a nonissue west of the East River.
So, how about a couple of issues that really cut to the core in major league baseball, North, South, East and West.
The National League is tinkering with the notion of realignment.


Stock Drop For Citicorp
Citicorp stock slipped 25 cents in heavy trading yesterday to close at $9.375, its lowest level of the year.
As 5.96 million shares were changing hands, about three times the daily average, rumors circulated through the financial markets that the company would announce a big loss, change its chairman, and was having trouble borrowing money.
That news pushed the stock down nearly $1 at one point yesterday but the price recovered after Citibank issued a statement.


'Baby Bells' Are Accused of Overcharging
The Consumer Federation of America, one of the nation's largest consumer groups, yesterday attacked the seven "Baby Bell" telephone companies for reportedly overcharging their customers by about $30 billion in the eight years since the January 1984 breakup of A.T.&amp; T.
The Consumer Federation said the regional Bell holding companies had overcharged telephone ratepayers and had used the money to invest in lightly regulated businesses that have made little or no profit for the seven holding companies.
The group said the money would have been better used to reduce customer bills.


Prices of Treasury Securities Rise
Prices of Treasury securities moved higher yesterday despite a signal from the Federal Reserve Board that it had not yet decided to reduce short-term interest rates.
Credit market participants said they were surprised when the Fed chose to drain reserves from the banking system when the overnight Federal funds rate was trading at 4 3/8 percent, just under the 4 1/2 percent level that is widely seen as the Fed's target.


Systemix-Sandoz Accord Linked to Scientist's Role
The stake that Dr.
Irving L. Weissman holds in the genetic sciences company he helped to start four years ago, Systemix Inc., jumped to about $20.3 million yesterday, an $8 million gain since Friday, as investors reacted to the news that Systemix is selling 60 percent of its shares to Sandoz Ltd., the big Swiss drug and chemical company.
Analysts said Sandoz had paid a surprisingly high price in large part to insure that Dr.
Weissman and his team stick with Systemix's work on blood marrow cells and gene therapy.
They hope for important payoffs in cancer, AIDS and organ transplant therapies.


CHRONICLE
FRANCESCO SCAVULLO, the photographer, donates his work to so many charitable organizations for benefits that he has a hard time remembering what went where.


CHRONICLE
BETTY COMDEN, the lyricist, performer and five-time Tony Award winner, took home another prize yesterday, this year's Woman of Vision award of the Eye-Bank for Sight Restoration.


Boys of Summer Make a December Appearance


Judge Again Bans Expulsion of Haitians
Just hours after a Federal Appeals Court panel here lifted the ban on forced repatriations of Haitians who had been seized trying to reach the United States, a Federal District Court judge in Miami granted a new injunction barring any Government action until Friday.
The new injunction replaces one issued on Nov. 19 by Federal District Court Judge C. Clyde Atkins.
In a telephone conference call involving lawyers for the Haitians as well as Justice Department lawyers, Judge Atkins reportedly granted the new injunction to prevent the immediate repatriation of Haitians based on the Court of Appeals ruling earlier in the day.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY DINKINS RESCINDS SALARY CUTS
After announcing with great fanfare last year that senior city officials would do their part to ease the city's fiscal problems by taking 5 percent pay cuts, Mayor Dinkins rescinded the cuts for himself and about 800 other officials who are paid more than $70,000 a year.
The pay cut, which municipal union officials had denounced as a "public relations gimmick," has produced $3.5 million in savings over 14 months, the city said.
The budget deficit for the 1992 fiscal year is estimated at $210 million.
B3.
DRUG WARS CLAIM 4 IN THE BRONX
The drug trade that has devastated the Mott Haven section of the Bronx, where tenants are accustomed to rat-a-tat-tat gunfire in the middle of the night and teen-agers test-fire each other's weapons as casually as if they were test-driving cars, claimed four more victims, two of them innocent bystanders, officials said.
B3.


Cuomo Faces a Deadline on National Aspirations and a Stalemate on the Budget


Wine Talk
WINE may or may not gladden the heart of the imbiber, but it is unsurpassed when it comes to last-minute gifts.
The range is immense.
There are $30,000 wine gifts, like a case of 1945 Petrus; $3,000 gifts, like a case of Beaulieu Vineyard's 1959 Private Reserve; $1,500 gifts, like a bottle of Kelt Cognac, and $3 gifts, like a clever cork-puller from Italy.


Federal Panel Calls for National Standards and Tests for All Schoolchildren
In a major departure for American education, a major advisory panel is calling for voluntary national curriculum standards and national tests for American schoolchildren.
Such standards would spell out, for the first time on a national level, what children should be expected to learn and what level of achievement is good enough at different stages, according to the National Council on Education Standards and Testing, an advisory group of major political and educational leaders whose approval is crucial to the success of any such effort.
The council, created by Congress last June, concluded its deliberations today.
Its final report will be made public in mid-January.


As China's Economy Thrives, The Public Sector Flounders
The Avenue of Eternal Peace, the main road through the capital, ends at the gate to one of the country's gargantuan state enterprises, a steel factory that employs 186,000 workers and sprawls from the edge of the city into the mountains and plains beyond.
It takes half an hour by train to go from one end to the other of the central factory of the Capital Iron and Steel Mill, where giant blast furnaces run 24 hours a day.
Along the way, the main path splinters into the different parts of this mini-society: a park, a flower garden with a small zoo, a hospital, two colleges, a nursery, a kindergarten, and a farm that grows fish, poultry and vegetables for the factory workers.


Review/Theater; 2 Widows On Prowl In Revival Of a Genre
In another era, no Broadway season was complete without one play or musical whose characters worked in the shmata business.
Producers knew where some of their most reliable clientele was: on Seventh Avenue, bearing expense accounts.
So they perennially served these steady customers such fare as "The Fifth Season," "Seidman and Son" and "I Can Get It for You Wholesale." But that was another theater and another garment industry.
Why is the Circle Repertory Company, the Off Broadway home of such playwrights as Lanford Wilson and Craig Lucas, reviving the genre at its most trivial on the eve of 1992?
Don't look for answers here.
"The Rose Quartet," as the Circle Rep's offering is called, makes no more sense as either commerce or art than did this company's other boulevard play of the year, "The Balcony Scene," which, like this one, told of the mating dance of urban apartment dwellers.
This time we watch the heartwarming story of two widows, one a lifetime worker in ladies' hats, who become Upper West Side roommates and try to snare two single male neighbors who are partners in a long-running ribbon business.
Were it not for the late-in-the-evening revelation that the two elderly gentlemen are discreetly gay -- an off-the-rack effort to be with it -- there is nothing in the play that might not have appeared in a bygone vehicle for Menasha Skulnik, Sam Levene or Gertrude Berg.
But those stars would have demanded funnier material, even if they had to pay retail.


Lest We Forget the Five Sullivan Brothers
To the Editor:
"The Hidden Heroes" (editorial, Dec. 7), which recalls the Japanese-American 442d Regimental Combat Team in World War II on the 50th anniversary of the attack on Pearl Harbor, contains what I take to be an unintended misstatement.
You say of the 442d Regimental Combat Team, "It was the only combat unit that boasted five brothers." Not so.


She Has a Steady Job But it Wasn't Enough
Jalal Nettles, 8 months old, is happily playing with his breakfast, opening his mouth wide to show his mother what's in there.
He's an energetic little boy, a squirmer, a grabber, and as he finds his way off his mother's lap and onto the floor, the cliche is appropriate: He's a handful, this kid.
Jalal would be a handful even if his mother, Hafeesa Nettles, a 37-year-old sales assistant in television advertising and an aspiring cartoonist, had been married the way she expected to last April, around the time Jalal was born.
Even if she could afford child care and rent on the $644 checks she brings home from her job every other week.
And even if she didn't already have a 16-year-old son from a long-defunct marriage.
A Familiar Problem
But when Ms.
Nettles's relationship with her fiance collapsed and the prospect of a two-income household vanished with it, the arrival of Jalal placed a financial burden on her that she was unable to carry.
By September, with her resources depleted by child care, she was three months behind in her rent and had been forced to send her older son, Tyve, to live with her mother in Memphis.
She applied for food stamps and rent aid and was turned down by the city.
In October, her landlord threatened to evict her.


Review/Dance; Showing the Introspective Side of Ailey
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater honored its founder on Sunday afternoon at the City Center by presenting repeat performances of Mr.
Ailey's "Blues Suite" and "Pas de Duke" and a revival of his "Hermit Songs."
The revival, a solo choreographed in 1961 to songs by Samuel Barber, demonstrated that Mr.
Ailey, who could choreograph wonderfully rousing works, was also capable of introspection.


S.A.T. Coaching Raises Scores, Report Says
Commercial coaching courses that train students to take standardized tests can raise scores significantly, according to a new report, and give students who can afford such courses an advantage over poorer students in getting into college or receiving a scholarship.
The report by the National Center for Fair and Open Testing, a not-for-profit group in Cambridge, Mass., that also goes by the name FairTest, asserts that studies done over the last 20 years prove that coaching courses can raise a student's score by 100 points on the Scholastic Aptitude Test, a multiple choice examination with a top score of 1600 that many colleges and universities use in making admission decisions.
A similar test, the Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude Test, is used to award some competitive scholarships.


Croats Are the Victims of Serbian Harassment
To the Editor:
In "Croatia's Borders: Over the Edge" (Op-Ed, Nov. 22), David Martin offers a lesson in history to the European Community and the United States.
It is unfortunate that he didn't do his homework properly.


Geer, DuBois Accelerates Officer Shift
GEER, DUBOIS INC., which has a reputation for stylishly understated advertising for clients like Jaguar and the World Gold Council, is accelerating its timetable for a new generation of top management.
Peter Geer, chairman and chief executive of the New York agency, is relinquishing those titles to take the new position of chairman of the executive committee, effective today.
John Hayes, the president, adds the chief executive's title, while Rodney Underwood, vice chairman, becomes chairman and remains creative director.


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Stock prices fell in Tokyo today.
At midday, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 106.39 points, or 0.47 percent, to 22,629.90.
On Tuesday, the index lost 100.38 points.


The Looming Abortion Showdown
For very different reasons, abortion rights advocates and their opponents agree that the Supreme Court should hear a Pennsylvania case that challenges Roe v.
Wade -- and decide it in the coming election year.
The pro-choice forces want clarification of the 1973 ruling, which has been under attack by the high court's newer members.
Pro-life forces want the justices to flatly overrule Roe.
What a fascinating situation.
Roe's defenders no longer resist attempts to re-examine the ruling's constitutional protections for a woman's right to choose between giving birth or terminating a pregnancy.
And Roe's opponents seek their desired result at the hands of justices appointed by Presidents Reagan and Bush -- which in turn could hurt the Bush re-election campaign next fall.


Limerick Journal; An Irish City Bounces Back, in the Spirit of 1691
People living here in Ireland's third-largest city, along the banks of what James Joyce described as "the dark mutinous Shannon waves," have long been accustomed to hearing their town bad-mouthed by the rest of the country.
To the smart alecks of Cork and Dublin, Limerick is "Stab City," where no one is safe on the streets.
It has been a place to ridicule whether or not one has been there or knows very much about it.
There is even doubt that the eponymous poetic form really started here.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-22  KAZAKHSTAN ON NUCLEAR ARMS
As Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d visited Kazakhstan, the president of the former Soviet republic, Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, made clear that in advance of negotiations on the details of a new commonwealth, he was not ready to cede nuclear weapons or any other advantages to the larger, more powerful Russian republic.
A1  DEATH WATCH FOR SOVIET UNION
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, met privately on the now anti-climactic issue of how and when to dispose of the remnants of the Soviet Union.
Mr.
Yeltsin's spokesman later said New Year's Eve would be soon enough.
A1  Moscow Mayor haunted by his own bitter economic medicine.
A20  WOES OF THE CHINESE COLLECTIVE
Capitalistic attitudes have brought economic prosperity to southeast China.
But elsewhere the country seems compelled to cling to the lagging state sector, and the growing economic inequalities between the two tiers of the economy are leading to political headaches for China's leaders.
A1  EXPELLING OF HAITIANS BLOCKED
Hours after a federal appeals court in Atlanta lifted the ban on froced repatriation of Haitians fleeing their homeland, a district court judge granted a new injunction.
A3.
KOHL ON RECOGNIZING CROATIA
Chancellor Helmut Kohl said that Germany would vote on Thursday to recognize Croatia and Slovenia, but would not carry out the decision until January.
The announcement came after the European Community agreed recognize the two separatist Yugoslav republics, but not until next month.
A3  'IVAN' CASE REOPENED
Israel's Supreme Court will hear new evidence claiming that John Demjanjuk, convicted and sentenced to death as the monstrous "Ivan the Terrible" of the Treblinka concentration camp, is the wrong man and the victim of a frameup by United States and Israeli authorities.
A9  ISRAELIS LEAVING TALKS
With Israeli and Palestinian delegations still meeting on a couch in a State Department corridor, and little progress made in separate talks with the Syrians and Lebanese, Israeli officials said that they would leave Washington today.
A7  Limerick Journal: 'Stab City' tries to revamp its reputation.
A4  Attacked for ineffectiveness, U.N. to have relief coordinator.
A19  National A24-26, B8, D21-22  RECESSION LIVES, OFFICIALLY
In a reversal urged by the new chief of staff, the White House abandoned its effort to persuade voters that the economy is recovering and acknowledged that the recession was not over.
A1  News analysis: Bush weighs good politics and bad economics.
D21  CANDIDATES CAN SPEND MORE
Changes in Federal campaign laws will allow candidates in the 1992 primary season to pump unusually large amounts of money into the early states.
D22  KERREY TIED TO LABOR VIOLATIONS
The Labor Department fined a restaurant chain partly owned by the Presidential candidate Bob Kerreyfor violations of child labor laws.
D22  G.O.P. officials take steps to keep Duke off primary ballots.
D22  WELFARE COMES UNDER ATTACK
Anger over the welfare system is giving rise to plans around the nation to pay welfare mothers less and change their behavior through financial threats and rewards.
A1  GETTING ADDICTS ON THEIR FEET
A restaurant staffed by former drug abusers is the latest enterprise of a San Francisco program that resurrects hard-core criminals and addicts by teaching them how to live and work on their own.
A24  VICTORY FOR HOMOSEXUALS
A Minnesota appeals court granted guardianship of a brain-damaged woman to her lesbian lover, after a seven-year legal battle.
A26  MILLIONS ON A DOOMED PLANT
The Energy Department said it will continue to spend hundreds of millions of dollars a month on nuclear weapons plants it plans to close.
B8  The Noriega defense is granted a delay.
A24  More Americans than ever live in cities or suburbs.
A24  Education Page B9
Do children need national schools standards and national tests?
Metropolitan Digest, B1 JERSEY CITY MAYOR GUILTY
Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City was found guilty of 15 counts of fraud and tax evasion, setting the stage for his removal from office when the verdict becomes final at his sentencing.
A1  Neediest Cases B7  Business Digest, D1  Health Page C21  PUTTING A LID ON DRUG COSTS
Hospitals are meeing highly promoted and expensive new drugs head on with their own programs to promote cost-effective drugs.
Some are even banning expensive drugs with what they see as few extra benefits.
A1  Personal Health: men get depressed, too.
C21  The Living Section C1-18
Hotels at the holidays.
C1  Family rituals.
C1  Christmas beers.
C1  Eating Well.
C12  Wine Talk.
C16  Edible stocking stuffers.
C18  Arts/Entertainment C23-30  Barry Levinson's producer.
C23  Janis Joplin estate loses its suit to control plays about the singer.
C23  New York Film Critics' Circle awards.
C25  Theater: "The Rose Quartet." C23  Music: Andre Watts performs at Carnegie Hall.
C23  Dance: Introspection by Ailey.
C30  Word and Image: "Dreadnought," a history by Robert K. Massie.
C27  Obituaries D23  Charles Levine, first trans-Atlantic aviation passenger.
Sports B11-17  Baseball: Johnson may play center field for Mets.B11  Basketball: Knicks defeat Nets.
B11  Column: Vecsey on John Starks.
B11  Football: Dolphins are confident.
B11  Hockey: Islanders beat Hartford.
B14  Olympics: U.S. speed skier takes zany course.
B17  Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29  Editorials A28  Brutalizing the helpless.
New York and mental health.
Looming abortion showdown.
De-recognize Yugoslavia.
Letters A28  Anna Quindlen: The glass eye.
A29  Leslie H. Gelb: The TV debate fiasco.
A29  Vladimir Bukovsky: Goodbye, Gorby, and good riddance.
A29


Rutgers' Lalas Named Top Collegian
Rutgers was bypassed as one of the four seeded teams for the Division I soccer tournament, but the school was not overlooked yesterday when Alexi Lalas, the towering sweeper, was named the country's player of the year.
Lalas was presented with the 25th Hermann Trophy, soccer's equivalent of the Heisman Trophy, at a ceremony at the Plaza.
The Hermann Trophy was established in 1968 in honor of Bob Hermann, one of the founders of the now defunct North American Soccer League.


Making Circuits Without CFC's
Electronics companies have been scrambling in recent years to find ways to eliminate the use of environmentally damaging chlorofluorocarbons from the manufacture of circuit boards.
Two approaches -- one already well tested by Northern Telecom, the other under development by Motorola -- demonstrate that responding to environmental concerns can sometimes cut costs without affecting the reliability of the product.
Although best known as a refrigerant and as a blowing agent in plastic-foam production, the family of chemicals called chlorofluorocarbons is widely used to clean newly soldered electronic circuit boards.
But CFC's, as they are generally known, have been linked to the degradation of the earth's protective ozone layer.
Production Is Ending
By international agreement, CFC production is to be phased out by the end of the century.
And that deadline may well move up as political leaders respond to environmental concerns and to mounting evidence of the adverse effect of CFC's on the atmosphere.
Moreover, the price of the compounds is going up because of production cutbacks and increasingly stiff Federal taxes.


The Man Who Gathers the Means For Barry Levinson's Movies
Barry Levinson, the director, laughed and said his longtime partner, Mark Johnson, hardly fit the classic portrait of the profane, shirt-open-to-the-third-button, Armani-clothed Hollywood producer.
"Mark is certainly not flamboyant," said Mr.
Levinson, the director of "Bugsy," the new, critically lauded film about the gangster Bugsy Siegel, as well as "Rain Man," "Good Morning, Vietnam," "Diner" and other films produced by Mr.
Johnson.
"There's no false bravado there."


Kohl to Compromise on Yugoslavia
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany said today that his Government would move on Thursday to recognize Croatia and Slovenia, but would not carry out the decision until January.
The announcement was made hours after the European Community agreed here to recognize the two separatist Yugoslav republics by Jan. 15.
In making the announcement, Mr.
Kohl apparently sought to reconcile the community's action with his earlier promise to accept Croatia and Slovenia as independent nations before Christmas.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 13
Dec. 6
Dec. 14
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.3
6.8
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
214.4
211.5
224.6
Distillate stocks
142.3
141.4
132.6
Crude imports, daily
5.8
6.7
5.1
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.5
2.1
Crude stocks
340.4
346.1
331.5
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
87.0
82.3
83.8
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Alert Holdings Seeks Bankruptcy
Alert Holdings Inc., one of the nation's largest alarm security companies, filed for bankruptcy protection because of increasing debts and lawsuits.
Records indicated that the debt was more than $40 million.


People
*
Deborah A. Newkerk has been named president and chief executive of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Direct North America, a new unit of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide that incorporates the New York and Torrance, Calif., offices of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Direct U.S.A., and the Canadian direct marketing unit, Taylor-Tarpay Direct Advertising Ltd., Scarborough, Ontario.
Ms.
Newkerk had previously been president of Saatchi Direct.
Also, Peter Tarpay, Taylor-Tarpay's president, has been named executive vice president at Saatchi Direct North America.
The Rochester office of Saatchi Direct beomes an independent unit, called Saatchi &amp; Saatchi CMS, with Richard A. Peters remaining chairman and chief executive.


At Least 55 Are Hurt as Train Derails in Florida


Soviets Say Arms Scuttling Will Take 10 Years
A top official of the Soviet nuclear-arms complex said today that destruction of Moscow's short-range weapons would cost $2 billion and take 10 years.
He also said that a pledged $400 million in American aid for that effort should be used to build one of two storage sites for materials from retired warheads and that that center should be under "joint control" with Washington.


Brutalizing the Helpless; State Senate Republicans Target the Poor
The budget battle between Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York and the State Legislature is more partisan than usual this year.
Senate Republicans seem to be using the impasse to tarnish Mr.
Cuomo's credibility as a possible Democratic Presidential contender.
The struggle is over where to impose the harshest cuts -- on welfare and Medicaid recipients or on schoolchildren.
That's a false and destructive choice.
Fairness dictates careful cuts both in school aid and Medicaid and welfare.


Rookie Owner Adapts to Hard Knocks
Don't say that Bob Tisch wasn't warned.
"Before Bob came on, I told him, 'If you want to be an owner, you'll have to wait 30 years for 10 years of enjoyment,' " recalled Wellington Mara today, chuckling at his little joke.


Nets' 7-Minute-40-Second Drought Saves the Knicks
What happened at Madison Square Garden last night would be hard to believe if it had not happened to the Nets.
After leading the Knicks, 83-74, in the fourth quarter, New Jersey went the next 7 minutes 40 seconds without scoring.
Not a basket, not a free throw.


Anti-Tax Drive in Hartford Sputters Out
A special legislative session that began last month in the heat of a drive to repeal Connecticut's new income tax ground to a clanking anti-climactic halt tonight, having achieved nothing but strife.
The final major vote of the session -- a proposal to overhaul the income-tax code and cut taxes for most families -- was killed through a procedural maneuver; it never even came up for a vote.


Shining Path Supporters Abroad Anger Peru
When President Alberto K. Fujimori visited San Francisco recently, Amnesty International organized two picket lines: one outside a hotel where he was speaking, and the other outside a Berkeley bookstore that sold propaganda for the Shining Path.
Human rights protests against Peruvian Presidents are as old as Peru's 11-year-old counterinsurgency war.
But the bookstore picket line reflected new concern about a growing American and European support network for Peru's Maoist guerrillas.


European to Publish
One of the court-appointed administrators overseeing the bankrupt private companies owned by the late Robert Maxwell announced tonight that he had decided to publish the next issue of The European.
The administrator, Martin Fishman, closed the money-losing pan-European weekly last Thursday.


Corrections
Charts on Aug. 30 and Dec. 1 comparing the land area of the republics of the Soviet Union gave incorrect figures.
Ukraine makes up 2.7 percent of the total, Russia 76.2 percent and all others 21.1 percent.
In some issues, the total land area of the former Soviet Union was given incorrectly.
It is 8,649,496 square miles.
The errors were pointed out by readers in letters dated Dec. 3 and Dec. 6, but delayed in reaching the responsible editors.


Mets Fans Paying the Price
Inside a parka and under a frozen sky, the man slid through the line and strode up to Window 4 at Shea Stadium yesterday.
"Hey, hey, you can't cut the line," cried some of the people standing on line, their breath visible, their anger real.
"Wait your turn."
The man in the parka turned around and Jeff Torborg smiled.
The voices went silent for a second as the new manager of the Mets addressed his accusers.
There was surprise but not embarrassment.


WAR-CRIMES TRIAL AWAITS NEW DATA
Israel's Supreme Court will hear new evidence in a few days asserting that John Demjanjuk, convicted and sentenced to death here as the monstrous "Ivan the Terrible" of the Treblinka death camp, is the wrong man and the victim of "a complete frame-up" by United States and Israeli authorities.
Mr.
Demjanjuk's Israeli lawyer says that copies of diplomatic cables, official letters and other documents that he recently obtained show that the United States Justice Department knew as far back as 1978 that Ivan the Terrible was not Mr.
Demjanjuk, a 71-year-old retired auto worker from Cleveland.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Standard Inc., New York, announced that Fred A. Allardyce, vice president and controller, had been named vice president and chief financial officer. *
Bulova Corp., New York, a unit of Loews Corp., named Carl E. Rosen senior vice president.
He also remains executive director-management information systems development at Loews.


Bridge
The fashion among experts nowadays favors "upside-down signals." This means that, in contrast to the traditional method, a low card is encouraging and a high card is discouraging.
This has a slight, very slight, advantage for those who use it.
In particular, a player with a strong holding may not be able to spare a high card to encourage his partner.
The modern style was at work, although to no great effect, on the diagramed deal from the prestigious Reisinger Board-a-Match Team Championship in Indianapolis last month.
East and West were Marty Bergen of Farmingdale, L.I., and Bjorn Fallenius of Manhattan, who were en route to victory.


3 From Reebok Go to L.A. Gear
The Athletic footwear maker L.A.
Gear Inc. said today that it had hired three top executives from Reebok International Ltd.
The Los Angeles-based company said recently that it would cut about 400 of its 1,350 employees as it eliminated its apparel division to focus on footwear.


Anderson Needs Floor Time For Nets to Make Their Point
When Patrick Ewing was beginning his second season with the Knicks in the fall of 1986, Hubie Brown wanted him to play power forward.
On the hot seat, the coach needed a competitive start by his team to save his job.
He decided his best chance was to have the immobile Bill Cartwright play in the middle, with the far more athletic Ewing chasing the smaller, quicker power forwards.
Tactically speaking, this wasn't really an illogical deployment, except that Ewing wanted no part of it and Ewing, not Brown, was the future of the franchise.
Ewing had been raised to be a center.
Critics hailed him as the second coming of Bill Russell, not Ralph Sampson, and no self-respecting 7-footer could let himself be moved from his pedestal in the low post.


Video in Drunken-Driving Cases
New York City drivers stopped on suspicion of driving drunk or under the influence of drugs are being videotaped under a new Police Department program aimed at winning convictions.
City highway patrol cars began using 12 small video cameras yesterday.
Each camera is mounted next to the rear-view mirror to record erratic driving and the actions of drivers when they get out of their cars.
Highway officers also have clip-on microphones that can record suspects.


Bank C.D. Yields Off Again
Yields on certificates of deposit and bank money market accounts continued to decline through the week that ends today, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a publication based in North Palm Beach, Fla., that reports on interest rates.
"Because of more weak economic signals, such as a fall in housing starts, and with no inflation in the wind, look for the Federal Reserve to lower the disccount rate momentarily," Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Monitor, said yesterday.
"That should trigger another decline in the banks' prime rate, especially since their cost of funds has fallen."


Theater in Review
Big Noise of '92 Diversions From the New Depression
Cherry Lane Theater 38 Commerce Street Manhattan
Set, Ann Davis; costumes, Gregg Barnes; lighting, Douglas O'Flaherty; sound, Serge Ossorguine; wigs, Elizabeth Katherine Carr; choreography, Tony Musco; musical arrangements, Mario Sprouse; assistant producer, Gregg Wilcynski.
Presented by Neilan Tyree.
WITH: Mr.
Tyree, Mink Stole, Tim Michaels and Tom Kosis.
Kit McClure and Her All-Girl Orchestra and Joel Forrester, piano.
For the opening second-act number of "Big Noise of '92," a two-hour variety show subtitled "Diversions From the New Depression," its co-stars Neilan Tyree and Mink Stole lurch woozily through Noel Coward's "Why Must the Show Go On?" then fret about their weak second act.
Never mind the second act; Coward's musical question should have been asked 10 minutes into this vanity showcase for Mr.
Tyree, who produced it.


Cars Don't Increase Central Park Safety
To the Editor:
A lot of the menace from speeding cyclists in Central Park could be eliminated by safety checkpoints.
How many bicycles have the requisite bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for at least 100 feet or who give hand and arm signals?
How many have lamps visible 500 feet in front or 300 feet to the rear and 200 feet from each side?
Improperly or unequipped bicycles should be banned or confiscated.


Personal Health
DEPRESSION has long been considered primarily a women's disease.
The rate for women being treated and in community surveys, in fact, is two to six times as high asfor men.
Now it looks as if men could be starting to catch up.
Economic and social pressures and a greater willingness by men and doctors to recognize and discuss emotional problems may eventually whittle away the statistical difference.
Still, according to a recent analysis involving more than 23,000 patients and 500 medical practitioners, many more mistakes are made in recognizing depression in men than in women.


Macy Posts Large Loss In Quarter
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company reported a surprisingly large loss yesterday for the three months leading up to the Christmas selling season, and Macy officials said Christmas results so far were disappointing.
"It's below what most people think it is," Myron E. Ullman, Macy's vice chairman, said when asked how the Christmas selling season was going.
"It's tough out there."


A Hardy Flu Bug and Long Lines for Shots
Before Peter Gianokos rolled up his sleeve yesterday for a nurse to inject him with a dose of influenza vaccine, the 74-year-old Stamford resident had not had a flu shot since he was in the Navy during World War II.
"I heard it's more severe this winter, and I know a lot of people who've had the flu pretty bad," he said, explaining his decision to show up at one of about 45 flu clinics held during the last two months by the Stamford Health Department.
"They advertised it so much, and since it's a good precaution and it's free, I'd be foolish not to take it."


Book Notes
Found: One Ship
It was a dark and stormy night.


Going Home (to a Hotel) for Holiday Meals
AROUND the holidays, historic hotels become surrogate hearths and homes for families who return every year.
At these stately dowagers, the planning and baking, preserving and spicing of food for Christmas dinner begins months before the meal is served.
Jack Reynolds, manager of the Golden Lamb, a hotel that opened in Lebanon, Ohio, as a log tavern in 1803, started worrying about his Christmas persimmon pudding in October, when the fruit began to ripen on the bushy trees that line the streets of that sleepy village in southeastern Ohio.


Canadian Financier Adds to Media Holdings
Conrad M. Black, the Canadian financier, has made a career of collecting well-known media properties worldwide.
On Monday he added another group of newspapers and magazines to the more than 200 he already owns.
Tourang Ltd., one of Mr.
Black's Canadian companies, agreed to pay $690 million (Australian currency), or about $534 million (United States), for the John Fairfax Group and will assume the company's $700 million (Australian), or $542.6 million, in debt.
Fairfax, Australia's second-largest media group, owns the Sydney Morning Herald, the Australian Financial Review and other newspapers and magazines.


Market Place; T. J. Maxx Parent Set to Branch Out
BERNARD CAMMARATA, president and chief executive of the TJX Companies in Framingham, Mass., the parent of T. J. Maxx, the star of the $10 billion off-price retail apparel industry, is banking that its success will carry over to two new satellite ventures.
At an analysts' meeting today in New York, Mr.
Cammarata plans to announce plans for some former Zayre properties that the company took over in a complex series of transactions with the bankrupt Ames Department Stores.


Safeco Is Giving President The Title of Chief Executive
Roger H. Eigsti says his ability to make timely decisions is one reason he has been named chief executive of the Safeco Corporation, the Seattle-based insurance company, effective Jan. 1.
Mr.
Eigsti, 49, is now president and chief operating officer of the company, which he joined 19 years ago.
He succeeds C. Bruce Maines, 65, who will continue as chairman.


Weprin Joins G.O.P. in Opposing School Aid Cut
The stalemate over the state budget continued today as the new Speaker of the Democratic-led Assembly, Saul Weprin, joined Senate Republicans in opposing Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal to cut $250 million in school aid in this year's budget.
Mr.
Weprin, in the first political muscle-flexing of his three-day tenure, also indicated that he would accept no more than $300 million of a $600 million cut Mr.
Cuomo had proposed in the $8.3 billion school-aid program for next year.


Edward Suisman, 89, Aerospace Executive
Edward Suisman, a founder of the University of Hartford and retired chairman of Aerospace Metals Inc. in Hartford, died on Saturday at Eisenhower Medical Center in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
He was 89 years old and lived in West Hartford, Conn., and Palm Springs, Calif.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


G.M. Choses Candidates For Factories to Be Closed
The General Motors Corporation, in announcing candidates today for two of the six car or truck plants it plans to close in the next few years, singled out factories that make some of G.M.'s slow-selling larger cars.
G.M. will make a final decision on the closings in the coming months.
But the company said today that either its Arlington, Tex., plant or its Willow Run plant in Ypsilanti, Mich., would be shut.
Both plants make full-size, rear-wheel-drive cars -- including the Chevrolet Caprice and the Buick Roadmaster -- which are not selling well.


CHRONICLE
It was a memorable evening for the Tisch family Tuesday as the Lawrence Tisches, the Preston Robert Tisches and some of their children gathered to celebrate the inauguration of the Tisch Center for the Arts at the 92d Street Y.
"This shows there is life after professional football," said JOAN TISCH, the center's first chairman and a vice president of the Y. She was referring to another family venture, which has not proved a consistent winner. (Her husband, PRESTON ROBERT TISCH, is co-owner of the New York Giants, who have had a dismal season.) "You can't win 'em all," Mr.
Tisch said philosophically.


Yugoslav Peace Mission Goes On, Vance Declares
Despite disappointment over a European Community decision this week endorsing diplomatic recognition of the breakaway republics of Croatia and Slovenia, Cyrus R. Vance, the United Nations special envoy, said today that he intended to persist with his peacekeeping mission in Yugoslavia.
In an interview, the 74-year-old former American Secretary of State said he planned to spend "at least a week or so" in Yugoslavia starting Dec. 28 in a new effort to achieve a genuine cease-fire between Croatian and Serbian forces.


Jersey City Thinks About A New Mayor
Red bows, silver cardboard snowflakes and Christmas carols gave City Hall a proper holiday atmosphere today.
But the mood was hardly festive here a day after Mayor Gerald McCann was found guilty of Federal fraud charges.
One visitor likened the almost palpable sense of apprehension to "sitting on top of a volcano," while Brian K. Dorf, Mr.
McCann's spokesman, said the dominant mood was "introspective."


The Trusted Museum Insider Who Turned Out to Be a Thief
On Jan. 10, Prof.
John Quentin Feller, a widely published authority on Chinese export ceramics, examined a finely crafted Chinese serving platter at the Winterthur Museum outside Wilmington, Del.
The dish, which once belonged to George Washington and was later owned by Robert E. Lee, seemed to radiate history.
Instead of returning the platter to the locked case from which an attendant had removed it, Professor Feller slipped the platter into the drawer of a sideboard in the museum and reported it missing.
When questioned by a Delaware State Police officer, he denied trying to steal the platter.
When it became clear his story would not hold up, however, Professor Feller began to spill the details of an 18-year criminal career in which he stole more than 100 precious objects from 8 museums in the United States and England, making him one of the biggest art thieves of the century.


Corrections
A map on Tuesday with an article about an agreement to give Eskimos in Canada political domain over a fifth of the country's territory mis located the eastern and southern boundaries of the newly designated region.
A corrected map appears today on page A13.


Officers of Dock Union, Linked to Mafia, Agree to Quit
Pressured by a Federal lawsuit, top officers of a longshoremen's union identified as a bastion of Mafia power on the Brooklyn waterfront have agreed to step aside in favor of a court-appointed monitor.
A leading New York waterfront official hailed the agreement as the Government's most powerful blow in wresting control of the docks from organized crime.
Federal prosecutors had accomplished more through this civil suit, he said, than through their traditional powers of arrest and indictment.


Big Board Disciplines Former Chief of Drexel
Frederick H. Joseph, the former chief executive of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. who presided over the the emergence of the firm as a Wall Street power and its subsequent collapse, was censured by the New York Stock Exchange yesterday and barred from associating with member firms for two years.
The Big Board cited Mr.
Joseph for his failure to carry out proper supervision that might have prevented the scandal that led to the firm's collapse.
Drexel was propelled from a third-tier firm to a Wall Street powerhouse through its junk bond business, headed by Michael R. Milken.


Quotation of the Day
"We cannot blame our problems totally on the war, the plunge in consumer confidence, or the recession. Rather, we must make fundamental changes in the way G.M. does business if we are to improve our performance." -- ROBERT C. STEMPEL, chairman of General Motors.  [ D4:1. ]


Debating Park Service Plan To Raze Ellis I. Buildings
The buildings were there when the immigrants poured into Ellis Island in the early 1900's: the morgue and the crematory, the contagious-disease wards, the furnace and laundry.
But do they have enough historic merit to save them from the wrecker's ball?
That was the dominant question at a 3 1/2-hour hearing Tuesday night on the National Park Service's plan to demolish 12 buildings to make room for a privately owned, $145 million conference center with 325 rooms for overnight guests.


Stopping The Shots, But Not Rumors
John Vanbiesbrouck stopped 39 shots last night during a 6-3 victory by the Rangers over the Philadelphia Flyers, but he made no effort to deflect the rumors.
If a premature trade report from Minnesota wasn't quite true, then maybe the next bulletin about the Ranger goaltender would be accurate.
And maybe, Vanbiesbrouck decided, a change of creases wouldn't be such a terrible thing.


Stowe's Gondola, an Opening and a Quad Chairlift
Skiers in line for the Mount Mansfield gondola in Stowe, Vt., sometimes had to wait 35 to 50 minutes to get onto the lift during peak times.
When viewed from the gondola, on the other hand, the slopes often looked practically empty.
That imbalance promises to change at 9 A.M on Saturday when a new gondola, which the manufacturer says is the fastest in the world, begins taking passengers up 3,750 feet to the summit.
"The uphill capacity of this new gondola is two and a half times the old one," said Gary Kiedaisch, president of the ski resort.
"The old lift carried 900 people per hour and this new one can carry 2,400 people per hour. Our goal, especially during rush hours, is to get skiers up and on the slopes quicker."


Corrections
A map on Tuesday with an article about an agreement to give Eskimos in Canada political domain over a fifth of the country's territory mislocated the eastern and southern boundaries of the newly designated region.
A corrected map appears above.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR many families, the good cheer of the holiday season is liberally laced with alcohol.
We use Champagne to celebrate our happiness, and liquor to deaden our sorrows.
It is a time when children see much more drinking -- and drunkenness -- than usual.
All of this leads parents to wonder whether or when they should permit their children to drink socially, even though it is illegal.
Will forbidding alcohol make it only more appealing?
Will condoning drinking lead to alcoholism for a child?


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE -- Named Rick Dudley director of corporate sponsorship.
American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Named Bobby Meacham manager of Eugene of the Northwest League and Tom Poquette manager of Appleton of the Midwest League.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Reached a one-year player development agreement with Reno of the California League for 1992.
Named Gary Jones manager and Scott Budner pitching coach of Reno; Dick Scott manager and Gil Patterson pitching coach of Madison of the Midwest League, and Rick Rodriguez manager and pitching coach of Scottsdale of the Arizona League.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Named Bob Hartsfield manager of Jacksonville of the Southern League.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Fired Bill Zeigler, trainer.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Jack Morris, pitcher, on a two-year contract.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Named Mark McGuire executive vice president for business operations; Keith Bode vice president for finanace and information systems and John McDonough vice president for marketing and broadcasting.
NEW YORK METS -- Named Clint Hurdle manager of Tidewater of the International League and Steve Swisher manager and Randy Niemann pitching coach of Binghamton of the Eastern League.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Agreed to terms with Mitch Williams, pitcher, on a three-year contract.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
MILWAUKEE BUCKS -- Waived Bobby Phills, guard.
MINNESOTA TIMBERWOLVES -- Activated Felton Spencer, center, from the injured list.
Released Myron Brown, guard.
Hockey  National Hockey League
NHL -- Named Scotty Bowman, Pittsburgh Penguins coach, to coach the Prince of Wales Conference All-Star team.
HARTFORD WHALERS -- Traded Chris Tancill, right wing, to the Detroit Red Wings for Daniel Shank, right wing.
LOS ANGELES KINGS -- Assigned Tim Watters, defenseman, to Phoenix of the International Hockey League.
VANCOUVER CANUCKS -- Purchased the contract of Tom Fergus, center, from the Toronto Maple Leafs.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Recalled Luciano Borsato, center, from Moncton of the American Hockey League.
Soccer  Major Soccer League
ST. LOUIS STORM -- Signed Godfrey Ingram, forward.


POLISH PARLIAMENT SUPPORTS PREMIER
The Polish Parliament today gave Jan Olszewski, who was nominated as Prime Minister less than two weeks ago, a vote of confidence to continue efforts in forming a government.
Mr.
Olszewski, the 61-year-old former Solidarity lawyer, announced Tuesday that he was giving up his attempt to form a government after clashing with President Lech Walesa on his cabinet choices and the pace of Poland's economic reforms.


2d AIDS Test Negative
The wife of MAGIC JOHNSON, the former Los Angeles Lakers star, has tested negative for the second time H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, Johnson's agent said.


U.S. Says 4 Soviet Republics Vow To Carry Out Nuclear-Arms Cuts
The leaders of all four of the crumbling Soviet Union's republics that have long-range nuclear missiles have promised to carry out all cuts in nuclear weapons required of them under agreements made between President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and President Bush, American officials said today.
The republics will also accept American advisers to help them dismantle the warheads, the officials said.
In the last two days, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d has visited all four Soviet republics where intercontinental ballistic missiles aimed at the United States are based: Russia, Kazakhstan, Byelorussia and Ukraine.
These four states, which have all declared their independence, also make up the core of the new commonwealth that is being formed to replace the Soviet Union.


Review/Dance; Sounds of Saxophones Set Scenes of Enigma
Simone Forti and David Dorfman were concerned with words as well as movements in the dances they presented Monday night in the Movement Research program at the Judson Memorial Church on Washington Square South.
The choreographers were also concerned with saxophones.
David Dorfman Dance, Mr.
Dorfman's company, offered two works-in-progress: "Dayenu" and a piece called simply "Work in Progress." They made one eager to see the finished products.


Pop and Jazz in Review
David Murray, Geri Allen, Richard Davis and Andrew Cyrille  Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at Perry Street) Through Sunday
The best moments of Tuesday's first set at the Village Vanguard were when the drummer Andrew Cyrille, in mid-solo, started clapping his hands and rubbing them together loudly.
For a moment, the show became something other than a standard set in a New York jazz club; Mr.
Cyrille gave the proceedings a little drama and intimacy, and members of the audience were craning their necks to catch what was going on.


B.C.C.I. Accord Said to Assist 2 U.S. Banks
The liquidators of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International have tentatively agreed to place $100 million in a fund to assist two American banks that had been secretly owned by B.C.C.I., according to people close to the negotiations.
The assistance for the two banks -- First American Bankshares and the Independence Bank-- is part of a broader settlement in which the liquidators will plead guilty on behalf of B.C.C.I. to state and Federal charges of conducting a multibillion-dollar fraud.
Government prosectors and the liquidators have been working on the plea bargain for months.


Little Leaves Bethune
Was it a case of being too little too late in his career for LARRY LITTLE, who resigned yesterday as coach of Bethune-Cookman College in Daytona Beach, Fla.?
In what he called "nine hard-working, good years," Little led his alma mater to two conference titles, earning a coach-of-the-year award en route, and a 43-49-2 record (4-6 in 1991).
But the former Miami Dolphins' All-Pro guard was reportedly making less than $40,000 a year and the school's entire athletic budget was $900,000.
By comparison, the football budget alone at its archrival Mid-Eastern Athletic Conference member, Florida A&amp;M, was $900,000. (AP)


BUSINESS DIGEST
A Shrinking G.M.
G.M. said it would close 21 of its 125 assembly and parts-making plants in North America over the next few years, and eliminate 70,000 jobs, or nearly 18 percent of its employees in the U.S. and Canada.  [ Page A1. ]


Review/Dance; Momix Merges Flesh and Spirit
"Passion," the new dance piece by Moses Pendleton, is fun.
The fact that it was created by Mr.
Pendleton, one of the founders of Pilobolus, virtually guaranteed that it would be.
"Passion" abounds with the sort of acrobatic trickery that the gymnastic dancers of Pilobolus made famous.
What's more, Mr.
Pendleton's work is rich in mixed-media magic.
Yes, "Passion" is fun.
But it is not frivolous.
Mr.
Pendleton theatrically meditates upon serious ideas in this piece, which Momix, the company Mr.
Pendleton now directs, gave its New York City premiere on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater.
Indeed, "Passion" aspires to spiritual significance.


21 PLANTS TO SHUT
The General Motors Corporation, which has dominated the world automotive industry for generations, acknowledged today that it would probably never regain the huge share of the market that it enjoyed more than a decade ago.
In a wide retrenchment, G.M. said that it would close 21 of its 125 assembly and parts-making plants in North America over the next few years and eliminate more than 70,000 jobs, or nearly 18 percent of its employees in the United States and Canada.


Street-Wise Impresario; Sharpton Calls the Tunes, and Players Take Their Cues
When Richard Earl Luke died in the custody of the housing police on a balmy evening in May 1989, it did not take long for rumors and anger to race through the Queensbridge public housing project where he lived.
His mother, Patricia Garcia, recalls that by morning her phone was ringing nonstop.
Friends offered condolences.
Family members checked in.
In one instance, she remembers, she even received a call from someone she had never heard of -- the Rev.
Al Sharpton.
Mrs.
Garcia remembers that the reverend extended sympathy and offered assistance.
Within an hour, she said, he was in her apartment with a handful of aides, reciting a prayer, pledging to cover funeral costs and suggesting the legal services of his brother in arms, Alton H. Maddox Jr.
In the next few days, Mr.
Sharpton led marches through her neighborhood while tensions roiled.
Projecting an Image
The demonstrations soon died down, and a few months later, Mr.
Sharpton moved on after what he describes as a falling-out with Mrs.
Garcia, whose family still argues about him.
Now, when she watches Mr.
Sharpton on television, Mrs.
Garcia says, she sometimes muses that he might have simply forsaken her for higher-profile cases.


Motor-Vehicle Employees Charged in Fake-ID Ring
About 40 employees of the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles have been arrested and charged with selling at least 700 fake driver's licenses and other documents, many of them to illegal aliens, Federal authorities in Manhattan said yesterday.
The United States Attorney, Otto G. Obermaier, said that an 18-month investigation had smashed a loosely organized ring of state workers and others.
In all, 57 people were charged with fraud, bribery and trafficking in false documents, including driver's licenses, registrations, learner's permits and other Department of Motor Vehicle documents.


No Dreyfus Plan To Replace Levine
The Dreyfus Corporation has no plans to hire a replacement for Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, the defunct agency that handled a large share of the mutual-fund company's advertising account.
At one time, Levine, Huntley had as much as $10 million in billings from Dreyfus, which is reassigning that business among its in-house advertising staff and two other agencies on its roster, Lois/GGK and Barry Blau &amp; Partners.


Cures May Be Worse Than Economic Ills
To the Editor:
As a result of the profligate Reagan years the traditional tools of financial management, monetary and fiscal policy, are no longer available to bring the economy out of recession.
Fiscal policy has been rendered unusable by the size of the debt, monetary policy by the near destruction of the banking system and the financial integration of the world economy.


Mideast Talks Halt Without Progress
Peace talks between Israel and its Arab neighbors adjourned today after 10 days of failure to advance discussions beyond procedures and agendas.
Discussions are tentatively scheduled to resume in January, but the two sides have not been able to agree on either a time or a place.
Palestinians and Jordanians made a last-minute request to the Israelis today that the United States be drawn into the talks to break many deadlocks, but the Israelis refused, saying the role of co-sponsors was over.
The United States and the Soviet Union had jointly opened the meetings in Madrid in October.


Digital Forecasts Quarterly Operating Loss
The Digital Equipment Corporation told analysts today that it was facing a probable operating loss for its second fiscal quarter ending Dec. 28.
After the announcement, the computer company's stock plunged $4.75 to close at $51.75 on the Big Board.
While Digital did not say how much it expected to lose, analysts' estimates ranged from $18 million to $75 million.


Despite Appearances, Cuomo Is Still Not in the Race


Bridge
Although New York City's prestigious Cavendish Club died last May, its offspring, the Cavendish South, lives on in Hallendale, Fla.
Michael Moss, a leading member of the old club and the proprietor of the new one, organized an Invitational Calcutta Pairs last weekend along lines made famous by the original club.
Many top-ranked stars traveled to Florida to take part, and the top honors went to John Mohan of Santa Monica, Calif., playing with his wife, Kay Schulle.
They just edged out his longtime partner, Roger Bates of Mesa, Ariz., whose partner was Gaylor Kasle of Tucson, Ariz.


Gifts Meant to Gladden a Gardener: C9


Stocks Prices Mixed as Dow Gains 5.81
Stocks closed mixed yesterday as blue-chip issues rallied after some early weakness to finish slightly higher.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 5.81 points, to 2,908.09, while some indexes posted small losses.
Investor concern over the economy continued to hound the market, as well as disappointment with the Federal Reserve's delay in lowering interest rates.
Some traders said the General Motors Corporation's announced restructuring could be interpreted as good news, while others said it simply underlined the economy's weakness.


Investigator Cites Schiller For 'Minor Infractions'
An independent counsel informed senior officials of the United States Olympic Committee yesterday that his investigation of Harvey Schiller, the committee's executive director, found that Schiller had violated the U.S.O.C.'s Statement of Principle, which forbids officers and staff members from using their positions for material gain.
But the conclusions reached by the counsel, Arnold I. Burns, were mild compared with those in Burns's report last month on Robert Helmick, the former U.S.O.C. president.
Burns determined that Helmick, who resigned before the report was presented, had blatantly used his office for financial gain.


Bedroom and Kitchen Vie in War of the Coffee-Table Books
A THICK, heavy package under the tree is always a welcome sight for design mavens, particularly these days, when fancy objects seem as distant as shooting stars.
This season in the world of coffee-table books, there is a polite turf war regarding which room is truly the soul of the house.
With three books devoted to beds and two to the kitchen, the bedroom seems to be winning.
But who knows?
Next year could see the rise of the Gentlewoman's Basement or the Norwegian Linen Closet.


Ameritech Plans to Cut 2,300 Jobs
Following the lead of other regional Bell operating companies seeking to cut costs, Ameritech said yesterday that it planned to use attrition and layoffs to trim its work force by nearly 2,300, or 3 percent, over several years.
Ameritech is taking a quarterly charge of $140 million, or 53 cents a share.
This includes costs for severance pay, as well as separate charges for the write-down of certain assets in unregulated businesses like audiotext, and the early retirement of high-interest debt.


China Rebukes the U.S. on a Tariff Threat
China mildly rebuked the United States today for announcing that it would impose higher tariffs on Chinese imports if trade negotiations on copyright protection did not lead to a breakthrough before mid-January.
Over the last few months, trade issues between China and the United States have taken on a larger dimension in the two nations' relationship, especially as it becomes apparent that the United States' trade deficit with China this year will be second only to the deficit with Japan.
Talks on intellectual property rights have proved to be among the most difficult to resolve, according to Western diplomats.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
ENCLOSING a bathtub with a tile or wood "surround" is a popular improvement that is not too difficult for amateurs with basic carpentry experience.
The project involves building a lumber framework around the tub, sheathing the framework with plywood or other backing, then applying ceramic tile or wood paneling.
Using 2-by-4 lumber produces a tub surround about 4 1/2 inches wide; using 2-by-6 lumber produces a surround about 6 1/2 inches wide.


Data Network Raises Monopoly Fear
Soon after President Bush signed legislation calling for the creation of a nationwide computer data "superhighway," a debate has erupted over whether the Government gave an unfair advantage to a joint venture of I.B.M.MCI that built and manages a key part of the network.
The venture, known as Advanced Network and Services, manages a network called NSFnet, which connects hundreds of research centers and universities.
NSFnet also manages links to dozens of other countries.
All these networks are collectively known as Internet.


M.T.A. Ends Exhibit and Artist Cries Foul
An artist commissioned to shoot a series of large photographs of Greek-Americans for display at a subway station in Jamaica, Queens, says that transit officials removed her exhibit last week -- only seven days after it went up -- because some black New Yorkers who use the station found it offensive.
Both the artist, Jenny Marketou, a Greek-born photographer, sculptor and teacher who lives in Manhattan, and transit officials said that some blacks had complained that the seven color photographs -- portraits of Greek-Americans from Astoria, Queens -- showed only white faces, and no black ones.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-15 CAMPAIGN TO PUNISH LIBYA
The United States, Britain and France plan a campaign to win support for sanctions against Libya for the part they say it played in the bombings of Pan Am 103 and a French jet over Africa.
A1  SOVIETS AFFIRM ARMS CUTS
The leaders of all four Soviet republics that have long-range nuclear missiles have promised to carry out arms reductions required of them under U.S. accords, the republic officials said.
A1  Ukraine agrees on the first steps for removing 4,000 nuclear arms.
A14  As order crumbles, Moscow's traffic officers demand bigger bribes.
A14  A YUGOSLAV VILLAGE REELS
Croatians in the village of Vocin charge that Serbian forces massacred civilians.
The village seems to be a microcosm of the Yugoslav war: mindless violence of neighbor against neighbor, with women, children and old men suffering at the hands of undisciplined killers.
A1  The U.N. envoy to Yugoslavia persists with a peacekeeping plan.
A8  SEOUL SAYS ARMS ARE GONE
In a move intended to increase pressure on North Korea to halt its nuclear weapons program, South Korea's President said there are no longer any nuclear weapons in his country.
A3  RECESS IN MIDEAST TALKS
Peace talks between Israel and its Arab neighbors recessed after 10 days of failure to advance discussions beyond procedure.
A3  ANOTHER BURMESE CRACKDOWN
A dissident group estimates that 900 students and others have been arrested in the Burmese capital in the last week as the Government represses signs of a any revival of the democracy movement.
A5  MORAL STRUGGLE IN GERMAN PARTY
Germany's governing Christian Democratic Union concluded a convention without deciding how to treat party leaders who collaborated with the Communists who governedthe former East Germany.
A9  FEAR OF MUSLIM FUNDAMENTALISTS
Algeria and Tunisia have intensified their campaigns against Islamic fundamentalists, asserting that organized groups are trying to overthrow the two Governments.
A10  POLISH ASSEMBLY BACKS PREMIER
The Polish Parliament rejected a move by the Prime Minister-designate to bow out and urged him to try to form a government.
The nominee, Jan Olszewski, has been clashing with President Walesa.
A11  SOUTH AFRICA FACES TRANSITION
When negotiations on South Africa's future get under way, the first major debate is likely to focus on the nation's transition to democracy.
A13  Vancouver Journal: An influx of Asians transforms the city.
A4  NATIONAL A18-29, B17-22 GENERAL MOTORS CUTTING BACK
General Motors announced it would close 21 of its 125 North American plants, costing 70,000 employees their jobs over the next few years.
The retrenchment means the company will not regain its former dominance of the auto industry.
A1  GREENSPAN IN BLEAK TESTIMONY
Alan Greenspan gave Congress a bleak assessment of the economy but suggested that tough times would be over by Election Day and cautioned against a "quick fix" like a tax cut.
A1  DRUG ABUSE RISING AGAIN
Cocaine and heroin use rose this year, in a reverse for the Bush Administration's campaign against illegal drugs.
A18  HELP IN SUICIDES RULED HOMICIDE
A medical examiner in Michigan issued homicide rulings in the deaths of two women who used suicide devices created by Dr.
Jack Kevorkian.
A29  NETWORKS SCALE BACK COVERAGE
Budget constraints and misgivings over their earlier efforts have prompted the four national television news organizations to plan radical changes in their coverage of the 1992 Presidential election.
B18  Bush goes to Texas to show he wants to ease "tough times." B19  THWARTING ENVIRONMENTALISTS
Alan Gottlieb is guiding loggers, ranchers, oil drillers, dirt-bike riders and other people who want more access to public land in the fine art of fund-raising.
His ploy: casting environmentalists as bogeymen.
A18  RISING ABOVE ITS NAME
Dirty Corners Journal: For years this tiny community in northwest Mississippi has struggled to belie its name, and now a Federal agency and a foundation are helping.
A18  AIDS FINDING TIED TO FLU SHOTS
About 90 people around the country had falsely tested positive for H.I.V. and two other viruses after received flu vaccinations.
B21  A million more Americans went without health insurance.
B17  William K. Smith's accuser in rape case goes public.
B22 METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 NEW MEDICAL CARE FRONTIER
An insurance company in Connecticut will sell the first long-term nursing-home insurance policy to be co-sponsored by a state government next year, starting a new debate on medical care for the elderly.
A1  Neediest Cases B5  BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Sports B24-31  Baseball: Morris signs with Blue Jays.
B25  Piniella settles libel suit.
B31  Basketball: Valvano being courted to replace Fitch.
B25  Celtics beat Bucks.
B28  Nets defeat Cavaliers.
B28  Column: Anderson on Naismith.
B25  Football: Jets' Brim ready for Dolphins.
B25  U. of Miami player posts bond on indictment.
B26  Hockey: Rangers top Flyers.
B28  A dream come true for new Devil.
B28  Olympics: Another ethics report.
B27 Obituaries D23  Joseph Smallwood, Led Newfoundland into Canada.
John Blatnik, Minnesota Congressman.
The Home Section C1-9  Family photos: The X-rays of the heart.
C1  War of the coffee-table books.
C1  Still on the farm, 200 million ants later.
C2  Where to Find It.
C2 Arts/Entertainment C11-24  Reminiscing with Jack Paar.
C11  A Robin Hood of art.
C11  Music: The Belmont Playboys.
C11  Dance: Momix in "Passion." C11 Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31  Editorials A30  Economy: go fast, and slow.
Two humans' rights in China.
Hounding Conrad McRae.
Karl E. Meyer: Wagner.
Letters A30  Tom Wicker: After the storm.
A31  Steven W. Sinding and Sheldon J. Segal: Birth rate news.
A31  Richard N. Gardner, Toby Triser Gati: Russia deserves a U.N. seat.
A31  Harry I. Subin: 230,000 cases, zero justice.
A31


Talking Deals; Troublesome Unit For Westinghouse
IN the annals of real estate excesses, the Westinghouse Credit Corporation will be remembered as the subsidiary that nearly destroyed its parent company by making reckless loans.
The credit unit financed billions of dollars' worth of motel projects that even by the standards of the 1980's were remarkably risky.
So far this year, those deals have resulted in more than $2.66 billion in losses for Westinghouse Electric.
The debacle is so severe that one executive referred to it as a "baby R.T.C." The discounting necessary if the company is to sell the disastrous real estate portfolio is on a par with the write-downs on some properties of the Resolution Trust Corporation, which sells assets of failed savings and loans.


Jets' Brim Will Do His Talking on the Field
It doesn't take long for a player to get involved in the intense rivalry that has built up over the years between the Jets and the Dolphins.
Just ask Jet cornerback Mike Brim.
This is the first year with the Jets for the Plan B cornerback, who was picked up from the Minnesota Vikings in March when he was left unprotected.
And he wasn't even a starter when the Jets played the Dolphins Sept. 29, blowing them out by 41-23 in the Meadowlands.


Accuser in Rape Case Elects To Make Her Identity Public
The woman who accused William K. Smith of raping her in March at the Kennedy family home in Palm Beach, Fla., has decided to identify herself publicly.
The woman, Patricia Bowman, taped an interview to be broadcast tonight on the ABC News program "Prime Time Live" in which she agreed to be identified and to be shown, ABC and her lawyer said.


Stopping The Shots, But Not Rumors
John Vanbiesbrouck stopped 39 shots last night during a 6-3 victory by the Rangers over the Philadelphia Flyers, but he made no effort to deflect the rumors.
If a premature trade report from Minnesota wasn't quite true, then maybe the next bulletin about the Ranger goaltender would be accurate.
And maybe, Vanbiesbrouck decided, a change of creases wouldn't be such a terrible thing.


Sports of The Times; Basketball's Papa Jimmy Remembered
MEMORIES of the founders of our games are mostly lost in history.
Nobody living today knew Abner Doubleday, if indeed he nurtured baseball's roots.
Football evolved from rugby and soccer.
Hockey was first played by forgotten Canadian soldiers.
Scottish shepherds topped the early golf balls.
French clerics plopped the first tennis ball into a net.
But as basketball awaits this weekend's celebration in Springfield, Mass., of its 100th birthday, its creator, Dr.
James Naismith, is still alive in the mind of one of his grandsons.
"I remember Papa Jimmy taking me to the old Madison Square Garden in 1936 on his way to Berlin for the Olympics," 68-year-old Jim Naismith was saying.


Dent to Kentucky
RODNEY DENT, a 6-foot-11-inch, 228-pound junior-college center from Texas, has announced that he will enroll at Kentucky next semester, ending a three-year flirtation with Auburn.
Although Dent is eligible to play as soon as he enrolls, he will sit out the rest of the 1991-92 season in order to have two years of eligibility remaining.
Dent transferred to Howard College in Big Spring, Tex., from Odessa Junior College this semester and finished his degree work there earlier this month. (AP)


INSIDE
Mideast Talks Recessed
Israel and its Arab neighbors adjourned peace talks until January after failing to advance beyond procedures and agendas.
Page A3.
South Korea Nuclear-Free
Trying to press North Korea to halt its nuclear weapons program, Seoul certified that the U.S. nuclear stockpile had been removed.
Page A3.
Sharpton and His Allies
The Rev.
Al Sharpton has used a variety of often surprising alliances to win a key role in the debate on race in the New York region.
Page B1.
Setback in the Drug War
A year after President Bush proudly announced a sharp drop in illicit drug use, cocaine and heroin use is again on the rise.
Page A18.
Robin Hood of the Arts
Prof.
John Quentin Feller is an expert on Chinese ceramics.
He is also a thief who would steal from one museum and give to another.
Page C11.


Ukraine-Soviet Accord On Weapons Removal
With smiles and nods, Ukrainian and Soviet officials expressed agreement in principle today on the first steps for the removal of the estimated 4,000 nuclear arms stationed in this republic.
Ukrainian officials said that their country, when nuclear-free, would renounce all control over nuclear weapons that it might have exercised through the new Commonwealth proclaimed by Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia, or any other organization that might arise to replace the Soviet Union.


Tug-of-War Over G.M. Plant Closing
By not announcing which of two big-car assembly plants here and in Ypsilanti, Mich., it would close, the General Motors Corporation today put the lives of 3,400 workers here in limbo.
In saying only that the company intends to close in the next few years 21 assembly, engine and parts plants, Robert C. Stempel, chairman and chief executive of the No. 1 auto maker, set off a likely tug-of-war between the company, the union and local politicians as a decision is reached on which plants should be closed.


The Free Market Inflates Moscow Traffic Bribery
Between the arriving free market and the lingering police state, there stands the traffic policeman in all his greed and glory.
The Moscow "gaishnik," or traffic policeman, long acknowledged as open to routine bribes that they prefer to call "souvenirs," is now one of the most important official figures still in view during each chaotic day of the Soviet Union's disintegration.


Trenton Awaits January Last-Minute Rush
The failure of the Assembly to achieve a quorum during the last two weeks has set the stage for a breakneck finish to the 204th Legislature and left the future uncertain for several major issues.
After twice failing to meet because of a lack of a quorum and canceling two other sessions, including one on Thursday, when it became apparent that the required 41 members would not be present, the Speaker, Joseph V. Doria, recessed the Assembly until Jan. 6.
That has left Assemblymen with barely a week to consider scores of matters as mundane as naming the brook trout the state fish and as important as redrawing New Jersey's political map to adjust for the loss of a Congressional seat because of a drop in population.


Jack Paar, the Carson Of His Day, Looks Back With the Usual Chuckle
From 1957 to 1962, Jack Paar ruled late-night television as host of the "Tonight" show.
On Tuesday evening, coaxed out of placid retirement in Greenwich, Conn., to give a seminar at the Museum of Television and Radio in mid-Manhattan, he showed why.
It was an evening of television archeology, as Mr.
Paar showed highlights from his show and reminisced about favorite guests like Jonathan Winters, the French actress Genevieve, Dody Goodman, Robert F. Kennedy and Richard M. Nixon and pronounced anathema upon Phil Donahue ("a disgrace") and his morning-show peers ("sleazy"), praised Johnny Carson ("I should never have given the 'Tonight' show to him; I should have rented it or married him") and admitted that he no longer stayed up late enough to watch "Tonight."


34.7 Million Lack Health Insurance, Studies Say; Number Is Highest Since '65
The number of Americans without any health insurance rose last year by 1.3 million, bringing the total number of uninsured to 34.7 million, the highest since the creation of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965, several health policy researchers reported today.
The increase occurred before the recent surge in layoffs because of the slumping economy, the researchers said, suggesting that the problem reflected long-term changes in the nation's health-care system.
The recession and the sharp rise in unemployment in recent months have almost certainly contributed to a further rise in the number of uninsured Americans because many people lose health insurance when they lose their jobs.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Princeton Triumphs  Sean Jackson's 3-pointer with 1 minute 47 seconds left in overtime last night helped Princeton (6-3) rally for a 50-47 victory over North Carolina State in Raleigh, N.C.
Jackson finished with 15 points on five 3-point field goals.
North Carolina State (4-2) didn't even hit the basket after Mark Davis's tap-in off a Tom Gugliotta shot with 3:10 to play. (AP) Georgetown 89, St.
Leo 51: Alonzo Mourning scored 21 points, grabbed 12 rebounds and blocked 6 shots to lead the Hoyas (5-1) in Landover, Md. (AP) Arizona 127, N. Arizona 81: Deron Johnson scored a career-high 26 points as the Wildcats (5-0) held Northern Arizona (3-3) to 38.8 percent shooting from the field.
It was Arizona's 18th straight victory over the Lumberjacks and its 66th straight victory at home. (AP) Georgia 66, Georgia Tech 65: Litterial Green's 10-footer in the lane with 3:03 remaining gave Georgia (5-2) a 5-point lead Georgia Tech couldn't overcome as the Bulldogs beat the Yellow Jackets (6-2) in Atlanta.
Georgia didn't score again after Green made the score 66-61. (AP) N.H.L.
Sabres' Skid at 11  Kevin Hatcher's slap shot through a screen with 9.2 seconds left in the third period last night gave the visiting Washington Capitals a 2-2 tie with Buffalo, establishing a Sabres record of 11 games without a victory.
Buffalo is 0-8-3 in its last 11 games, breaking the mark for games without a victory set in the 1970-1971 season, which was the Sabres' second season in the league. (AP) Oilers 7, Maple Leafs 5: Kelly Buchberger broke a 5-5 tie at 11:43 of the third period to lead Edmonton.
Craig Simpson added an insurance goal at 18:15. (AP)


BUSINESS PEOPLE
O.
M. (Tony) Nicely was named chief executive of the Goverment Employees Insurance Company yesterday.
This is the largest subsidiary of the Geico Corporation, which said Mr.
Nicely is expected to be named chief executive of the parent company in 1994 when its current chief executive, William B. Snyder, retires.
Mr.
Nicely, 48, is a 30-year employee of the automobile and property insurer, having begun in the underwriting department as a clerk.
Since then, he said, he has worked in every department of the company.
He remains president of the Government Employees Insurance Company.


Emirates and Boeing In a $2 Billion Jet Deal
Emirates, the international airline of the United Arab Emirates, said today that it would buy 14 Boeing 777 mid-sized jets in a deal worth about $2 billion.
The Boeing Company said that while the deal was not yet final, it had received a letter for seven airplanes and seven options.
The deal comes two months after an order for 20 of the new aircraft by Japan Airlines and brings to seven the number of customers for the 777.
If confirmed, the Emirates order will bring the total orders for the jet to 93, with 82 options.
Emirates will take delivery of its first seven planes in 1996 and 1997.
The 777 will seat 304 passengers in three classes.


Excerpts From Fed Chief's Testimony
Following are excerpts from the testimony of Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, before the House Ways and Means Committee yesterday.
The upturn in business activity that began earlier this year clearly has faltered.
It is apparent that the economy is struggling and that there have been some strong forces working against moderate cyclical revival.


Weeping Spruces Set Free
A MODERN Christmas-tree fairy tale unfolded along Fifth Avenue amid the glitter and bustle of the last few weeks.
Bergdorf Goodman had decided on a woodland fantasy to decorate the Fifth Avenue side of the store, between 57th and 58th Streets, for its windows celebrating the world premiere of the opera "The Ghosts of Versailles" by John Corigliano.
The plan called for 22 weeping Norway spruces, a variety of evergreen that grows into ghostly silhouettes, no two alike: Some arching over like phantoms in a Hans Christian Andersen fairy tale, the kind with an enchanted forest where things come alive and chase the children.
Some with tails swooping up from the base, or drooping limbs suggesting legs or arms.
Others shaped like the barosaurus, a dinosaur with a very long curving neck.


Tax-Exempt Money Market Yields Rise
Yields on tax-exempt money market funds reversed course in the last week and strengthened a little, according to IBC/Donoghue's, which monitors the funds and issues The Money Fund Report.
The taxable funds continued their steady downward progress.
Walter S. Frank, chief economist for IBC/Donoghue's, said the tax-exempt yields rose "partly because of the recent large supply of municipal issues coming to market and a diminished appetite among investors for short-term securities at current low yields."


Stocks Lower in Tokyo
Japanese stock prices were sharply lower today.
At the midday trading recess, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 420.63 points, or nearly 2 percent, to 22,209.27.
On Wednesday, the Nikkei lost 106.39 points.


Note and Bond Prices Move Lower
The Federal Reserve Board's apparent decision not to cut short-term interest rates again immediately was met with disappointment in the credit markets yesterday, as prices of Treasury notes and bonds fell.
In testimony before the House Ways and Means Committee, Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve Board Chairman, said all of the things that appeal to traders of fixed-income securities but are anathema to politicians up for reelection in 1992.


Holy Record Breaker! $55,000 for First Batman Comic
The superhero at Sotheby's first auction of comic books yesterday was Harold M. Anderson, the owner of a traveling museum of baseball memorabilia based in Florence, Ala.
Mr.
Anderson bought many of the most important properties and paid a record price at auction for a comic book with his $55,000 purchase of a copy of Detective 27, the 1939 issue in which Batman appeared for the first time.


Fund-Raisers Tap Anti-Environmentalism
In the world of mail-order fund-raising, it helps to have what Alan M. Gottlieb calls "an evil empire:" the specter of an enemy to raise potential contributors' fears and open their wallets.
For conservative fund-raisers like Mr.
Gottlieb, the enemies were Senator Edward M. Kennedy or the threat of gun control.


President Resigns At Television Bureau
Jim Joyella, president of the Television Bureau of Advertising in New York, resigned yesterday, following a year of drastic cuts and reorganization of the bureau's services.
He leaves, effective next month, to become president of the American division of Katz Television Group, a television sales-rep firm.
Last month, Mr.
Joyella took several steps to narrow the bureau's focus, in response to a drop in membership to 350 stations from 620 in 1986.
The bureau ceased offering such services to member stations as education and training, to concentrate on encouraging advertisers to use spot and local television.


For the Gardener On Your Gift List
EVEN with a mere six days till Christmas, don't panic about gardeners on your list.
The gifts can range from practical to whimsical.
Take, for example, flying copper creatures, or a tool shed of miniature sterling silver implements (to wear, not use).
Few gifts compare with a four-volume garden encyclopedia with more than 50,000 plant entries; organic beetle or slug repellant, or a naturalistic trellis of gnarled trunks and twiggy grapevines.
Soil secrets are revealed with a test kit; a topiary elfin herb.
And gardeners stay dry under mildew-resistant umbrellas.
Here's a sampling from shops and mail-order catalogues that are as close as your phone.(Prices listed do not include shipping.)


The Economy: Go Fast, and Slow
The economy suffers from two ailments.
For 20 years incomes have stagnated, leaving the middle class little better off than it was in the 1970's.
Apart from that stagnation, the economy started sliding into recession in 1990, a slide that has now accelerated -- as witness the deep cuts announced yesterday by General Motors.
The remedy for the first problem is less consumption and more investment.
The remedy for the second is more consumption.
By confusing the two ailments, Congress is tying itself in knots.


Revco Bids Inquiry Set
Two competing bids for Revco D.S.
Inc. are the subject of antitrust investigations by the Ohio Attorney General's office and the United States Department of Justice, Revco said today.
Two drugstore chains, the Rite Aid Corporation and the Jack Eckerd Corporation, are both seeking to buy Revco, which has been operating under Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection since 1988.


G.E. to End Support Of Audubon Series
The General Electric Company has decided not to renew its $3 million in funding for the National Audubon Society's series of television specials when its commitment expires in 1993.
Loggers and ranchers who disapproved of the documentaries' portrayal of environmental issues saw the decision as the result of their protests against G.E.'s support of the programs.
But a G.E. spokeswoman said yesterday that because the company had reduced its communications budget, it could not justify making additional program grants.


We Need Both Big Science and Little Science; Slide Rule Pork Barrel
To the Editor:
Gregg Easterbrook's "Big Science on Easy Street" (Op-Ed, Nov. 29) is exactly on target, but his argument can be extended.


Villagers in Croatia Recount Massacre by Serbian Forces
When Serbian irregulars withdrew last weekend from this picturesque hillside village 80 miles east of Zagreb, they left behind a vista of death and destruction.
Drunken men in uniform, backed by at least one tank, moved methodically through this community of 2,000, blasting Croatian houses, killing civilians, and blowing to pieces the 550-year-old Roman Catholic Church at the town center, witnesses say.


Communist Skeletons Haunt Ruling German Party
Germany's governing Christian Democratic Union concluded a three-day convention this week without deciding how to treat party leaders who collaborated with the Communist Government in the former East Germany.
The 1,000 delegates discussed a wide range of issues at the convention, but many were preoccupied with the troublesome moral and political questions raised by the 40-year collaboration of East Germany's Christian Democrats with the oppressive Government there.


Algeria and Tunisia Intensify Anti-Fundamentalist Efforts
Algeria and Tunisia have intensified their campaigns against Islamic fundamentalists, asserting that organized groups are trying to overthrow the two North African Governments.
The two countries also appear to be moving toward much closer cooperation between their security forces in identifying and containing fundamentalists, who have moved freely between Algeria and Tunisia.


PARLEY TO BEGIN IN SOUTH AFRICA
When negotiations on South Africa's future get under way, the first significant debate looks likely to focus on the nature and duration of the nation's transition to democracy.
The Convention for a Democratic South Africa, as the conference of 19 political parties and groupings is called, is to convene on Friday to lay the foundation for talks about a new constitution that will extend political equality to the nation's disfranchised black majority.
Working Groups on Issues
It will set up at least five working groups to concentrate on specific problems, including differences over an interim government and other transitional alternatives.


School Acquires Large Silver Collection
A WORKING fountain, designed to be a table centerpiece, is one of more than 2,500 pieces of sterling silver being given to the Rhode Island School of Design in Providence.
The donation of the Textron Collection of Gorham Silver was announced yesterday by Beverly F. Dolan, chairman of Textron, a conglomerate in Providence that once owned Gorham, the silver manufacturer.
The collection is valued at more than $1 million and includes American, European and Japanese pieces designed between 1850 and 1960.


Black and White Redux
Harry Poster P.O. Box 1883, South Hackensack, N.J. 07606; (201) 794-9606.
One foolproof way to avoid seeing colorized versions of "It's a Wonderful Life" and other holiday classics is to watch them on an old black-and-white television.
Most of these sets from the late 1940's to early 1970's can still work when properly repaired.
The problem is finding someone to do the job.


Editorial Notebook; Wagner, Israel -- and Herzl
The conductor Daniel Barenboim is right to try to break an Israeli taboo about performing the music of Richard Wagner.
Nobody will be compelled to attend or listen next week when his orchestra, the Israel Philharmonic, plays its first Wagner concert since 1938, when it was the Palestine Philharmonic.
"What we are talking about," says Mr.
Barenboim, "is a simple issue of free expression in a democratic society."
Yet his indignant critics are also right on one large point.
Wagner, who died in 1883, was zealously anti-Semitic, and his descendants all too eagerly allowed Hitler to turn Bayreuth, Wagner's home, into a shrine for a criminal creed.


New Jersey Democrats Say the Bill Is Due
To the Editor:
I couldn't disagree more with "New Jersey's Cynical Democrats" (editorial, Dec. 10), on the plan of Democratic members of the New Jersey Senate to repeal the same $2.8 billion tax package that they approved last year.


Rautins and Lithuania
LEO RAUTINS, a former Syracuse forward and Toronto schoolboy star, wants to win an Olympic basketball medal and figures his best chance is with Team Lithuania.
It certainly isn't with Team Canada.
Rautins, 31 years old, left the Canadian team on a sour note last summer, saying that Basketball Canada had "zero direction," little fan support and sparse funding.
Yesterday, he criticized the players for being defeatist.
"I don't hear a lot of guys on the team saying, 'I want to go to the Olympics and win a medal,' " Rautins said.
"I know a lot of guys on the Lithuanian team and they're not just going there to be there. They want to win a medal."


We Need Both Big Science and Little Science
To the Editor:
Gregg Easterbrook's "Big Science on Easy Street" (Op-Ed, Nov. 29) paints a distorted picture.
The tired argument that "small is beautiful, big is bad" doesn't apply to science.


Trump and USAir Deal Seen Near
USAir is close to signing an agreement to take over the running of the Trump shuttle, with an option to buy it after five years, two executives close to the talks said yesterday.
In return, Donald J. Trump would no longer be held personally responsible for more than $300 million of the shuttle's debt.
But the executives, who insisted on anonymity, differed on the timing, with one saying it could be a matter of days and the other saying the move could occur in a week or more.


Valvano In, Fitch Out? It's a Muddled Picture for Nets
Bill Fitch's tenuous hold on the Nets' coaching job appeared to grow even more precarious today when one of the team's minority owners presented an offer to Jim Valvano to take over as coach.
But while Fitch twisted, the Nets turned against each other, presenting a disorganized front on the coaching situation and reinforcing the notion that they are a franchise in disarray.
Fitch was on the bench tonight for the Nets' game against the Cleveland Cavaliers at the Meadowlands, which the Nets won, 102-93.
But earlier in the day, Joe Taub, a minority owner who is viewed by the other owners as a basketball adviser, met with Valvano's agent, Art Kaminsky, to discuss the prospects of Valvano's taking over for the belaguered Fitch.


Miami's Patton Posts Bond; Playing Status in Question
Martin Patton, starting fullback for the University of Miami's national football championship contender, today posted a $50,000 personal surety bond in connection with a three-count Federal indictment involving the alleged use of a stolen credit card.
Then he was hustled away from the United States Courthouse without comment by his lawyer.
Left undetermined is whether Patton's troubles will prompt his suspension from the team for the Federal Express Orange Bowl game on Jan. 1 against Nebraska.


Amdahl Expects Loss in Quarter
The Amdahl Corporation said it expects to report a fourth-quarter loss.
The company's results for the end of the year will be released late next month, but Amdahl said that it expects to report a modest profit for the year over all and that it would return to profitability in the first quarter of 1992.
Amdahl, a computer maker based in Sunnyvale, Calif., made the announcement after trading closed today on the American Stock Exchange.
Its stock finished at $13.125, down 37.5 cents.


Two Humans' Rights in China
It's welcome news that China has now given Dai Qing, a journalist involved in the 1989 democracy movement, permission to come to the United States for a Nieman Fellowship at Harvard.
Just last month, police agents spirited Ms.
Dai away from Beijing to prevent her from meeting with Secretary of State James Baker.
Ms.
Dai credits the international outcry over this incident with speeding her exit permit, proving once again that targeted humanitarian pressure can move even the hard-line Chinese regime.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Akzo N.V., the Netherlands, a chemical concern, will acquire a tire yarn plant in Scottsboro, Ala., from Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co., Akron, Ohio.
No price was disclosed. *
Allscrips Pharmaceuticals Inc., Vernon Hills, Ill., has entered into an acquisition agreement with Clinical Pharmaceuticals Inc., Nashville.
Terms were not disclosed.


Russia Deserves The Soviet Seat
The new commonwealth and the independent republics that will replace the Soviet Union are confronting the international community with potentially explosive legal and political conundrums.
Some may be resolved when the republics meet in Kazakhstan on Saturday to address commonwealth issues.


Connecticut to Sponsor Nursing-Home Insurance
Early next year an insurance company in Connecticut will sell the first long-term nursing-home insurance policy to be co-sponsored by a state government.
The moment will push both the insurance industry and the state -- old allies in Connecticut and now full partners -- into a new frontier in the national policy debate over health care for the elderly.


Squeezed Networks Plan Radical Changes in Covering '92 Race
Facing sharply reduced budgets and acknowledging that they made serious mistakes in 1988, the four national television news organizations, ABC, CBS, NBC and CNN, are planning radical changes in their coverage of the 1992 Presidential election campaign.
"You are going to see a zero-based approach to the coverage," said Tom Hannon, the political director of the Cable News Network.
"Everything will be looked at in a brand new light."


Review/Pop; Rockabilly With the Elvis Touch
Three bola ties, four modest pompadours, two goatees, one pair of two-tone shoes, a saxophone player in a tuxedo jacket and a repertory heavy on Elvis Presley tunes equals one great rockabilly band.
On Monday night at Delta 88, the Belmont Playboys from Charlotte, N.C., climbed onstage, announced that they were "ready to rock-and-roll," and launched a set of old-time standards that was equal parts tribute, reverence and heart-and-soul.
The lead singer, Mike Hendrix, wearing a sleeveless cowboy shirt that showed off his tattoos, rattled his big red Gibson guitar as if he never wanted Chuck Berry to go out of style; Jeff Hendrix plucked a white slap bass as tall as himself and adorned with red hotrod flames.
They played Mr.
Berry's "Brown-Eyed Handsome Man"; they played "Party Doll," a 1957 hit for both Buddy Knox and Steve Lawrence.
They played originals like "Rockin' in My Pocket" that were indistinguishable from the real thing.


CHRONICLE
You never know what you're going to see in the movies, especially if you're MARVIN MITCHELSON, the California divorce lawyer.
Mr.
Mitchelson, in New York last weekend from Los Angeles, was watching "The Last Boy Scout" at the Gemini Twin.
"Suddenly I saw in the background a long shot of my castle," he said.
"I live in a castle built by a New York copper baron off Sunset Boulevard, and there it was in all its glory as the backdrop to a scene shot on the street. You couldn't mistake it; it's one of a kind."


We Need Both Big Science and Little Science; Pernicious Grants
To the Editor:
Gregg Easterbrook's concern about big science (Op-Ed, Nov. 29) is well taken but late and incomplete.
In 1978, I contended in Bridge of Eta Kappa Nu (Volume 74, No. 4) that natural bureaucratic tendency leans toward administering fewer but larger grants because it is easier.
Furthermore, many of the grants follow popular trends.
As such, they frequently stifle original research and indirectly force applicants to conform to what is fashionable or dictated by influential interests.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Warren Zevon and the Odds  The Marquee
Death, mayhem, gunplay, brutality -- Warren Zevon's songs have offered twisted Hollywood adventure stories since the 1970's, before gangster rap emerged from the opposite side of Los Angeles.
Along with his violent imagination, Mr.
Zevon has an eye for duplicity and a calmly sarcastic sense of humor, and he can't resist far-flung geographic name-dropping.
Set to hard-bitten riffs and a martial beat and sung in a deadpan baritone, Mr.
Zevon's songs conjure a world where heroism and recklessness run aground on human venality.


Gastineau 5 for 5
MARK GASTINEAU, the former New York Jets defensive end who has thrown himself into the ring, scored his fifth knockout in five fights when he stopped a journeyman fighter-cum-hairdresser and tavern bouncer from Indianapolis Tuesday night.
Gastineau, who weighed 265 pounds, dropped JIMMY BAKER with a right hand at 1 minute 9 seconds of the second round in a scheduled four-round bout.
Baker, 16-17-1 entering the fight, was outweighed by 52 pounds.
Baker rose to his feet but was prevented from continuing when the referee ended the fight.


Shoreham Board Begins a Hunt for Alternatives
At the very time they are preparing to dismember and decommission the ill-fated Shoreham Nuclear Power Station, officials here began the process today of seeking an alternative use for its nuclear shell, possibly including a new gas-fired plant.
With little comment and none of the bitter public protest that has dogged the 20-year Shoreham saga, trustees of New York State's Long Island Power Authority said that within two weeks they would seek proposals from several large companies to retrofit the plant.


Dirty Corners Journal; New Homes Bring Idea of 'New Hope'
In the early part of this century, as local lore would have it, whenever a cow or hog strayed off the sprawling Rabbit Ridge plantation and into the adjacent tiny enclave of black landowners, the animal would disappear.
People would whisper that the animal had last been seen around "Dirty Corners" and nod knowingly and silently.
Over time the name stuck.
The name of this tiny community in northwest Mississippi, midway between Tutwiler and Glendora, cannot be found on a map, nor has it acquired the legitimacy of a post office by that name.


Books of The Times; A Mirror of Reality on a Computer Screen
Mirror Worlds Or the Day Software Puts the Universe in a Shoebox How It Will Happen and What It Will Mean By David Gelernter Illustrated. 237 pages.
Oxford University Press. $24.95.
The prospect that David Gelernter describes in "Mirror Worlds" sounds like a late 21st-century science-fiction fantasy.
"You will look into a computer screen and see reality," he writes in his prologue.
"Some part of your world -- the town you live in, the company you work for, your school system, the city hospital -- will hang there in a sharp color image, abstract but recognizable, moving subtly in a thousand places. This mirror world you are looking at is fed by a steady rush of new data pouring in through cables. It is infiltrated by your own software creatures, doing your business."


150 Remedies to the Wail, 'There's Nothing on TV'
SOME people say they can never be too rich or too thin.
Then there is Lori Massa of Whitestone, Queens.
She can never have too many cable channels, and since yesterday, she has had far more than the average channel-hopping couch potato.
Mrs.
Massa and her husband John are the first cable-television subscribers in the world -- yes, the world, says her cable company, modestly -- to get 150 channels.
That is twice as many as her next-door neighbor on Ninth Avenue, Silva Griparic, who kept dropping in yesterday, asking what's on.


Events: Christmas Fairs and Tours
Urban Design
Buell Hall, Columbia University, Broadway at 116th Street; (212) 854-3414.


Blue Jays Make Morris Baseball's Richest Pitcher
For the fourth time in the last six winters, Jack Morris signed a contract as a free agent yesterday, and this time he became the highest-paid pitcher on baseball's ever-escalating salary scale.
The Toronto Blue Jays, who have always had difficulty luring major free agents to Canada, captured Morris with a contract that guarantees him $10.85 million for two years.
The Boston Red Sox, who also had sought Morris's services, were on the verge of reaching agreement with their alternate choice, Frank Viola, on a three-year contract for about $14 million.
Viola rejected the Mets' three-year, $13 million offer last April.


Micro Sees Chip Leadership
W.
J.
Sanders 3d, chairman and chief executive of Advanced Micro Devices Inc., predicted today that his company would sell more 386 microprocessors than the Intel Corporation, the chip's inventor, by the end of 1992.
"I would be surprised if our 386 revenues weren't at least $600 million next year," Mr.
Sanders said in an interview.


Where the Rich Get Richer as the Best Battle It Out
From one view, the $2.55 million Johnnie Walker World Championship this week represents the worst in modern golf: a few millionaires playing for more millions in a hyperbolically titled, prepackaged event.
But from another view, such a tournament is precisely what the professional game needs more of: the best against the best to find out who really is the best.


Retirement Talk From John Robinson
JOHN ROBINSON, who guided the Los Angeles Rams to the playoffs in six of his first seven seasons as coach, told his team yesterday that he would retire after this season, according to a source close to the team.
The retirement would not be a surprise.


Unhappy Look Back, Hopeful Look Ahead for Cone
The Mets, who have spent the last couple of months staging one major news conference after another, held one more yesterday at Shea Stadium.
The front-office executives were on the dais, and Bret Saberhagen, the featured speaker, was in front of the microphone.
But by the afternoon's end, David Cone was arguably the man of the moment.
In his first public appearance since a rape investigation by the Philadelphia police department and the resulting media frenzy dramatically disrupted his life, the talented right-hander spoke about both the damage done in the recent past and the brighter promise of the near future, one that he hopes will include a lucrative contract to pitch at Shea Stadium.


Jury Weighs Kahane Case
After a monthlong trial, the jury in the Rabbi Meir Kahane murder case began deliberations yesterday on the guilt or innocence of El Sayyid A. Nosair, but recessed after about six hours.
The jury is to resume deliberations today in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
Mr.
Nosair, a 36-year-old Egyptian-born engineer, is accused of fatally shooting Rabbi Kahane on Nov. 5, 1990, just moments after the rabbi finished a speech to a pro-Zionist group at the Marriott East Side Hotel at Lexington Avenue and 48th Street.


Umpire's Suit Against Piniella Is Settled Out of Court
Lou Piniella, the hot-tempered manager of the Cincinnati Reds, and the primary targets of that temper, the umpires, have said soothing words to each other and made up.
Offering conciliatory comments from both sides, the commissioner's office announced yesterday that the libel suit Umpire Gary Darling brought against Piniella last August was settled out of court.
The settlement emerged from a two-hour meeting Tuesday attended by Piniella; Commissioner Fay Vincent; Bill White, the president of the National League, and Richie Phillips, the lawyer for the umpires' union.


Jacob Polish, 78, Dies; Rabbi Aided Refugees
Rabbi Jacob Polish, who aided refugees from Nazism, died on Tuesday at Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park, L.I.
He was 78 years old and lived in the Forest Hills, Queens.
He died of pulmonary failure in the aftermath of a stroke, his family said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  40 STATE WORKERS ACCUSED OF SCAM
About 40 employees of the State Department of Motor Vehicles have been arrested and charged with selling at least 700 fake driver's licenses and other documents, many of them to illegal aliens.
B3.
COURT TO SUPERVISE WATERFRONT UNION
Pressured by a Federal lawsuit, top officers of a Brooklyn longshoremen's union identified as a bastion of Mafia power have agreed to step aside in favor of a court-appointed monitor.
B2.
THE QUEEN OF CABLE TV
Some people say they can never be too rich or too thin.
Then there is Lori Massa of Whitestone, Queens.
She can never have too many cable channels, and since yesterday, she has far more to choose from than the average channel-hopping couch potato.
Mrs.
Massa is the first cable-television subscriber in the world to get 150 channels.
Whitestone Journal, B3.
STATE BOARD CRITICIZES FISCAL PLAN
Expanding on its earlier complaints, the State Financial Control Board issued a sharply critical report on Mayor Dinkins's long-term plan to balance the city's books, saying the administration's predictions about future tax revenues, debt and demands on welfare and the schools were unrealistic.
B13.
Parents try to save school for the disabled.
B6.
Koch collapses at health club.
B3.
Subway photos stir controversy.
B3.
REGION  FISCAL DEADLOCK INTENSIFIES
The stalemate in Albany over the state budget intensified when the new Speaker of the Democratic-led Assembly, Saul Weprin, joined with Senate Republicans in opposing Governor Cuomo's proposal to cut $250 million in school aid in this year's budget.
B11.
FUROR OVER HOSPITALS VOTE
A confirmation vote for the post of Westchester hospitals commmissioner has set off a furor, with some arguing that the candidate is not qualified and others saying that he is being held to a higher standard because he is black.
B9.
DEBATING ELLIS ISLAND'S FUTURE
How meaningful are Ellis Island's morgue, crematory, contagious-disease wards and furnace and laundry buildings to the immigrant experience there?
Those questions were dominant at a hearing on the National Park Service's plan to demolish 12 buildings to make room for a privately owned conference center.
B7.
DOWN TO THE WIRE IN TRENTON
The failure of the New Jersey Assembly to achieve a quorum during the last two weeks has set the stage for a breakneck finish to the 204th Legislature and left the future uncertain for several major issues.
B15.
NURSING-HOME INSURANCE IN CONNECTICUT
Early next year, an insurance company in Connecticut will sell the first long-term nursing-home insurance policy to be co-sponsored by a state government.
The moment will push both the insurance industry and the state -- old allies in Connecticut and now full partners -- into a new frontier in the national policy debate over medical care for the elderly.
A1.
Seeking new uses for the Shoreham site.
B10.
Cuomo names new social services chief.
B4.
Neediest Cases B5


In Thaw, Henson and Disney Strike Deal on Home Videos
One year after the bitter breakdown of a proposed merger they had billed as "made in family entertainment heaven," the Walt DisneyCompany and Jim Henson Productions said today that they had struck a narrower deal for Disney to distribute 30 years worth of Henson's Muppet programming on home video.
The companies said the deal gave Disney distribution rights to the entire Henson library, including hundreds of hours of movies and television shows with Kermit, Miss Piggy and the other Muppets -- but not the "Sesame Street" characters -- for the next five to six years.
Disney also agreed to finance the production of new home video shows from Henson Productions.


Preschool for Disabled Struggles for Survival
In a few weeks, workers will begin packing up the blocks, the beads and the elephant mobile that hangs in a large playroom at the Pre Kindergarten Center on the campus of Teachers College at Columbia.
Down will come a row of paper horses inscribed with the names and birthdays of fragile children to whom doctors gave little hope.
The 11-year-old day school for 85 disabled children was voted out of existence this month by its board of directors, who cited a lost lease at their building on 120th Street on the college campus.


U.S. Licensed Du Pont To Sell Iraq Lubricant
To the Editor:
A Dec. 11 article discusses companies whose products were inventoried by a United Nations team that inspected Iraqi nuclear operations and files.
The headline, apparently to get more attention than the report deserved, made Du Pont the focal point.


New President Named For Aerospace Corp.
Edward C. Aldridge Jr., the president of McDonnell Douglas Electronic Systems, is leaving the McLean, Va., electronics company in March to join the Aerospace Corporation, the McDonnell Douglas Corporation said yesterday.
A successor will be named later.
Mr.
Aldridge, who is 53 years old, will become the president and chief executive of Aerospace, a federally financed research and development center, based in El Segundo, Calif., that provides engineering and technical support for United States military space systems.


Even Those Who Have Little Find Something for Neediest
The courage shown by beneficiaries of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund is often matched by that of its contributors.
"A recent illness left me temporarily visually impaired and I feel the pain of being unable to drive, or read, and how cut off and helpless it left me," began a letter from an anonymous donor with a gift of $100.
Still, "I often think how lucky I am because I have all this -- a good marriage, two wonderful daughters and enough to eat. I am well aware of that life is a daily struggle for so many."


Phone Offer in GATT Talks
Hours before negotiations for a global trade agreement concluded in Geneva this evening, the United States made and heavily promoted an offer on long-distance and international telephone services.
But the offer, which consisted of providing details for a sketchy offer made last year, not only appeared unlikely to produce a breakthrough.
It illustrated that participants in the talks remain far apart.


Estimate of Uranium Dust Emissions Is Increased
A team of scientists studying nuclear contamination in Ohio has found that the amount of uranium dust released by a nuclear weapons plant near Cincinnati was many times higher than the Government previously estimated.
The study is in its early stages, and the scientists said they could not determine what effect, if any, the contamination was having on residents near the plant, in Fernald, Ohio.


Glaxo Appoints A Top Officer
Glaxo Holdings P.L.C., the British pharmaceutical group, Tuesday announced the appointment of Ernest Mario as deputy chairman, effective Jan. 1.
Dr. Mario, 53 years old, will keep his present responsibilities as chief executive.


Another Milepost on the Long Trail of Corruption in Hudson County
Hudson County is the land of the once-and-future corrupt office holder, a legendary character who has taken many names over the years but who never seems far from the public till or some other ready source of cash.
His arch enemy is the United States Attorney for New Jersey.
The score isn't even close.
On Tuesday, in the latest match, the Government prevailed once more, this time against Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City, who was convicted of fraud and income tax evasion.
His crimes, the Government says, occurred between his first and second terms, but the conviction has placed his mayoralty in jeopardy.
He now joins a former United States Representative, other Jersey City mayors, state legislators, Council members and school board presidents in Union City, Weehawken, Bayonne and other Hudson County towns on the losing team of a rivalry that goes back decades and shows no signs of waning.


Seoul Says It Now Has No Nuclear Arms
In a move intended to increase pressure on North Korea to halt its nuclear weapons program, President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea announced on national television tonight that there were not now any nuclear weapons in his country.
"As I speak, there do not exist any nuclear weapons whatsoever, anywhere in the Republic of Korea," Mr.
Roh said.


Choosing Proper Role Model Can Be a Lesson in Itself
The young people in the audience already seemed to know.
They are still in high schools in the metropolitan area, football heroes in their communities, some sorting out offers of college scholarships and others just hoping to hear.
There is a lot they don't know, but the young people already seemed to sense this: There are no more role models.
There are just models.
If you are wise, and fortunate, you pick one that works and learn from the rest.


Home Video
It's getting harder to determine which older movies are still being marketed on videotape these days.
"I pity anybody who tries to be a cataloguer of what's available," said Milos Stehlik, himself a cataloguer and co-director of Facets Multimedia Center in Chicago.
"It's become very haphazard."
Mr.
Stehlik's store and catalogue offer about 15,000 films.
Facets stocks the hits, but most of the inventory consists of classics, foreign films and often critically praised titles from independent producers.
"A lot of these titles are going off the market," he said.
"If you see an old movie you want, buy it because it may not be around for very long."


Use of Cocaine and Heroin Rises Among Urban Youth
Cocaine and heroin use are once again on the rise in the United States, Administration officials said yesterday, one year after President Bush triumphantly announced a sharp drop in illicit drug use.
The data compiled from a national survey and hospital reports were the first reversal in the President's campaign against drugs since late 1989, when it became clear that the cocaine epidemic was beginning to wane.


Parcells Leaves Jersey Hospital
Bill Parcells, the former Giants coach, was released from Valley Hospital today after having one of the arteries of his heart cleared of blockage, the hospital said.


Accounts
*
Bryan, Williams &amp; Associates, New York, has been awarded a $2.5 million advertising and promotion account to reintroduce P.F.
Flyers athletic shoes.
The manufacturer, LJO Inc., Hamburg, N.J., is counting on baby-boomers' nostalgia for the 1950's and 1960's to fuel sales of the brand, which disappeared from stores in 1970.
Ads, carrying the theme "Athletic shoes that are just your speed," are to begin appearing in February.
Bryan, Williams, which handles other nostalgia-driven products like Tootsie Rolls and Charms candies, won the account following a review earlier this year.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly Meets at 10 A.M.
TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL -- 10:30 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


U.S. AND ITS ALLIES TO MOVE ON LIBYA OVER AIR BOMBINGS
The United States, Britain and France have agreed to begin a campaign to win international support for sanctions against Libya for the part they say it played in the bombings of a Pan American World Airways plane over Scotland and of a French airliner in Africa, in which a total of 440 people were killed, officials of the three countries said today.
The three countries are considering a Security Council resolution that would at a minimum ban all international flights in and out of Libya, the sale of commercial planes and spare parts, and the delivery of any airline-related services.


County Confirmation Vote to Fill Top Hospital Post Sets Off Furor
A confirmation vote on Thursday by the Westchester County legislature for the post of county hospitals commmissioner has set off a furor here, with some arguing that the candidate is not qualified for the job and others saying he is being held to a higher standard because he is black.
The 43-year-old candidate, Mack L. Carter Jr., was chosen by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, who rejected others fielded by his own selection committee in making the choice last August that has infuriated the medical community and divided the county's Board of Legislators.


AIDS Test Results Tied to Flu Shots
Federal health officials reported last night that about 90 people around the country who donated blood had falsely tested positive for three viruses, including the one that causes AIDS.
The findings created a scientific mystery because a recent influenza immunization was the only common denominator among 60 percent of the blood donors.
It was not clear how a flu shot would cause false positive reactions in the laboratory tests for the three viruses: H.I.V.-1, which is the major cause of AIDS in this country; hepatitis C, which damages the liver, and H.T.L.V.-1, which is uncommon in the United States.


EXECUTIVES
*
First Security Corp. of Kentucky, Lexington, Ky., a bank holding company, named William R. Hartman president and chief operating officer.
He will also serve as chairman and chief executive of its subsidiary First Security National Bank and Trust Co. of Lexington. *
General Signal Corp., Stamford, Conn., a manufacturer of electrical equipment, named Julian (Jay) B. Twombly corporate vice president and treasurer.


In the Nation; After The Storm
Can anyone recall a disappearance more precipitous than that of the national celebration of Desert Storm, last winter's great victory in the Persian Gulf -- the war whose fighting men and women, unlike those of Vietnam, were to be honored and remembered?
The honors, like yellow ribbons, quickly came and went.
The remembrance of the war, as evidenced by polls and public statements, has been equally short-lived, and soured by the survival of Saddam Hussein in Iraq.


Sealing Up Salems To Sell Them
THE R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is about to embark on another multimillion-dollar advertising and promotion campaign as it expands an ambitious, and risky, strategy to use packaging innovations to reverse the sales slide of its largest cigarette brands.
On Jan. 1, Reynolds will begin a national introduction of a special package wrapping for its menthol Salem brand.
The wrapping, which is intended to keep cigarettes fresher, has been available on its Winston brand since mid-August.
Around the same time, Reynolds will start testing in the Northeast a redesigned "convertible box" for its Vantage Ultra Lights brand.


The Hounding of Conrad McRae
Bribery.
Altered transcripts.
Players who never graduate.
The N.C.A.A., watchdog of fairness and morality in college athletics, has plenty of problems that deserve attention.
Conrad McRae is not one of them.
The N.C.A.A. would do well to stop hounding him and spend its energies where they are needed.
Mr.
McRae, a communications major and a basketball player at Syracuse University, is said to be a bright, trouble-free student who's scheduled to graduate this year.
On time.


Review/Television; From Fitting Room to Living Room, 2 Programs Tailored to Style
Most attempts to cover fashion on television are either slightly tacky or wildly misinformed.
But the potential for sharp fashion editing, with very little lead time, has always been there.
Leave it to MTV, whose Paris edition of "House of Style" will be shown tomorrow at 9:30 P.M., to take advantage of the medium's possibilities for style reporting.
While Vogue and Harper's Bazaar need three to four months to get a fashion story into the reader's hands, television can bring it into the living room -- or better yet, bedroom, just a few feet from your closet -- in a few weeks or less.


Arrhythmia Lands Koch In Hospital
Former Mayor Edward I. Koch was hospitalized yesterday after he collapsed and briefly lost consciousness at his health club, apparently as a result of an irregular heart beat.
Mr.
Koch's doctors at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Upper Manhattan tentatively attributed his collapse to an arrhythmia, a momentarily irregular heart beat that suddenly decreased the supply of blood to his brain.


In Nicaragua, Free Enterprise Never Left
To the Editor:
Nicaraguans, your headline states, "Are Back in Business" ("Managua Journal," Nov. 22).
You see vendors on street corners peddling their wares to passing cars as an indication that the people are "rebuilding a market economy." Those of us who have known Nicaragua over the last decade see no surprise in this miniature example of private business in Managua or other parts of the country.
It is an old characteristic of the peoples of poor countries, like paperboys, push-cart vendors and kids selling in buses or from door to door goodies made in mom's kitchen.


Japan Remains Top Investor
Japan was the world's top foreign investor in 1990, when its firms spent a total of $48 billion on investment abroad, the Japan External Trade Organization said today.
Japanese direct investment overseas accounted for 22.1 percent of the world's total, up from 21.2 percent in 1989 when Japan first clinched the top place, said the organization, which is the Government's trade monitoring body.


Family Photos: X-Rays of the Heart
WITH old snapshots and other family mementos, people are putting their lives, or the lives of others, back together.
They are raiding attics and, in a pinch, scavenging flea markets.
Some are making their pasts into works of art; others are hanging their pasts in galleries, and many are, as always, keeping the past close to home, in big old scrapbooks or taped to the refrigerator door.


Woman, 71, Dies in Fire Linked By Police to Bushwick Drug War
It looked like just another grocery store in a poor Brooklyn neighborhood.
But it was a front for crack dealing, the police said, and early yesterday it became a battleground when rival drug dealers sprayed the store with gunfire and then bombed it.
The fire that followed killed a 71-year-old woman who lived upstairs and injured two of her children and a teen-age grandson.


Control Board Assails Dinkins 4-Year Fiscal Plan
Expanding on its earlier complaints, the State Financial Control Board issued a sharply critical report yesterday on Mayor David N. Dinkins long-term plan to balance the city's books, saying the administration's predictions about future tax revenues, debt and demands on welfare and the schools were unrealistic.
The City Budget Director, Philip R. Michael, insisted that the city's economic assumptions were sound.
But he said the administration would take many of the board's criticisms to heart while revising the plan.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.50
4.62
7.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.12
4.11
6.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.18
4.16
6.60
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.73
6.71
7.89
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.75
7.74
8.17
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.80
8.80
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.78
6.79
7.45
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Suffolk Bond Issue
Suffolk County, L.I., offered $37.5 million in Drinking Water Protection Program general-obligation bonds yesterday at yields ranging from 4.40 percent for the 1993 maturity to 5.80 percent for the 2000 maturity.
The underwriter for the issue was Roosevelt &amp; Cross.
The bonds are insured by the Financial Guaranty Insurance Company and are rated AAA by the major rating agencies.


Bush Signs Transit Bill In Texas And Touts Jobs
President Bush traveled 1,430 miles today to a muddy road-building site near Dallas in his latest effort to dramatize his eagerness to ease the "tough times" he now says the nation faces.
With television cameras rolling through a gray drizzle, Mr.
Bush signed a $151 billion highways bill that he said would create or sustain 600,000 jobs in the current fiscal year.


States Slashed Aid to Poor in 1991, Report Says
Drastically paring emergency cash assistance and programs intended to avert homelessness, states slashed programs for the poor more sharply this year than in any year since the recession of the early 1980's, according to a study issued today.
In what they called the first comprehensive report on the subject, the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities and the Center for the Study of the States said 40 states froze or cut benefits under the Aid to Families with Dependent Children program.


Greenspan Bleak About Economy But Warns Against a 'Quick Fix'
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, gave Congress a bleak assessment of the economy today, but he suggested that the bad times would be over by Election Day and cautioned against a "quick fix" like a tax cut.
"The economy is struggling," Mr.
Greenspan said, because the nation is feeling the hangover from rampant speculation and increased debt in the 1980's.
He said he was especially struck by a deep-seated concern among Americans that they will not live as well as previous generations.


Vancouver Journal; City Is Beginning to Look a Lot Like Hong Kong
The influx of nearly 100,000 Asians over the last decade, many of them Chinese entrepreneurs from Hong Kong, has transformed the look and character of Canada's third-largest city and helped shield it from cold economic winds blowing across the rest of the country.
As a result of new Canadian immigration policies and worries in Hong Kong about absorption by China in 1997, Vancouver, which now counts 15 percent of its 1.5 million people as ethnic Chinese, has emerged as a bustling Pacific Rim finance and trading center.


Cuomo Picks Harvard Professor For Social Services Commissioner
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today nominated Dr.
Mary Jo Bane, a Harvard professor who is one of the nation's foremost academic experts on welfare policy, as his new Social Services Commissioner.
If confirmed by the State Senate, Dr.
Bane will succeed Cesar A. Perales, who has accepted the new job of New York City's deputy mayor for health and human services.
Mr.
Perales has been the state's Social Services Commissioner since 1983.


Joseph R. Smallwood Dies at 90; Led Newfoundland Into Canada
Joseph R. Smallwood, the politician credited by Canadians with leading Newfoundland and Labrador into the Canadian confederation in 1949, died on Tuesday night at his home outside St.
John's, the Newfoundland capital.
He was 90 years old.
He had been suffering from several ailments, including recurrent pneumonia, for several years.


John A. Blatnik, 80, Congressman Who Promoted Public Works Bills
John A. Blatnik, who sponsored major environmental and public works laws and led liberal causes in his 27-year career as a Democratic Congressman from Minnesota, died yesterday at his home in Forest Heights, Md.
He was 80 years old.
The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.


At Least on the Court, Fitch Has a Good Day
They played office politics and they played basketball at Byrne Meadowlands Arena tonight.
Surprisingly, the Nets shone in the sporting event, beating the Cleveland Cavaliers, 102-93.


Randolph Bid Likely by Mets
Al Harazin, the general manager of the Mets, yesterday contacted the agent for Willie Randolph in the first formal step of what could well lead to a deal for the free-agent second baseman.
"We spoke with Al Harazin, and as is his style, he was up front about the club's interest in Willie," said Ron Shapiro, the agent for Randolph.
"Beyond that, I can't comment other than to say the genuine interest is mutual."
One person familiar with the club's dealings with Randolph said it was likely that the Mets, after yesterday's discussions, would make a formal offer to Randolph today.


Machado Arrest Order
The Venezuelan police have issued an arrest order for Milwaukee Brewers pitcher JULIO MACHADO, who disappeared after he was involved in a homicide case.


Russian Player's Dream Comes True With Devils
A dream has finally come true for Valery Zelepukin, the 23-year-old Russian forward for the Devils.
He will be playing alongside his boyhood idols, Vyacheslav Fetisov and Aleksei Kasatonov, in the National Hockey League.
After he scored 20 goals in 23 games for their top affiliate in the minor leagues, the Devils thought it was time to promote Zelepukin, who arrived from Russia shortly before the start of the season and was assigned to Utica of the American Hockey League.


Marino Driven by Just One Goal
Dan Marino reached the Super Bowl in his second professional season.
Seven seasons later, he's still waiting for an encore.
It bothers the Miami Dolphins' quarterback that he doesn't have a Super Bowl conquest in his portfolio, which is why Sunday's game against the Jets may mean a little extra to him.
Sunday's winner gets a playoff ticket, which keeps its Super Bowl hopes alive.
The loser's season will be over.


Burmese Dissidents Say 900 Were Arrested in Crackdown
A leading Burmese dissident group estimated today that 900 students and others had been arrested in the Burmese capital over the last week.
The moves came after the Government, apparently fearing a revival of the democracy movement it silenced in 1988, shut the nation's universities and further isolated its leading dissident.
The protests in Myanmar, formerly Burma, last week that set off the arrests coincided with the formal awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of the country's opposition.


French Merger to Create A New Electronics Giant
In a daring move to shore up France's ailing electronics industry, the French Government announced today that it would form a high-technology conglomerate by merging some money-losing electronics businesses with a cash-rich producer of nuclear reactors.
Asserting that this new conglomerate would rival giants like Toshiba of Japan and Siemens of Germany, the Government said it was combining Thomson Consumer Electronics and Thomson's semiconductor activities with the civilian activities of the state-owned Atomic Energy Commission.


Pro Bowl For Oates But Not For Taylor
When the results of the Pro Bowl voting were announced today, Anthony Munoz and Lawrence Taylor had made history, Munoz because he was selected and Taylor because he was not.
Munoz, the Cincinnati Bengals' offensive tackle, was chosen for the 11th year, a record for this National Football League All-Star game.
Taylor, the Giants' outside linebacker, had played in 10 consecutive Pro Bowls, a record, in his first 10 seasons, but injuries have slowed him this year.


Two Indicted On Charges Of Extortion
The executive director of the Jersey City Sewerage Authority and a consultant have been indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges of extorting $140,000 from a contractor on a $17 million construction project during 1987 and 1988, the United States Attorney's office announced today.
The indictment was handed up Nov. 22 but sealed until today to avoid any possible impact on the trial of Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City, who was found guilty on Tuesday of 15 counts of criminal fraud and income-tax evasion, said Michael Chertoff, the United States Attorney for New Jersey.
Mr.
Chertoff said there is no evidence linking Mr.
McCann to the crimes alleged in the nine-count indictment unsealed today.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
B.C.C.I. has agreed to plead guilty to Federal and state criminal charges and will forfeit $550 million in the largest single criminal forfeiture ever obtained by the Government.  [ Page A1. ]
USAir said it had reached an agreement with the Trump Organization and Citibank to operate the Trump Shuttle for up to 10 years with an option to buy it after five.  [ D1. ]


Review/Film; Kurosawa, Small in Scale and Blunt
Long regarded at home and abroad as the least Japanese of great Japanese directors, in part because his work has been so widely hailed outside Japan, Akira Kurosawa has now made his most Japanese film in years and, as might be expected, he has been damned for it.
When his new "Rhapsody in August" was shown out-of-competition at this year's Cannes festival, the critics were inclined to dismiss it for the simplicity of its structure and its moralizing tone.
The inference was that Mr.
Kurosawa, born in 1910, was giving in to age, losing his touch.
Not so.
The master is as vigorous and complex as ever, though now impatient with the world in which he has been making movies so productively since 1943.


Savoring the Season, Window by Window
AT an indecipherable moment sometime in mid-December, the edge softens.
It is the time when street corners are transformed into aromatic north country forests, when snowsuited schoolchildren line up expectantly outside concert halls.
Around New York City, windows become animated stage sets, as plastic icicles dance in liquor-store windows and wreaths adorn Greek coffee shops.


Trenton Senate Votes to Repeal Most of Tax Package
The State Senate approved legislation today to repeal an unpopular tax package that cost New Jerseyans a record $2.8 billion increase and created a voter backlash that cost the state's Democrats control of the Legislature.
The Democrats, who hold a 23-to-17 majority in the Senate, received unexpected support from a Republican -- Joseph L. Bubba of Wayne -- on the vote to repeal the taxes.
The legislation would add "sunset" provisions to legislation that 18 months ago increased sales and income taxes and imposed new taxes on a variety of products ranging from liquor and tobacco to detergents.
Assembly Bill Next Month
Mr.
Bubba's vote offset that of Gerald R. Stockman, a Trenton Democrat, who voted against the package.
"The sunset provision will help clear away the rancor and allow the new Legislature, the Governor and the public to reassess the state's budget needs without the cloud of discontent that continues to surround the tax package," said Senator Laurence S. Weiss, the chairman of the Revenue, Finance and Appropriations Committee and the sponsor of the five-bill repeal package.


Koch Undergoes Surgery to Have a Heart Pacemaker Implanted
Former Mayor Edward I. Koch, who suffered a fainting spell on Wednesday as he began his regular morning exercise session, yesterday underwent surgery to have a heart pacemaker implanted at Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan.
The two-hour surgery, which Mr.
Koch's physicians repeatedly described as entirely routine, began at 4:10 P.M. and ended about 6 P.M., said Karen Schwab, a hospital spokesman.
Dr.
Henry Spotnitz, a cardiothoracic surgeon at the hospital, implanted the battery-powered device, which is somewhat bigger than a silver dollar.


Review/Film; One Man's Approach To Sexual Obsession
"Ted and Venus" tells of a sadly dissipated drifter who lives in Venice, Calif., and becomes obsessed with a beautiful young woman he first glimpses on the beach.
Since Ted (Bud Cort), an ex-mental patient who is an aspiring and supposedly talented poet, expresses his longing for Linda (Kim Adams) largely by means of surprise visits and obscene phone calls, it's not surprising that their relations never get past the tenuous stage until the film reaches its bleak finale.
Directed by Mr.
Cort and based on a Southern Californian newspaper story, "Ted and Venus" seems to regard Ted as a good-hearted innocent.
The audience isn't likely to share that view.
Mr.
Cort, still best remembered for his role as Ruth Gordon's young suitor in "Harold and Maude," directs other actors with some assurance but seems to have little idea of how he himself comes across on the screen.
Alternating between wide-eyed naivete, dopey humor (in his stridently awful poetry readings) and boozy exaggeration, he turns Ted into an unsympathetic pest and makes Linda's attempts to avoid him understandable.
Indeed, when Ted first expresses his yearning for Linda, he affects a kind of dog-paddle and seems to be experiencing apoplexy rather than love.


At the Insane End Of a Twisted Road
"Golden Braid" was shown as part of the 1990 New York Film Festival.
Following are excerpts from Caryn James's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Oct. 5, 1990.
The film opens today at the Cinema Village, West 12th Street, near University Place, in Manhattan.
Paul Cox's "Golden Braid" is so sincere that it deserves respect, yet so precious and absurd that it's probably best to get the unintentional laughter out of the way.
Bernard, a middle-aged clockmaker, is having an affair with a married Salvation Army soldier, yet feels he's cheating on her with a lovely, long golden braid he finds in an antique clock.
"I wish I could take you to a restaurant, to the theater," the clockmaker tells the hair as he lies in bed and strokes his body with it.
Eventually, he puts the braid in his pocket and takes it to dinner at a Chinese restaurant.
At a concert, the braid occupies the empty seat meant for the woman.


Critic's Choice/Music; A Neapolitan Expression Of Bethlehem
A Neapolitan Christmas, as we think the 17th century experienced it, is being rethought at a Manhattan theater called Home three times this weekend: at 8 tonight and tomorrow nights and at 3 P.M. on Sunday.
The result is an update of an old tradition and constitutes what we today would call a mixed-media event: music, dance, masks and puppets.
Together they blend the fears and ecstasies of the Christian experience with the comic gestures of commedia dell'arte.
The show itself is done in Italian, but with the help of English narrations and printed programs, everyone should understand.


Dow Climbs 6.27 Points in Volatile Trading
Stocks ended a choppy and volatile session yesterday with blue chips modestly higher and secondary issues lower, as investors expressed wariness over the economy and disappointment at the Federal Reserve's delay in lowering interest rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 6.27 points to finish at 2,914.36.
Some traders said the erratic trading resulted from buying and selling ahead of today's "triple witching hour," when options on individual stocks, indexes and futures contracts expire.


The Word From Cuomo Is: Stay Tuned
As rumors swirled, budget negotiations faltered and political reporters descended on the State Capitol, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo kept his own counsel today about whether he would meet Friday's 5 P.M. deadline for entering the New Hampshire Presidential primary.
The most that Mr.
Cuomo would say about his dilemma was that he realized he had to say something "reasonably decisive" by Friday.
He continued, however, to hold out the possibility that he could run for President without running in New Hampshire.


Miscellany
*
The Publishers Information Bureau reported that magazine ad pages in November fell about 2 percent, to 16,721.4, from November 1990.
For the year to date, pages dropped about 9.1 percent, to 141,969.2, from the corresponding period last year.


TV Weekend; Making The Best Of Slim Pickings
Curious habit: The closer television gets to Christmas, the stingier it gets with original programming.
Most weekly series have segued into repeats, and an inordinate number of holiday specials are, ahem, "classics" from decades past.
Finding something requires an effort, but persistence can be rewarded, however modestly.
These are this weekend's more promising entries:


Leonard Johnson, 79, Business Leader, Dies
Leonard C. Johnson, the retired president of the New Jersey Business and Industry Association, died Dec. 12 at the Princeton Medical Center in Princeton, N.J.
He was 79 years old and lived in Princeton.
He died of pneumonia after suffering a stroke, his family said.


Art in Review
Philip Taaffe  Gagosian Gallery 980 Madison Avenue (at 76th Street) Through Jan. 11
The pleasure of Philip Taaffe's paintings remains undeniable.
They are sophisticated abstractions, layered with motifs derived from different corners of the Mediterranean.
Mr.
Taaffe has been living in Naples for the better part of the last several years, and the evocation of weathered textures and warm, sun-baked colors is one constant in his work.
Sometimes his images bring to mind ancient frescoes on crumbling walls, or elaborate wrought-iron gates, but they are spared by the rigor of their forms from the facile antiquing that became a common device among 1980's landscapists.


Penn State Coach Will Abide by Lesbian Policy, but Won't Discuss It
THE Lady Lions meet the Spartans tonight and Rene Portland's voice throbs with that high octane of desperate optimism that seems to fuel the most successful coaches.
"This is the season that can make us or destroy us," she said, "beat us up so bad we're done or give us confidence."
This is her 12th year as head coach of Penn State's women's basketball team and certainly one of her most demanding.
While still officially an independent, the team is scheduled to play eight Big Ten teams, including Michigan State tonight at home.
Next season, it becomes an official member of the conference.
In this transitional season, the Lady Lions, as they call themselves, play 18 games on the road, from Tennessee to Texas to Alaska.


M.I.T. to Get Taiwan Grant
A group of 12 Taiwan businesses has promised to give the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Sloan School of Management $10 million to start an educational exchange program with Taiwan companies.
The $6 million endowment and a pledge for $4 million more came from 12 Taiwan conglomerates.


Allegra Maynard, Headmistress Of Madeira School, Is Dead at 94
Allegra Maynard, a retired headmistress of the Madeira School in Greenway, Va., died Wednesday at the North Hill Retirement Center in Needham, Mass., where she resided.
She was 94 years old.
She died of congestive heart failure, a spokeswoman for the school said.


From Despair to Hope, Aided by Neediest Cases
Thousands of Soviet citizens have immigrated to New York City in search of a dream.
Yail Iziaeva came to escape a nightmare.
It was April 18, 1990, and dusk had just settled on the quiet town of Kislovodsk in the Russian republic.
Mrs.
Iziaeva was in the kitchen, kneading dough for bread.
Then she heard a thunderous thump.
The front door flew open.
She saw four armed men in black ski masks.
"They blindfolded me and my son and tied us to chairs," the 51-year-old woman recounted last week through an interpreter.


METRO DIGEST
PUTTING THE 80's TO REST, STATISTICALLY
The recession has hit private industry in Manhattan so hard that it has erased all the job growth of the 1980's boom years, the Federal Government announced.
Throughout the New York region, the picture is not much prettier.
Since employment peaked in early 1989, 40 percent of the 80's job growth has been lost.
Underlining the grim news, 50,000 angry construction workers took to the streets, marching across the Brooklyn Bridge to City Hall, where they protested delays in New York City's rebuilding projects that they said have cost them jobs.
A1 and B2.
NEW YORK CITY KEY RULING ON EVIDENCE
In two notorious cases, one an act of arson in which six firefighters were killed, the other the shooting of police officers by black radicals in the 1970's, the State Court of Appeals broke new legal ground, ruling that a defendant seeking a new trial because the prosecution withheld evidence must demonstrate a reasonable possibility that this failure contributed to the conviction.
B3.
N.Y.U.
MEDICAL CENTER UNDER FIRE
In yet another criticism of the relationship between the city's public hospitals and the private institutions paid to staff them, the State Comptroller cited a variety of instances in which New York University Medical Center failed to comply with the terms of its contract to provide doctors to Bellevue Hospital.
B2.
BEHOLD, A LIBRARY
At Public School 94 in the north Bronx, English classes are taught in the hallway, the science lab is in an old shower room and the guidance counselor has more than 1,000 students to worry about.
But the school did reopen its library this week, nine years after it was closed to make space for a classroom.
And that is a major event in a city where most public elementary schools lost their librarians years ago.
B3.
HEART PACEMAKER FOR KOCH
Former Mayor Koch, who collapsed Wednesday at his health club, had a pacemaker implanted in his heart.
B2.
The Post gets help in covering its debts.
B3.
REGION
A Westchester County judge set bail at $500,000 for a Swiss au pair accused of arson and murder in the death of a 3-month-old baby in her care.
Her lawyer said it was unlikely that the defendant's family could raise that amount.
B4.
TAX REPEAL MOVES AHEAD
The New Jersey Senate approved legislation to repeal Governor Florio's $2.8 billion tax package, which created a voter backlash that cost the Democrats control of the Legislature.
B5.
NEW INDICTMENT IN JERSEY CITY
The executive director of the Jersey City Sewerage Authority and a consultant have been indicted on charges of extorting $140,000 from a contractor on a $17 million construction project during 1987 and 1988.
B5.
Westchester Legislature approves budget without tax rise.
B5.
Neediest Cases B4 Our Towns B5


Federal Courts Allow Questions by Jurors
To the Editor:
"In Some Courtrooms, Jurors Play Inquisitor" (news article, Dec. 1) discusses rare cases where jurors have asked questions of witnesses.
A subheadline states that questions by jurors are "Banned in Federal Courts."


Bank's Holders Clear Merger
The BankAmerica Corporation said today that its shareholders had approved its merger with the Security Pacific Corporation, which was first announced in August.
The merger, which was approved by 98 percent of the votes cast by BankAmerica common shareholders, is expected to be completed in the spring, pending the approval of regulators.
The combined organization, to be called the BankAmerica Corporation, will be the nation's second-largest bank holding company.
Richard M. Rosenberg, BankAmerica's chairman and chief executive, will hold those titles in the new organization.
Robert H. Smith, Security Pacific's chairman and chief executive, will be president and chief operating officer.


B.C.C.I. Agrees to Plead Guilty And Will Forfeit $550 Million
The Justice Department and New York City prosecutors announced today that the Bank of Credit and Commerce International had agreed to plead guilty to Federal and state criminal charges and would forfeit $550 million in the largest single criminal forfeiture ever obtained by the Government.
"This action successfully resolves all United States charges against B.C.C.I. as an institution," said Attorney General William P. Barr at a news conference announcing the agreement.


Another Top Manager Is Leaving Salomon
The stream of departures continued at Salomon Brothers yesterday, as the firm announced that Jay F. Higgins, a vice chairman and one of the only remaining members of Salomon's prior senior management, would resign at the end of the year.
The departure of Mr.
Higgins, who founded the firm's mergers and acquisitions department and served as the head of investment banking, had been expected.
But his decision marks the highest-level defection since November, when Stanley B. Shopkorn, the head of the equities division and one of Salomon's most aggressive traders, said he would leave at the end of the year.


Books of The Times; From Silver Boom Town to Celebrity Playground
Whiteout  Lost in Aspen  By Ted Conover  269 pages. Random House. $20.
Having previously explored the precarious worlds of railroad hobos ("Rolling Nowhere") and illegal aliens from Mexico ("Coyotes"), the journalist Ted Conover now turns to the other end of the social spectrum in his latest book, "Whiteout: Lost in Aspen." His subject is Aspen, the glittering ski resort and celebrity enclave in the Rocky Mountains of Colorado.
The underlying theme, however, is similar to that explored in his earlier books: the promise and betrayal of the American Dream.


A Kick for the Mulish Middle East
President Bush's disappointment in the first round of Arab-Israeli peace talks will be generally shared.
Never before had the bitter adversaries dealt directly with each other.
Yet progress in Washington fell sadly short of hopes raised in Madrid.
Six working days were devoted mostly to procedural squabbles and the restatement of stale demands.
The one tangible result was Wednesday's agreement to resume talks in early January, probably in Washington.
Thus far, the most fitting symbol for the peace process is not a dove but a mule.
If coaxing does not work, Mr.
Bush and Secretary of State Baker would be right to try a kick.


NIGERIA ENDS BAN FOR EX-OFFICIALS
Nigeria's military Government has announced the lifting of a five-year-old ban on anyone who has ever held a senior government position from seeking elected office.
The ban affected tens of thousands of officials, and its repeal is expected to have a dramatic impact on congressional and presidential elections scheduled for the end of 1992, when the military has promised to hand back power to civilians.
The reversal will make it at least theoretically possible for members of the present military Government to seek elected office.


On Stage, and Off
Dissecting 'Nick and Nora'
Just when you thought it was safe to read about the theater again, a few postcards from the edge of "Nick and Nora," which closed on Sunday.


22 Haitians Sent Back
In the first American repatriation of Haitians since November, a Coast Guard cutter brought home today 22 Haitians who said they were caught in the middle of the refugee crisis and asked to be returned.
The 22 Haitians, each of whom carried a small bundle of personal belongings, descended by gangplank from the cutter Thetis in a bright morning sun.
They said that they had all been accidental victims in the refugee crisis, either picked up at sea by the Coast Guard while fishing or passengers on boats making local trips that were hijacked by other Haitians desperate to reach the United States.


Federal Panel Offers Bush a Plan On Health Care for the Uninsured
A Federal advisory panel, in its final report, told President Bush today how the Government could help finance health care for 20 million uninsured people at a cost of $6.5 billion a year.
But consumer groups, labor unions, some businesses and doctors immediately criticized the proposals as far too modest.
The 14-member panel was headed by Deborah L. Steelman, a political adviser to Mr.
Bush, and its report lays out a recipe that Mr.
Bush can use in the 1992 campaign to deflect attacks from Democrats who say he has done nothing to deal with the nation's worsening health-care problems.
That recipe calls for $3 billion a year in Federal grants to states to test various ways of controlling health costs and providing care to people with no health insurance.


BUSH ASSERTS TRIP IS SEARCH FOR JOBS
President Bush sought today to portray an impending trip to Japan and the Pacific as a crusade to boost American exports and the economy, saying he intended during the 12-day tour to "relentlessly pursue our mission to create jobs and restore prosperity."
The remarks, similar to previous statements, were widely seen as a political response to criticism of his handling of the economy.
But they took on added significance amid reports that Japanese leaders were dismayed by the White House's depiction of the visit as a campaign to pressure Japan into lowering trade barriers.


Review/Music; Opening Nights, One After the Other, at a Renewed 92d St. Y
The Tisch Center for the Arts at the 92d Street Y opened on either Tuesday or Wednesday night, depending on your point of view.
Tuesday's black-tie, celebrity-laden, show-business sendoff showered the Y in uncharacteristic glitz while offering a four-part sampler of its arts programs.
On Wednesday, the Tisch got down to its customary business with a concert by the New York Chamber Symphony under Gerard Schwarz.
The process continues on Sunday with readings by the poet Joseph Brodsky.
The Tisch Center is a reconfiguration of longstanding arts programs at the Y, organizing concerts, recitals, readings, jazz programs and celebrations of the American popular tradition under a new umbrella.
Led by Joan Tisch, a new board will operate within the larger organization and with a measure of autonomy.


Amazingly, Bronx School Gets Library
At Public School 94 in the north Bronx, English classes are taught in the hallway, the science lab is in an old shower room and one guidance counselor has 1,000 students to worry about.
But the school did reopen its library this week, nine years after it was closed to make space for a classroom.
"It's a big story," said Gabriel Crespo, a 10-year-old fourth grader who was covering the ribbon-cutting as the anchor for the school's own video news team.
It is also one in which Gabriel takes a deeply personal interest.
"Now," he said, "if I need a book, I can just come here and look for it."


Jury Clears Friend of Kennedy Family
In an action that resolves the last major legal issue remaining from the William K. Smith rape case, a grand jury that had been investigating possible obstruction of justice at the Kennedy family estate in Palm Beach declined today to hand up an indictment.
Since the summer, the grand jury had been looking into accusations that William Barry, a longtime Kennedy family friend who was staying with the family on Easter Weekend, misled police investigators responding to a complaint by Patricia Bowman that Mr.
Smith had raped her at the compound.


Kuwait Journal; Kuwaitis in a Hurry to Recapture the Good Life
The detritus of war has been swept aside, the 732 burning oil wells capped, the streets repaired, the telephone and electrical service restored and the stores stocked with products as diverse as Louis Vuitton luggage, English chutney and Davidoff cigars.
In the 10 months since Iraqi invaders were ousted from Kuwait, the country has transformed itself from a looted wreck to a place that holds out the promise of recapturing its former affluence.


Corrections
A music review on Wednesday about the Black Rock Christmas Show at the Manhattan Center misstated its affiliation.
It was organized independently, not by the Black Rock Coalition.


Art in Review
'Miro, Early Prints, 1935-1955'  Pace Master Prints 32 East 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
This excellent show of 27 works brings together nearly all the prints Joan Miro made in the 1930's, when he first tackled etching and seems to have loved the variety of line and mark possible in this medium.
The marvelously smoky atmosphere of a tiny etching created for "Solidarite," a book of poems by Paul Eluard, is punctuated by little more than three fingerprints.
In "Three Sisters," from 1938, an image that has an air of trauma similar to Picasso's "Guernica," delicate smokelike tendrils surround the more heavily lined spiderish forms of three alarmed and alarming females.
In an adjacent work, "The Giantess," the tendrils mass into dark clouds and the female form seems to be full of bullet holes.
Sexuality and violence, disguised by caricature and abstraction, are constant themes in these works, as in much of Miro's oeuvre.


INSIDE
Australian Premier Ousted
Bob Hawke was ousted as Australia's Prime Minister by the party he led to four election victories.
Page A3.
Court Rules Against Haitians
A Federal court ruled for the second time this week that the Government can start sending home thousands of Haitian refugees.
Page A3.
Bush Trip Worries Japan
To the dismay of Japanese leaders, President Bush is casting a state visit to Asia as a crusade to boost the American economy.
He is planning to take along some leading American business executives.
Page B8.


N.C.A.A. Restores McRae at Syracuse
In a rare reversal of one of its decisions, the National Collegiate Athletic Association today restored the eligibility of Conrad McRae, the Syracuse University basketball player who was forced to sit out because of recruiting violations.
In overturning a decision it made a month ago, the N.C.A.A.'s eligibility committee said in a prepared statement that while it was convinced that Syracuse gained an improper recruiting advantage in its pursuit of the 6-foot-10-inch center, "it also appeared unreasonable in this case that the young man should bear a disproportionate level of responsibility for the violations."


Is Doomsday Near for Central Park Bandshell?
Seeing it as a magnet for drug dealing, homelessness and vandalism, New York City parks officials want to tear down Central Park's Naumburg Bandshell, whose classical limestone dome has reverberated for generations with some of the stateliest -- and noisiest -- music ever heard under the trees.
The demolition plan, advanced by the Central Park Conservancy and endorsed by the Landmarks Preservation Commission, has inflamed the descendants of Elkan Naumburg, the man who donated this "Temple of Music" in 1923.
Given the officials' reasoning, said one, you might as well raze Manhattan.


Art in Review
'Ann Hamilton Malediction'  Louver Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Jan. 4
If theatrical evocation is your thing, this is the last weekend to catch Ann Hamilton in action at Louver.
Hereafter only the props of her eerie performance piece, with its intimations of a Dickensian sweatshop, Holy Communion and medieval morgue (or kitchen), will be on view.
These props include twisted pieces of white clothing stained with wine and strewn on the floor, so that they force the viewer to walk on tiptoe before entering the large open gallery space.
Inside await a refectory table supporting an old basketry casket half filled with little disks of dough; more clothing piled along and up a huge wall, like laundry left undone, and the sound of a woman's voice (on tape) murmuring incessantly in the background, near the casket's lid.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  YELTSIN WIDENS CONTROL
President Yeltsin of Russia started swallowing up the remnants of the Soviet state, taking control of the Foreign Ministry, the K.G.B., the Parliament and even Mr.
Gorbachev's presidential office.
A1  DISORIENTED SOVIET ATHLETES
Organizers on the Soviet Olympic Committee urged that athletes form a "joint" team for next year's games rather than appear under disparate nationalist groupings.
A10  The Bush Administration feels no rush to recognize new states.
A10  The Soviet airline says its accident record is worsening.
A10  RECONCILIATION IN MEXICO
Culminating a three-year reconciliation, Mexico has nearly completed constitutional changes that will give legal recognition to churches and allow parochial education for the first time since the revolution.
A1  HOW MAXWELL BESTED BANKERS
Leading banks around the world stand to lose an estimated $2 billion on loans to the business empire of the late Robert Maxwell.
In the gung-ho atmosphere of the 1980's, his bravado won the lenders over and cowed critics into silence.
A1  AUSTRALIAN LEADER OUSTED
Faulted for his inability to rescue the Australian economy, Bob Hawke was ousted as Prime Minister by his own party after nearly nine years in office.
The Labor Party replaced him with Paul Keating, the country's caustic former Treasurer.
A3  COURT ALLOWS HAITIAN EXPULSIONS
An appeals court ruled for the second time this week that the Government can start sending home thousands of Haitian refugees.
A3  NIGERIA EASES ELECTION BAN
Nigeria's military Government lifted of a five-year-old ban that prevented anyone who had ever held a senior government position from seeking elected office.
A7  FROM CAMP DAVID TO A COUCH
An Israeli negotiator said his most vivid memory of the latest round of Middle East peace talks would probably be a bright blue sofa in a corridor of the State Department.
A11  NORTH KOREA DENIES BOMB PLAN
North Korea's leader denied that his country intends to make nuclear weapons and proposed some conditions for allowing inspection of its nuclear research center.
A14  COMPROMISE IN SOUTH AFRICA
On the eve of a conference for charting South Africa's future, the Government and its foremost foe agreed they would be "morally" bound to enforce any decisions reached.
A6  Soldiers in Djibouti opened fire and killed scores of people.
A8  Kuwait Journal: A country is transformed from a looted wreck.
A4  National A16-33, B6-8  B.C.C.I.
AGREES TO GUILTY PLEA
B.C.C.I. agreed to plead guilty to Federal and state criminal charges and will forfeit $550 million, the Justice Department and New York City prosecutors announced.
It is the largest criminal forfeiture ever obtained by the Government.
A1  BUSH TO PRESS ASIA ON TRADE
Bush cast his coming trip to Asia as a crusade to boost U.S. exports and the economy, dismaying Japanese leaders who fear he will turn a state visit into a business mission.
A25  FAMILIARITY BREEDS IN ARKANSAS
Bill Clinton may be a favorite of the national news media, but at home in Arkansas he's the favorite punching bag.
B8  Will Cuomo make the New Hampshire deadline?
He's not saying.
B8  ADVICE FOR BUSH ON HEALTH CARE
A Federal advisory panel told Bush how to help finance health care for 20 million uninsured people, but consumer groups, labor unions, some businesses and doctors immediately criticized the proposals as far too modest.
B6  DOCTORS' CREATIVE BILLING
Doctors and hospitals are increasing their income by improperly manipulating bills and insurance claims, sometimes submitting four or five bills for a single operation, Federal investigators say.
A1  KENNEDY FRIEND IS CLEARED
No indictment has resulted from an investigation of possible obstruction of justice at the Kennedy family estate in Palm Beach early in the William Smith rape case.
A16  'I'm not a blue blob,' Smith's accuser says.
A16  DISPUTE OVER DNA FINGERPRINTING
Some scientists critical of the accuracy of DNA fingerprinting say they have been subjected to official pressure.
One says he was asked to withdraw an article about to be published in a scientific journal because it might endanger criminal prosecutions.
A20  Americans are moving around less than they used to.
A16  Law Page B9  Lawyers who skip law school and learn their profession on the job.
At the Bar.
Metropolitan Digest, B1 ROLLING BACK THE 80's
Job losses have been so severe over the last two years in Manhattan that they have completely erased all the private-sector growth in jobs of the booming 1980's, according to a year-end review.
A1  Neediest Cases B4  Business Digest, D1  Weekend C1-35  Members are a museum's best friends.
C1  The season, window by window.
C1  Theater: On Stage, and Off.
C2  Patrick Stewart in "A Christmas Carol." C3  Film: "J. F. K." C1  "Father of the Bride." C17  "High Heels." C20  Music: Tisch Center's two opening nights.
C3  Art: Japanese Master.
C32  Art in Review.
C25  Word and Image: "Whiteout: Lost in Aspen." C32  Holiday television shows.
C34  Obituaries B10  Allegra Maynard, Headmistress of Madeira School.
Sports B11-18  Baseball: Howe arrested on cocaine charges.
B11  Red Sox and Viola agree on a contract.
B11  Randolph close to signing with Mets.
B13  Basketball: Who's in charge of the Nets?
B11  N.C.A.A. allows McRae to play for Syracuse.
B13  Boxing: One less foe for Tyson.
B14  Hockey: Flyers rout the Islanders, 6-2.
B15  Power-play goals help Devils beat Hartford, 4-1.
B15  Editorials/Op-Ed A34-35  Editorials A34  Let's open up intelligence.
A kick for the mulish Mideast.
John P. MacKenzie: "JFK." Letters A34  Anthony Lewis: But the killing goes on.
A35  A. M. Rosenthal: Visit to the Kremlin.
A35  Oliver Stone: Who is rewriting history?
A35  Elizabeth Fischer: The trash police.
A35


Suddenly, a Tyson Foe Stops Swinging at Him
The man who once called Mike Tyson "a serial buttocks fondler" has apparently changed his opinion about the former heavyweight champion.
J.
Morris Anderson, the founder of the Miss Black America Pageant, acknowledged yesterday that he had reached a settlement with Tyson and the Rev.
Charles Williams of the Indiana Black Expo and that he had dropped his $21 million suit against them.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 583 money market mutual funds decreased by $3.37 billion, to $484.74 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 217 institutional funds decreased by $438.7 million, to $163.88 billion.
The assets of the 278 general-purpose funds were down by $1.9 billion, to $176.77 billion.
The 88 broker-dealer funds decreased by $1.04 billion, to $144.09 billion, the institute said.


A Contrite Schiller
Harvey Schiller, the executive director of the United States Olympic Committee, said yesterday his mistakes of "judgment and style" that violated the committee's standards of behavior would not happen again.


No Mysticism in Oz, Just the Populist Credo; Baum Was a Skeptic
To the Editor:
That "The Wizard of Oz" has, as Paul Nathanson asserts (news article, Nov. 28), "a narrative function not unlike that of the Jewish and Christian passage either through the life cycle as individuals or through history as communities" would have been news to L. Frank Baum, who wrote the book.
It certainly was news to me, Baum's biographer.


A Financing Drive Begun By Sematech
Sematech, the controversial American semiconductor industry consortium, today formally opened what could be a difficult battle to continue to receive Government funding for five more years.
Its initial charter expires at the end of this fiscal year.
The consortium, based in Austin, Tex., outlined a proposed strategy for the next five years that will mainly carry on the work it started in its first five, with two significant changes.


Paul Clark, 69, Expert On Developing Nations
Paul G. Clark, an economist who advised third-world countries on development, died Tuesday at a hospital in North Adams, Mass.
He was 69 years old.
Mr. Clark, who lived in Williamstown, Mass., died of lymphoma, his family said.


New Yorkers Don't Live in Ecological Vacuum
To the Editor:
"What to Do About Water" (editorial, Nov. 19) makes a commendable call for sensible, everyday water conservation measures in New York City.
On Nov. 29 you report a major drought is feared as reservoirs hit lows and indirectly show that this call for conservation -- and the city's recent sequence of watch, warning and emergency -- are part of a pattern of response that arrives too little and too late for the watershed region.


Open Positions on Short Sales Increase 2.9% on Big Board
The number of shares sold short on the New York Stock Exchange and not yet covered rose for the monthlong period ended Dec. 13 by 22 million, or 2.9 percent, to 784.4 million, from 762.4 million on Nov. 15, the Big Board reported yesterday.
The figure had also risen in the previous period.
The increases reversed a trend that had continued through most of the year, when the figure had been falling.
The latest figure is still below the 1991 peak of 792.4 million shares in February, and it compares with 855.7 million shares at the end of December 1990.


Soviets Trying to Keep Olympic Team Together
Discombobulated as every other Soviet citizen, the czars of sport told the public today of their predicament in not knowing what national flag or anthem to use at next year's Olympic games.
"We suffer," said Aleksandr Kozlovsky, chairman of the Soviet Olympic Committee.
"The athletes are as disoriented as the people in the streets."


The U.N. Today
General Assembly  Meets at 3 P.M.
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 11 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Mary R. Williams, Foundation Chairman, 93
Mary R. Williams, chairman of the Teagle Foundation for the past 14 years, died Dec. 12 at New York Hospital.
She was 93 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Williams, then Mary Richardson, joined the staff of Walter Clark Teagle in 1917 when he was elected president of the Standard Oil Company (New Jersey), now Exxon.
Mr.
Teagle, who retired as chairman in 1942, established the foundation two years later.
Its primary purpose is to provide scholarships in higher education for children of Exxon employees, but it also supports charities such as the United Way and the Salvation Army.


Review/Theater; Scrooge, Ghosts, Tiny Tim and Patrick Stewart
"A Christmas Carol" has been so musicalized and cinematized that it may be difficult to remember the beautiful simplicity of the original Dickens story, an ode to Christmas past, present and future and a moral fable of heartwarming intensity.
Patrick Stewart's one-man dramatic version at the Eugene O'Neill Theater is restorative, revealing the work's full narrative splendor, its humor as well as its humanity.
Because of Mr.
Stewart's virtuosity, the show could be considered a coda to the Royal Shakespeare Company's "Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby." The actor offers his solo equivalent of that expansive ensemble act of the imagination, making an audience believe it has entered a magical world dense with character, atmosphere and action.


Miami Drops Fullback Cited In Fraud Case
Martin Patton, the University of Miami starting fullback who was indicted earlier this week for credit card fraud, was suspended from the football team today, forcing him to sit out the unbeaten Hurricanes' game against Nebraska in the Orange Bowl on New Year's Day.
Miami Coach Dennis Erickson returned this morning from a recruiting trip and moved swiftly in dropping Patton, a third-year sophomore, from the team.


Soldiers Fire Into Crowd in Djibouti Tribal Strife
Djibouti soldiers searching for rebel guerrillas of the Afar tribe opened fire in a crowded slum district of Djibouti Wednesday, killing scores of people, Western diplomats reported today.
The diplomats said that in addition to about 40 people being killed, another 50 were severely wounded in the shooting.
The Djibouti Governmemt of President Hassan Gouled Aptidon, which is dominated by the Issa tribe, said eight people were killed in the clash, including three soldiers.


Reporter's Notebook; Couch Gives Peace Talks A Distinction
Elyakim Rubinstein, who described himself the other day as the last refugee of the 1978 Camp David peace process, was back in Washington this week leading an Israeli team negotiating with Palestinians and Jordanians.
He says Camp David taught him patience.
It didn't prepare him to be a couch diplomat.
Mr.
Rubinstein, a man with a wry sense of humor, says that what will be recalled most about the inconclusive round of Middle East peace talks that ended Wednesday night in Washington will be a sofa.


No Bail in Fraud Case
A Federal judge ordered Steven Wymer, an investment manager, to be held without bail today, saying he should remain in custody until $100 million missing from his municipal clients' accounts was found.
The prosecutor in the case, Jean Kawahara, said that Mr.
Wymer had an incentive to flee the serious charges against him and that a book entitled "How to Launder Money" had been found in a dresser drawer in his home.
Mr.
Wymer is charged with securities fraud and mail fraud in handling accounts worth $1.2 billion for his clients, including the California towns of Torrance, Orange and Indio, and Iowa Trust, a consortium of more than 100 Iowa towns, counties and municipal pension funds.


Shuttle Account
USAir's announcement yesterday of a preliminary deal to fly and possibly buy the Trump Shuttle may be good news for Earle Palmer Brown, Bethesda, Md., which handles retail advertising for USAir.
Advertising executives, who insisted on anonymity, said that the agency was likely to be awarded the account if the deal is completed.
A USAir spokeswoman said that it was "premature to discuss any details."


Review/Photography; A Japanese Mind Open to Western Ideas
In many ways the career of Yasuzo Nojima (1889-1964), whose photographs are featured in a valuable exhibition now at the Grey Art Gallery, paralleled that of Alfred Stieglitz.
Both men championed photography as an art in the first decades of the century, Stieglitz in New York and Nojima in Tokyo, and both ran important galleries that promoted modernist art.
Like Stieglitz, Nojima was at the center of a circle of avant-garde artists and writers in the 1920's and 30's, and some of his early pictures even look remarkably like those of his American counterpart.
But despite the many parallels between them, the two operated in very different contexts.
By the time of his death, in 1946, Stieglitz had been recognized as a great photographer, responsible in many ways for awakening the United States to the provocative art being produced in Europe in the first decades of the century.
Nojima, on the other hand, was forced by poor health and the rise of militarism in the 30's to withdraw from most of his artistic activities.


At the Bar; The Press Is Caught in a Misrepresentation of Clarence Thomas's Words, Or Is It?
It began with an editorial in The Wall Street Journal on Dec. 2.
It resulted in a revisionism now in full roar among conservatives who are convinced that they have discovered new evidence of the perfidy of the press.
The issue is this: Did Clarence Thomas say during the hearings on his nomination to the Supreme Court that he had never discussed Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 Court ruling that established a constitutional right to abortion?


BRIEFS
*
Century Contractors West Inc., Des Moines, Iowa, a unit of Midwest Resources Inc., was awarded a contract valued in excess of $40 million to build a steam and electricity plant in Gouvereur, N.Y. *
Honda Motor Co., Tokyo, said it would increase imports of cars and auto parts and the level of local content used in manufacturing its cars abroad.
Imports would be $1.22 billion a year by the 1994 fiscal year and local procurement $7.9 billion.


Maxwell's Empire: How It Grew, How It Fell -- A Special Report.; Charming the Big Bankers Out of Billions
It was in the summer of 1990 that Jean-Pierre Anselmini first noted a troubling change in the normally ebullient Robert Maxwell.
When Mr.
Anselmini entered his London office, Mr.
Maxwell would turn over the papers on his desk.
When key financial meetings were held, Mr.
Anselmini said he was not informed.
When he asked questions, he was met by silence.
When he complained to Mr.
Maxwell and his son Kevin about a transaction with Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, he was curtly told to get out of the office.
Yet Mr.
Anselmini was the deputy chairman of the Maxwell Communication Corporation, one of the top three jobs in the late Mr.
Maxwell's flagship company.
Nagging Question
By the time Mr.
Maxwell died under mysterious circumstances on Nov. 5, at age 68, while cruising on his yacht off the Canary Islands, his sprawling empire was in complete disarray.
Mr.
Maxwell had always operated on the basis that other people were fools, and the many banks that helped him build his web of companies may have proved him right.


Devils Defeat Whalers To End Six-Game Slide
Although they came up empty during a five-minute manpower advantage, the Devils did not come away empty-handed in their visit to the Civic Center tonight as they managed a 4-1 triumph over the struggling Whalers.
The victory was the first in six games (1-2-3) for the Devils and the first since Nov. 12 for Chris Terreri, who had gone seven starts (0-4-3) in goal without a victory.


Reviews/Film; A Mother, A Daughter And a Murder
Pedro Almodovar labors harder at striking a light tone than other film makers might work at a serious one.
And "High Heels," the latest from the director of "Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown," is very labored indeed.
Combining story elements worthy of Greek tragedy with the frivolous look of a fashion statement, Mr.
Almodovar sometimes achieves an arch, unpredictable narrative style but more often manufactures leaden fluff.
Unlike this director's best work, "High Heels" has no real mirth and not even enough energy to keep it lively.
Even the gaudiness of Mr.
Almodovar's antic taste seems muted this time.
The clothes in this film, by Chanel and Giorgio Armani, are deliberately sedate, yet they often upstage the people.


Leo A. Weiss, 73, Dies; Retired Manufacturer
Leo A. Weiss, who founded a multimillion-dollar manufacturing company and later ran programs to help struggling entrepreneurs, died on Wednesday at Alexandria Hospital in Alexandria, Va.
He was 73 years old and lived in Alexandria.
He died after suffering a stroke, his family said.


State Appeals Court Narrows Right to a New Trial When Evidence Is Withheld
New York State's highest court, acting in two similar appeals, imposed an important new limit yesterday on the right of convicted criminals to a new trial in cases where prosecutors withheld evidence from the defense and where all appeals have been exhausted.
In such cases, the Court of Appeals ruled in 4 to 3 companion decisions in Albany, the defendant is not automatically entitled to a new trial, but must show that the evidence withheld by the prosecution contributed materially to the original guilty verdict.


Glenn, Former Jet, Hopes To Work Over Holidays
Cornerback Kerry Glenn of the Miami Dolphins, a former Jet, won't play Sunday when the teams meet at Joe Robbie Stadium for the National Football League's last playoff berth.
But Glenn, who has been on injured reserve with a broken leg and torn ankle ligament since Miami's third game (Detroit), has been practicing this week and has a chance of being activated should Miami qualify for the playoffs.


Review/Art; Rebuking Tradition With Whimsy and Ephemera
One of Dennis Oppenheim's early works was made by driving a snowmobile around a field for an hour.
The tracks he left in the snow were meandering lines that parodied Abstract Expressionism.
And much else about "One-Hour Run," from its embrace of the outdoors in place of a gallery to its ephemerality and whimsy, was a rebuke to tradition.
Since then, whether pioneering Earth Art or Body Art or using industrial materials to build Rube Goldberg sculptures, Mr.
Oppenheim has refused to conform to anyone's expectations but his own.
His achievements during the last quarter of a century have been so varied that the retrospective at P.S. 1 Museum, "Dennis Oppenheim: And the Mind Grew Fingers," can seem like the work of several artists.
It is fun, sort of in the way a roller-coaster ride can be fun, with wild ups and downs and occasional stomach-churning surprises.
It also vividly recalls a time in the art world, the late 1960's and 70's, that seems more open-ended and experimental than our own.


T.I. and Motorola
The Los Alamos National Laboratory said today that it would join with Texas Instruments Inc. and Motorola Inc. to demonstrate a new laser-etching technology that could be used to make chips.
The project hopes to demonstrate that free-electron lasers tuned to very short wavelengths can etch onto chips features as small as one-quarter of a micron, or about 1/400 the width of a human hair.


For Valvano, 'The Cosby Show' May Be a Warm-Up to Nets
Bill Fitch ran practice for the Nets yesterday as he prepared to coach in his 1,664th professional basketball game tonight.
Jim Valvano taped "The Cosby Show" as possible preparation for another comedy: his pro coaching debut with the Nets.
Who will be in charge when the Nets play the Chicago Bulls tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
As of last night, not even club officials seemed to know for sure.
Would Valvano accept the "formal and firm" offer his agent said was tendered or would the Nets' confused ownership remain divided about whether an offer was made?
Would anyone know what was going on?
Is Bill Cosby available?


Washington Talk; Bad Year, Good Decade for the Rich
Representative Thomas J. Downey has done as much as anyone in recent years to advance the Democrats' case that the rich are getting richer and the poor are getting poorer.
So eyebrows were raised today when the Long Island Democrat released a study that seemed to weaken part of his case.
The very richest Americans were the ones who seemed to get poorer in 1989, losing almost 10 percent of their income, the study showed, while the incomes of most other Americans stayed the same and the poor showed a modest gain.


U.S. Urges Focus on Hard-Core Drug Users
With cocaine and heroin use rising again, Federal officials said today that more effort in the drug war must be focused on such hard-core users as high school dropouts and the unemployed.
But they said they did not foresee a major shift by the Bush Administration from its current policy of spending 70 percent of its anti-drug budget on law enforcement.


Corrections
An obituary on Dec. 11 about the photographer Berenice Abbott misstated the title of the 1960 textbook in which photographs by Miss Abbott appeared.
It was "Physics."


On Nets, All Woes Lead to Owner
You awakened yesterday as Alan L. Aufzien, one of two majority owners of the New Jersey Nets, and the basketball world was divided on its opinion of you.
Half believed you to be a liar.
Half believed you to be a fool.
You had spent the previous evening at Byrne Meadowlands Arena publicly distancing yourself from newspaper reports that your team had reached an agreement in principle with Jim Valvano, who would soon relieve the beleaguered Bill Fitch as head coach of the Nets.
Valvano's agent said his man had a "formal and firm" offer for five years and as much as $3 million.


Deal Made On Trump Shuttle
USAir Inc. announced yesterday that it had reached an agreement with the Trump Organization and Citibank to operate the Trump Shuttle for up to 10 years with an option to buy it after five.
The group of banks led by Citibank that financed the $365 million purchase of the shuttle will own the airline in the meantime, said executives involved in the negotiations who insisted on anonymity.


Art in Review
'Daniel Spoerri Background Landscapes'  Zabriskie Gallery 724 Fifth Avenue (near 57th Street) Through Dec. 31
This exhibition of 12 assemblages is the first solo show in New York in more than 25 years by the Romanian-born, Paris-based artist Daniel Spoerri.
For his last show here, in 1965, he displayed artifacts of his daily life in his room at the Chelsea Hotel in Manhattan, the local base of operations for him and other members of the so-called Nouveau Realisme movement, including Arman and Christo.
The French movement has sometimes been loosely linked with Pop art.
Mr.
Spoerri made his reputation by affixing to tables whatever happened to be resting on them, including the remains of a meal, and hanging the tables on walls.
It is easy to see how connections might be drawn between the works from the 1960's by Jasper Johns and Jim Dine incorporating household objects and what Mr.
Spoerri was doing at the time.


Comptroller Criticizes N.Y.U. Over Contract With Bellevue
An audit released yesterday by New York State Comptroller Edward V. Regan lists a variety of large and small instances in which New York University Medical Center failed to comply with the terms of its $37 million contract to provide doctors to Bellevue Hospital.
The audit is yet another addition to the growing stack of paper exploring and criticizing the relationship between New York City's public hospitals and the private institutions paid to staff them.


Job Losses in New York Region Erode 80's Growth
Job losses have been so severe over the last two years in Manhattan that they have completely erased all the private-sector growth of the booming 1980's, according to an annual year-end review by the region's Bureau of Labor Statistics.
There are now fewer private-sector jobs in Manhattan than there were in 1980, with the total back to its 1979 level, according to the figures released by Samuel M. Ehrenhalt, the regional commissioner of the bureau.


Stocks Drop in Tokyo
Stock prices fell in Tokyo today.
At the close, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was down 214.07 points, or almost 1 percent, to 21,777.12.


O'Brien Hopes for Big Game in One That Is Meaningful in Many Ways
When Ken O'Brien walked out of Giants Stadium last Sunday after a wrenching 6-3 defeat at the hands of the New England Patriots, he had to be thinking that it might have been his last meaningful game in a Jets uniform after nine years in the National Football League.
It didn't turn out that way because the Miami Dolphins, with a clear and sure shot at winning the final American Football Conference playoff spot, gave up 28 fourth-quarter points to the Chargers and lost in San Diego, 38-30.
Now both the Jets (7-8) and the Dolphins (8-8) have a playoff shot in their showdown in Miami on Sunday.


Accounting Board Rewrites Rule on Taxes
In a move that should allow many companies to report plumper profits, the Financial Accounting Standards Board agreed yesterday to a long-awaited rule governing how companies account for the income tax expense that they report to their shareholders.
The ruling affects not what companies actually owe or pay the Government in taxes each year, but only the profits they are permitted to show their shareholders without sacrificing the clean opinion of their auditors and industry regulators.


Boeing Orders Of $3.1 Billion
The Boeing Company confirmed today that five airlines had placed firm orders for 34 jetliners with a total value of about $3.1 billion.
Some of the orders are options that have been converted in past months.
Others have been under contract for some time but not publicly announced by the airline.
And others reflect recently signed contracts stemming from previously announced intentions.


Trade Deficit Fell Slightly In October
Record exports brought a slight drop in the United States' trade deficit in October, the Government said today, a rare bright spot in an otherwise dark economic outlook.
But further reductions in the trade gap remain a White House priority, and President Bush vowed today to press Japan and other trading partners to open their markets to more United States goods.


Let's Ban All the Lawyers, A Missouri Legislator Urges
Some of Joe Kenton's best friends are lawyers.
At least they were until last month, when Mr.
Kenton, a State Representative, introduced a proposed amendment to the Missouri Constitution that would ban lawyers from serving in the state's General Assembly or any other county, city, town or village governing body.
"I know perfectly well it will not go anywhere in the Missouri General Assembly, but I think it should be discussed," said Mr.
Kenton, a Democrat who is chairman of the House Ethics Committee.
Attorney-Client Privilege
Mr.
Kenton, a stamp dealer and marketing consultant, says he believes lawyers who serve as legislators have an inherent conflict of interest.


Critic of 'Genetic Fingerprint' Tests Tells of Pressure to Withdraw Paper
In a development that scientists warned could stifle open debate, a researcher says he was pressured by a Federal prosecutor to withdraw a paper about to be published in a scientific journal because it could damage criminal prosecutions involving a new genetic test.
The test, known as DNA fingerprinting, has been widely hailed as a revolutionary forensic tool that takes some of the uncertainty out of criminal convictions.
It relies on the fact that people have distinct patterns in the chemical strings that make up DNA, the genetic material in their cells.


William H. Wolff, 85, A Dealer in Asian Art
William H. Wolff, a Madison Avenue dealer in Asian art for more than 30 years, died on Monday at his apartment in New York City.
He was 85 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his secretary and longtime friend, Ann Gray.


CHRONICLE
A network president (DANIEL B. BURKE of Capital Cities/ABC), a movie star (JODIE FOSTER), a super agent (SAM COHN) and two producers (LINDA GOTTLIEB and PEGGY RAJSKI) talked yesterday about the travails and triumphs of women in the entertainment industry.
It was a fitting topic for the annual luncheon of New York Women in Film, at which the organization gave its Muse Awards to Ms.
Gottlieb, producer of "Dirty Dancing," television specials and the soap opera "One Life to Live," and to Ms.
Rajski, producer of three Bruce Springsteen videos and "Little Man Tate" and co-producer of "The Grifters."


A Change Of Place For Viola: It's Boston
After striking out with their $18.2 million worth of free-agent pitching acquisitions last winter, the Boston Red Sox fearlessly ventured into the market again yesterday, reaching an agreement in principle with Frank Viola on a three-year, $13.9 million contract.
The agreement came 24 hours after the Toronto Blue Jays, Boston's chief division rival, added Jack Morris to their starting rotation.
In what seemed like a game of one-upmanship, the Blue Jays further fortified themselves yesterday, this time bolstering their offense by signing Dave Winfield as a free agent for $2.3 million for one year.
But late last night, the Red Sox countered by re-signing their own free-agent pitcher, Joe Hesketh, to a two-year $3.55 million contract.


Editorial Notebook; Oliver Stone's Patsy
In an unworthy attempt to showcase his personal theories about the murder of John F. Kennedy, a self-promoter named Jim Garrison, the New Orleans District Attorney in 1967, concocted conspiracy charges against a retired local businessman named Clay Shaw.
Mr.
Garrison alleged that the crime in Dallas had been hatched in New Orleans by Mr.
Shaw, Lee Harvey Oswald and another man.
Two years later a jury, after a monthlong trial and a closing oration from Mr.
Garrison, took only 50 minutes to acquit.
The jurors concluded that, whatever doubts they might have had about the Warren Commission's finding that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone, Mr.
Garrison had utterly failed to link Mr.
Shaw to any crime.


At the Movies
George Segal's Role
George Segal, who portrayed Bette Midler's uncle in "For the Boys" and then went off to Italy to make a spy comedy called "A Bear Named Arthur," with Carol Alt, has just finished another movie.


Federal Auditors Report Rise In Abuses in Medical Billing
At a time when Medicare and private health insurers are struggling to control medical bills, many doctors and hospitals are increasing their income by improperly manipulating the numerical codes used to describe their services on insurance claims and billing forms, Federal investigators say.
Federal auditors say the techniques are often illegal and clearly violate the intent of Federal rules for the payment of doctors' services under Medicare.


Sounds Around Town
Reading Dr. Seuss
" 'How the Grinch Stole Christmas' and Other Dr. Seuss Stories," the Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Manhattan, (212) 228-6300.
Much of Dr.
Seuss's genius came from his pictures: the elongated landscapes, the bubble-shaped houses, the three-fingered hands and the staircases to nowhere.
But his words, too, have a picturesque quality all their own.
His tongue-twisters, nonsense songs and allegories about imaginary animals often hold the kernels of truth that one relishes from any great writer.
On Sunday, an eclectic lineup of writers, performers and personalities, among them the writer Judy Blume, the singer Fred Schneider of the B-52's and the actor John Heard, will read favorite Dr.
Seuss tales.
Tom Chapin is the host; different people will read at each of the three shows, at 2, 5 and 8 P.M.
Tickets are $15.
Syd Straw's Surrealism
Syd Straw, the Knitting Factory, 44 East Houston Street, Manhattan, (212) 219-3055.
From the smooth, clear tone of her voice, Syd Straw seems like a straight arrow, but her sensibility is couched in absurdism.
She can take a torch standard and twist it into a surrealistic shape, or send a rock ditty loping down a country road.
She thrives on the unpredictable.
Her band tonight includes the cellist Jane Scarpantoni and the violinist Hahn Rowe; surrounded by strings, she's likely to melt the heart faster than the warmest hearth.
Tonight at 9 and midnight; tickets are $12 in advance, $14 at the door.


Fixing What Fizzles
In appliance repair, you see a lot of filth. Anyone who doubts that hasn't been there.
Klaus Dutine has been there.
For 18 years now, he has navigated a white Chevy van up and down the crooked arteries of Long Island, fixing dead heating elements on stoves, finicky fans on refrigerators, fizzled pumps on dishwashers.
As part of the scenery, he gets to see bread crumbs like you wouldn't believe, pot roast remnants that churn the stomach, the fork that's been missing since the Reagan years.


Restaurants
Victor's Cafe 52
Victor's Cafe 52 is celebrating the landing of Columbus in 1492 by making dishes with ingredients indigenous to the New World.
It took the Admiral of the Ocean Sea more than two months to locate land; that's a little longer than it takes to find a waiter at this ambitious Cuban restaurant in the Broadway theater district, or so it seems after three visits.


Mexico Ending Church Restraints After 70 Years of Official Hostility
Ending more than 70 years of Government hostility toward the Roman Catholic Church, legislators have nearly completed constitutional changes that will give legal recognition to religious institutions and allow parochial education for the first time since the Mexican Revolution.
The measures, culminating a three-year reconciliation between church and state under President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, were approved overwhelmingly by the lower house of Congress on Wednesday.
The Senate is expected to vote their final approval by the weekend.


Construction Workers Protest Delays in City Projects


Losses Seen for Airlines Despite Busier Season
Today is the busiest day of the year for the nation's airlines -- 24 hours likely to seem an eternity for baggage handlers, ticket clerks and others who will cope with almost 1.7 million passengers leaving for the holidays.
Yet big crowds at airports are a misleading indicator of the airline industry's health, new figures show.
While 24 million passengers are expected to fly between now and Jan. 4, an increase of 1.5 percent over the comparable period last year, the Air Transport Association estimates that 1991 will still be a disastrous year for the industry.
Decline in Traffic
According to the association, traffic will fall 3.5 percent, to about 449 million passengers.
The association also estimates that the nation's carriers will lose $1.8 billion this year, after a record $4 billion loss last year.


Jobless Claims Surged At Start of December
In a sign of deepening job-market distress, first-time claims for state unemployment insurance leaped 79,000 in the week ended Dec. 7 to match the highest level since March, the Labor Department reported today.
The increase, to 493,000, was markedly greater than most analysts had expected and tended to support predictions that the December jobless rate, to be reported on Jan. 3, will hit 7 percent after standing at 6.8 percent in October and November.


Market Place; In Praise of G.M., If Not of Its Stock
MOST automotive analysts agree that the sweeping retrenchment announced by the General Motors Corporation on Wednesday was long overdue, a necessary move to streamline the company's unwieldy operations to match its diminished share of the vehicle market.
But the analysts are divided on G.M.'s common stock, which is trading around its four-year low.
Some advise selling the stock, out of fear that among other things the dividend may be cut again.
Others urge investors to buy G.M. shares, predicting that the stock is unlikely to drop much more.


Novell Says Software Virus Invaded a Recent Product
The nation's largest supplier of office-network software for personal computers has sent a letter to approximately 3,800 customers warning that it inadvertently allowed a software virus to invade copies of a disk shipped earlier this month.
The letter, sent on Wednesday to customers of Novell Inc., a Provo, Utah, software publisher, said the diskette, which was mailed on Dec. 11, had been accidentally infected with a virus known by computer experts as "Stoned III."


U.S. to Delay Post-Soviet Recognition
With the formation of a new commonwealth of former Soviet republics expected to be approved this weekend, the Bush Administration signaled today that it did not plan to rush into recognizing those new states immediately.
While Administration officials say privately that recognition of the independent republics is inevitable over time, they are trying to use whatever time they have before granting such recognition for two purposes: to encourage the republics to cooperate in forming the commonwealth as much as possible and to test whether they will live up to promises they made to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d last week to control or destroy their nuclear weapons.


The Prehistoric and the Precious Mingle in Museum Shops
Museum shops seem inspired, rather than constrained by thematic limitations and the budgets of nonprofit organizations.
While a few, like those at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, generate almost a million dollars a year in profits, most say they barely scrape by.
They tend to serve, as George Calderaro, a spokesman for the Studio Museum in Harlem, said, "a visitor service and educational resource, and not a money-maker."
Most of the shops have a penchant for stocking intriguing goods that more commercial emporiums might consider too quirky to handle.
The Studio Museum in Harlem, for example, carries one-of-a-kind wire masks made by a homeless man.
The American Museum of Natural History imports folk art from around the world.
The Cooper-Hewitt Museum sells Hungarian tin rockets whose awkwardly translated instructions advise: "Do not push too much or too strong before leaving it."


Who Is Rewriting History?
Members of the media establishment get upset when art gets
political
, especially when they disagree with the politics and fear the viewpoint.
When this priesthood is challenged as the sole or privileged interpreters of
our
history, they bludgeon newcomers, wielding heavy clubs like "objectivity" and charging high crimes like "rewriting history."
The leading detractors of my film "J.F.K." have been political journalists like Tom Wicker of The New York Times, George Lardner of The Washington Post, Dan Rather of CBS News and Kenneth Auchincloss at Newsweek, all of whom covered events of that period.


EXECUTIVE
*
Community Psychiatric Centers Inc., Laguna Hills, Calif., appointed Steven Weis chief financial officer. *
K Mart Corp., Troy, Mich., named Mary C. McGeachy director of national media relations.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL Wolves Beat Lakers Tony Campbell scored 23 points as the Minnesota Timberwolves ended a a club-record nine-game losing streak, 93-85, over the Los Angeles Lakers last night in Minneapolis.
Minnesota won for the first time since Thanksgiving.
The Timberwolves, whose 43 percent shooting is last in the National Basketball Association, shot 51 percent -- only the second time all season they made more attempts than they missed. (AP)
Bucks 95, Magic 87: Dale Ellis scored 27 points and visiting Milwaukee outscored Orlando, 14-4, in the final 2 minutes 31 seconds, extending the Magic's losing streak to nine games.
The victory gave the Bucks an 8-0 record against the Magic in the three-year history of the expansion team.
Milwaukee is one of three teams Orlando has never beaten. (AP) HOCKEY Penguins Top Bruins Jaromir Jagr scored two goals, including the tie-breaker on a rink-length dash, in the first five minutes of the third period and the Pittsburgh Penguins beat the Boston Bruins, 6-4, last night in Boston. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL Arkansas Triumphs Oliver Miller had 13 points and 12 rebounds as 19th-ranked Arkansas (6-2) routed Montevallo, 91-70, last night in Little Rock, Ark.
Montevallo (8-3) is a National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics school. (AP) Pitt 89, Marshall 65: Chris McNeal scored 25 points as Pitt (5-3) breezed to victory over Marshall (3-4) at Huntington, W. Va. (AP) Mississippi St. 74, Vanderbilt 71: Tony Watts scored 17 points and Chuck Evans added 14 as Mississippi State (7-2) took charge in the closing minutes to nip Vanderbilt (3-3) in the Southeastern Conference opener for both teams at Nashville. (AP)


Abroad at Home; The Killing Goes On
Among the epochal international events of 1991 there was one unambiguous disaster.
What happened in Yugoslavia has been a tragedy for its people and a monumental political failure for the United States and the European Community.
For months now Serbian forces have been shelling, bombing and invading parts of Croatia.
They have leveled one major city, Vukovar, and are destroying others.
They have occupied a third of Croatian territory, and are settling Serbians there.


Loss to Flyers Proves Painful to Islanders
Tonight at the Spectrum, the Flyers beat the Islanders on the scoreboard, 6-2, but the physical damage done to two of New York's key players may prove to be the more critical result.
One was Patrick Flatley, the captain, whose right thumb was slashed in the final minutes.
Ed Tyburski, the trainer, said there could be a fracture.
If there is, Flatley could miss several games.


Quotation of the Day
"Any banking relationship can be seen as a four-legged stool, involving the honesty and integrity of both the bank and the client. We could not know that in Mr. Maxwell's case, two of the legs were missing." -- DAN BROCKBANK, a spokesman for National Westminster Bank.  [ A1:2. ]


No Mysticism in Oz, Just the Populist Credo
To the Editor:
You report on "The Wizard of Oz as a Secular Myth of America," a paper delivered by Paul Nathanson at the convention of the American Academy of Religion in Kansas City (news article, Nov. 28).
Dr.
Nathanson, a researcher at McGill University's Center for Medicine, Ethics and Law in Montreal, apparently views "The Wizard of Oz" as a mild blend of religion and mysticism.
In fact, the book is a secular political tract firmly based in history and ideology.


Economic Scene; Will Recession Revive Unions?
WILL this stubborn recession, which the White House now concedes is continuing, further weaken the American labor movement?
Or will the slump revive it?
History does not provide an answer.
On the contrary, it shows that hard times can have a double, and contradictory, effect on organized labor.
On one side, falling sales and profits, plant closings, business failures, layoffs and the fear of unemployment undermine labor's bargaining power and ability to organize.
But, on the other side, a serious and prolonged slump also provides a challenge to attack problems of poverty and unemployment, and may revive the spirit and drive of the unions -- as happened in the 1930's Depression.


Riegle Showed Leadership on Bank Bill
To the Editor:
I take exception to "Senator Riegle's Duty" (editorial, Nov. 26), which accuses Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr. of a lack of "forceful leadership" during Congressional consideration of bank reform legislation.


Joseph Coleman, 61, A Marketing Executive
Joseph K. Coleman, a marketing and sales promotion executive, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old.
His health had been declining, associates said, but no a specific cause of death was released.


Hodges's Wife Arrested
The estranged wife of CRAIG HODGES was charged yesterday with aggravated battery and reckless conduct after she allegedly doused the Chicago Bulls guard with gasoline and threw lighted matches at him, authorities in Northbrook, Ill., said.
Hodges, 31 years old, wasn't injured in the incident.


Research Merger
Two consumer research companies that survey consumers by mail have merged to form a test panel of 360,000 households, one of the three largest such panels in the country.
Market Facts Inc. in Chicago, which operates the Consumer Mail Panel, has acquired the National Neighborhood Panel, a unit of the MARC Group in Las Colinas, Tex.
The panel will operate under the Consumer Mail Panel name, with MARC continuing to use its services for at least the next 10 years.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


Crashes Increase on Soviet Airline
The state airline, Aeroflot, reported today that its accident and mortality statistics were worsening in grim parallel with the deterioration of the Soviet Union.
Safety has eroded badly for the last three years, with 252 deaths resulting so far this year from 36 plane crashes on the airline, the world's largest.
Last year, 194 people died in 27 Aeroflot crashes, while in 1989 there were 98 fatalities in 23 crashes.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
7.50
7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
4.50
4.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.50
4.50
7.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.05
4.12
6.55
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
4.15
4.18
6.55
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.66
6.73
7.93
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.65
7.75
8.23
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.75
8.80
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.77
6.78
7.47
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Treasury Securities Up Sharply
Long-term interest rates fell yesterday to their lowest level in well over four years and bond prices rose sharply, as investors bought longer-term Treasury issues in surprisingly active trading.
A larger than expected increase in weekly unemployment claims, which jumped by 79,000 during the week ended Dec. 7 to 493,000, gave the fixed-income market an early lift.
And the tone was augmented later on by a successful auction of new five-year Treasury notes.


Pop/Jazz; Spicing Up The Music So the Feet Turn Itchy
To listen to Cachao is to hear a virtuoso of rhythm, and a charismatic one at that.
Cachao (pronounced cuh-CHOW), the 72-year-old bassist whose formal name is Israel Lopez, slaps the bass, plucking the strings until they snap against the neck, piercing through the percussive tumult of an orchestra.
During repeated bass figures he starts varying the rhythms until they seem in danger of collapsing on one another.
As a salsa orchestra swirls around him, Mr.
Lopez organizes the flow of the music with improvisations that drive the orchestra on without ever relying on unadorned repetitions.
He's the type of musician whose presence makes the rest of the band play better.


How to Win Friends and Influence Culture
"MEMBERSHIP was the foam on the wave of enthusiasm for the arts," says Jan E. Adlmann, assistant director for external affairs at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
"And the wave has subsided."
Mr.
Adlmann's fanciful metaphor underscored some tough facts.
Faced with spending cuts by city, state and Federal governments and by recession-pinched corporations, New York City's cultural institutions are running hard just to stay in place.
Increasingly, they are turning to their grass-roots base: the thousands of members who, year in and year out, contribute $25, $1,000 or $250,000 to help keep the doors open at institutions ranging from the Bronx Zoo to Fraunces Tavern, from powerhouses like the Metropolitan Opera to boutique-size operations like the New York City Fire Museum.


Stores See 11th-Hour Slowdown
With only five days left before Christmas, retailers' gloomy assessment of their latest sales results has forced them to scale back their already meager expectations for the critical selling season.
While merchants are hoping for a last-minute flurry of shoppers, many are now conceding that sales will be even worse than they feared.
"Time is running out," said Kenneth A. Macke, chairman and chief executive of the Dayton Hudson Corporation, the Minneapolis department and discount store chain.
Mr.
Macke said he still expected a burst of activity this weekend, but added, "The big question is whether there will be a big enough pickup to make up for the disappointment of the first couple of weeks" of the season.


Panel Clears Companies In Bribe Case
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said yesterday that an arbitration panel in Switzerland had exonerated it of charges that it paid bribes of millions of dollars to Ferdinand Marcos, the late dictator of the Philippines, to win a contract for a nucle ar reactor.
The Government of President Corazon C. Aquino, which succeeded Mr.
Marcos's administration, sued Westinghouse in December 1988 in United States District Court in Newark, accusing the company of paying the bribes.
But the American judge referred the bribery issue to an international tribunal, the International Chamber of Commerce, under the terms of the contract, which was signed in 1976.


Bail Set at $500,000 for Au Pair Charged With Murder of Infant
A Westchester County judge today set bail at $500,000 for a Swiss au pair accused of arson and murder in the death of a 3-month-old baby in her care.
Her lawyer said it was unlikely that the defendant's family could raise that amount.
At the same time, the prosecution expressed concern that the 20-year-old au pair, Olivia Riner, might flee the country if freed on bail.
George L. Bolen, an assistant district attorney, who had asked that bail be set at $1 million, said that although Miss Riner's passport had been revoked, she could still leave without it.


Met Opera
The world premiere of John Corigliano's "Ghosts of Versailles" at the Metropolitan Opera ended too late to be reviewed in this issue.
A review by Edward Rothstein will appear in Saturday's paper.


Construction Was Slow, So . . .
For motivation, he needs to consider only his age and heritage.
At 43, Mohamad Hadid will be one of the oldest athletes competing in the Albertville Olympics in February.
He will have the further distinction of being the only athlete representing Jordan.
While the combination may not be enough to assure him a medal in speed skiing, an Olympic demonstration sport for the first time, he is guessing that other Jordanians might benefit merely by his participation.


Critical Transit Fare Vote Is Put Off Until Next Week
Faced with plenty of proposals but little progress in limiting the size of a proposed increase in New York City bus and subway fares, transit officials yesterday put off for a week a critical vote scheduled for today.
The size of a fare increase remained as uncertain yesterday as it has been for five weeks, when transit officials proposed raising the $1.15 fare to $1.40.
They said then they would adopt the increase today if no help in closing a $263 million deficit in next year's budget was forthcoming, an assertion they repeated yesterday about next Friday's vote.


Sounds Around Town
Clayton's Band Plays On
Buck Clayton's Swing Band, the Arcade at Park Avenue Plaza, 55 East 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 308-0688.
Although the jazz trumpeter Buck Clayton died on Dec. 8, his 16-piece Swing Band is playing at the annual Christmas-season tea dances in the Arcade of the Park Avenue Plaza.
The group's first performance was on Dec. 7, with the saxophonist Jerry Dodgion filling in for Clayton as the leader.
The second will take place tomorrow afternoon from 3 to 6 P.M., again with Mr.
Dodgion conducting.
It will be recorded and will include, as the band's programs always did, compositions and arrangements that Clayton wrote for Count Basie's orchestra when he was a Basie star, as well as arrangements he wrote for Duke Ellington, Benny Goodman and Harry James, and for his own band.
The performance is sponsored by the stores in the Arcade.
Admission is free.
Cuber Quintet at Birdland
Ronnie Cuber Quintet, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, Manhattan, (212) 749-2228.
Since he first attracted attention as an 18-year-old member of Marshall Brown's Newport Youth Band at the Newport Jazz Festival in 1959, Ronnie Cuber has carried on the strong, deep-throated baritone saxophone tradition established by Duke Ellington's baritone saxophonist, Harry Carney, while keeping it in a contemporary context.
Although he was in an early George Benson quartet and has given a powerful foundation to several big bands -- Maynard Ferguson's, Lionel Hampton's, Woody Herman's -- Mr.
Cuber has created a special niche for himself in Latin bands like Eddie Palmieri's and Bobby Paunetto's.
His quintet at Birdland includes Joe Locke on vibes, Bobby Broom on guitar, Mike Formanek on bass, and Ben Perowsky on drums.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 9, 10:30 and midnight.
At tables there is a $10 music charge, plus a $10 minimum.
At the bar, the music charge is $5 and the minimum is one drink.


Smith's Accuser, on TV, Says, 'I'm Not a Blue Blob'
The Florida woman who accused William K. Smith of rape said she agreed to go on national television last night -- identified by name and without having her face electronically obscured -- because "I'm not a blue blob" and "I have nothing to be ashamed of."
Appearing on the ABC News program "Prime Time Live," the woman, Patricia Bowman, stuck by her assertion that Mr.
Smith attacked her last March on the lawn of the Kennedy estate in Palm Beach, Fla.
A jury last week acquitted Mr.
Smith of all charges.


How a Man and His Dog Learned to Love and Work Together
JACK PETERSON couldn't forget that awful sinking stomach that comes with the grimmest medical news about a loved one.
He had been sitting by the phone in his suburban Seattle home, feeling frightened and confined without Miles, his Seeing Eye dog.
Miles was a powerful German shepherd.
For eight years the pair had been inseparable, six legs striding off together to their assembly-line job.
Miles slept by his master's feet there, sometimes on them.
Miles knew Mr.
Peterson's daily routine paws-down -- the route to the washroom, the lunchroom, the bus, the grocery store, especially the dog-food section.
Darting squirrels didn't distract Miles.
The eager dog had slowed recently, but he had never let his human pal down, never led him into danger.
The phone rang.
"Mr. Peterson," said the veterinarian, "I'm afraid I have bad news." In his 41 years of blindness, Mr.
Peterson had often felt alone.
But never more than last April when he heard that word: cancer.


The Art Market
A Startling Titian
Followers of auction news were startled when last week's sale of Old Master paintings at Christie's in London totaled $40,194,835, far more than last year's Old Masters' auction, which brought in $17,156,928.
The sale also topped the fall's biggest Impressionist sale, held in New York, by $1.4 million, making it the highest-grossing auction of the season.


Sports of The Times; Why Jets See Blue On Sunday
BRUCE COSLET says he hears a lot of New York fans are going to be at the Jets' game in Miami on Sunday.
What he doesn't hear is that they'll probably be wearing red-and-blue shirts with No. 56 on them.
That was the sad tableau last Sunday as the Jets were stinking out the wastelands of New Jersey, no easy task.


Howe Is Arrested on Cocaine Charge
Steve Howe, who made a glorious comeback as a relief pitcher with the Yankees last season after six suspensions from baseball for drug and alcohol abuse and almost four years away from the major leagues, was arrested yesterday on a felony charge of cocaine possession near his home in Montana.
The 33-year-old Howe, who signed a $600,000 contract with the Yankees last month that could have risen to $2.3 million if he remained healthy, was arrested in Kalispell, Mont., according to Flathead County Sheriff Jim Dupont, and spent last night in jail.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Nov. 26 about electric cars misidentified a spokeswoman for the United States Advanced Battery Consortium.
She is Roberta Nichols.


CHRONICLE
JEFF L. GREENUP, the former president of the New York Branch of the N.A.A.C.P. who received its Valor Award at a party Wednesday evening, wants it known that "wherever I got was through the help of many other people." So he recounted for 150 guests at a party in the town house of BOB GUCCIONE and KATHY KEETON how an unknown 11-year old boy had saved his life -- and that of the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. -- during a time of racial conflict in Florida.


Let's Open Up Intelligence
The huge American intelligence apparatus is at a critical juncture.
After focusing on the Soviet threat for more than four decades, it must now find a new mission for itself that can be supported with far fewer dollars.
Robert Gates, who is taking over as Director of Central Intelligence after surviving a bruising confirmation fight, is off to a good start in trying to redefine goals and practices.
He has pledged to shift resources from monitoring the evaporated Soviet threat to worries like arms proliferation in the third world.
And he's begun some useful changes, like dissemination of dissenting views and critiques by outside experts.


On My Mind; Visit to Gorbachev
Mikhail Gorbachev is talking in his Kremlin chambers talking courteously, gracefully and forcefully for an hour about himself and his country, mustering the strength to act as if his life, power and nation were not shattering around him.
He also acts as if he does not know that he has bitter enemies who are waiting for him to leave the Kremlin's protection, some of them waiting in prison.
But of course he must know.


Budget Pact Averts Threat Of CUNY Cut
In its last meeting of the year, the City Council reached a budget compromise with the Dinkins administration that averts the threat by officials of the City University of New York to delay the admission of 10,000 prospective students for the spring semester.
The compromise on a package of midyear budget changes proposed by Mayor David N. Dinkins came after a day of frantic negotiations and an ultimatum to mayoral aides from Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone.
The Council also restored $727,000 for libraries, $700,000 for fire marshals and $257,000 for a program to coax the homeless into shelters -- items that had not been included in Mr.
Dinkins's package, which is meant to close a $210 million gap in the current budget.


Columbia House in Campaign
In its first national image advertising campaign, Columbia House, the country's largest direct marketer of videos and music, hopes to show that a mail-order company can be hip.
Research indicated that Columbia House "doesn't have the image of an entertainment company," Sharon Kuroki, the company's senior vice president for music club marketing, said, adding that consumers perceived it as "well respected" but "stodgy."


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Agreed to terms with Rick Sutcliffe, pitcher, on a one-year contract.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Joe Hesketh, pitcher, on a two-year contract.
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Announced that Dick Schofield, shortstop, accepted salary arbitration
DETROIT TIGERS -- Signed Mike Walker, pitcher, to a minor league contract with Toledo of the International League.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Announced that Jim Eisenreich, outfielder, accepted salary arbitration.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Agreed to terms with Brian Harper, catcher, on a two-year contract.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Announced that Ron Darling, pitcher, accepted salary arbitration.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Signed Marty Scott, director of player personnel, to a two-year contract extension through 1993.
TORONTO BLUE JAYS -- Agreed to terms with Dave Winfield, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Announced that Alejandro Pena, pitcher, accepted salary arbitration.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Reached a one-year player development agreement, in conjunction with the Minnesota Twins, with Visalia of the California League.
LOS ANGELES DODGERS -- Announced that Juan Samuel, second baseman, and Jay Howell, pitcher, accepted salary arbitration.
NEW YORK METS -- Announced that Daryl Boston, outfielder, accepted salary arbitration.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Agreed to terms with Jim Lindeman, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
PITTSBURGH PIRATES -- Named Doc Edwards hitting coach at Buffalo of the American Association.
ST.
LOUIS CARDINALS -- Announced that Pedro Guerrero, first baseman, accepted salary arbitration.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS -- Activated Bo Kimble, guard, from the injured list.
Placed Tony Brown, guard-forward, on the injured list.
Continental Basketball Association
GRAND RAPIDS HOOPS -- Traded Cedric Lewis, forward-center, to the Albany Patroons for the rights to Dave Popson, center.
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Signed Craig Neal, guard. FOOTBALL National Football League
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Placed Reggie Langhorne, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Jeff Bridewell, quarterback, and Gene Cullinane, guard, to the practice squad.
Canadian Football League
TOTONTO ARGONAUTS -- Signed Mike McCarthy, vice president and general manager, to a two-year contract.
Professional Spring Football League
TAMPA BAY OUTLAWS -- Named Jim Henderson director of information. COLLEGE
CLARION -- Announced that Bob Bubb, wrestling coach, has resigned effective at the end of the season.
CREIGHTON -- Named Todd Wenberg baseball manager.
FLORIDA STATE -- Declared Eric Turral, flanker, and Willie Pauldo, linebacker, academically ineligible for the Cotton Bowl.
HAMPTON -- Named Joseph Taylor football coach.
NEW MEXICO HIGHLANDS -- Named Jim Ewan football coach.
ST.
PETER'S -- Announced it would begin play in Division I women's soccer in the fall of 1992.
Named Kathy Kremins women's soccer coach.
WIDENER -- Announced that Bill Manlove has resigned as football coach but will continue in his position as athletic director.


On the Road, Gov. Clinton Wows the Press; Down Home It's Another Story
Of all the reasons that Gov.
Bill Clinton thinks he should be President, there is one that seems particularly sensible to newspaper readers here.
He disclosed it during the summer in a conversation with John Robert Starr, the managing editor of The Arkansas Democrat, whose column has appeared every single day for the past 10 years.
"At that point he still hadn't announced his candidacy," Mr.
Starr recalled.
"He told me, 'One reason I might run is so I don't have to wake up to that load of bleep y'all dump on me in The Democrat every morning.' "


The Post to Receive $5 Million
Peter S. Kalikow, owner of The New York Post, said yesterday that Bankers Trust has agreed to give the paper a $5 million line of credit to cover its short-term cash needs.
And in another matter involving the city's tabloid newspapers, a director of The Daily News who has been implicated in a scheme involving the Maxwell Communication Corporation, resigned from the paper's board, according to Frederick P. Hafetz, the lawyer for the former director, Sheldon Aboff.


Burkett Is Jets' M.V.P.
Since Chris Burkett says he didn't vote for himself, the Jets' selection for their 1991 most valuable player must not have been unanimous.
But every player polled leaving the locker room today was unanimously glad that Burkett won.
"He deserves it," said defensive end Jeff Lageman.
"He got my vote. In fact, they had a spot on the ballot for your first and second and third choice and I wrote his name down on all three spots."


YELTSIN SWEEPS UP CRUCIAL REMNANTS OF WITHERING UNION
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia set about swallowing up the remnants of the Soviet state today, taking control of the Foreign Ministry, the K.G.B., the Parliament and even Mikhail S. Gorbachev's presidential office, down to his dollars and his phones.
Neither Mr.
Gorbachev nor Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze, who has served only a month since his return to the union Government, had any immediate comment on the moves.
Officials at the Foreign Ministry said they had received no advance notice, and it was unclear whether Mr.
Gorbachev had.


Postema Sues Baseball
PAM POSTEMA, the former umpire who worked in the minor leagues for 13 years before being discharged in 1989, filed suit yesterday against baseball, contending she was dismissed because she is a woman.
The suit, filed in United States District Court in New York, names as defendants the National League, the American League, Class AAA baseball and baseball's office for umpire development.
TOM OSTERTAG, baseball's general counsel, said he could not comment on the suit because he hadn't seen it.


New Camel Agency Defends 'Smooth Character' Image
THE advertising industry's two most-talked-about executives are finally talking about their new account.
In October, John L. Mezzina and William G. Brown Jr. stunned their colleagues.
The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company unexpectedly moved the creative portion of its $40 million Camel cigarette account from Young &amp; Rubicam New York, which the two men had left two months earlier, to Mezzina/Brown Inc., their small start-up agency.


County Bars Tax Increase But Cuts Jobs
The Westchester County legislature tonight approved a $1.18 billion budget for 1992 that does not raise county property taxes but cuts 305 union jobs.
The legislature made only minor changes to the budget presented two months ago by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke.
In contrast to other recession-driven budgets involving large tax increases, like Nassau County's, the one passed tonight will freeze county property taxes thanks largely to a sales tax increase of 1 percentage point that Westchester won this year from the State Legislature.


Big Dollars, Bigger Names
In a tournament built on the lure of big names even more than big dollars, at least two of golf's most enduring stars played their roles admirably today in the opening round of the Johnnie Walker World Championship.
Although the highly respected Bernhard Langer of Germany shot a four-under-par 67 over a difficult Tryall Golf Club course and took the first-round lead, tournament organizers were most pleased that Greg Norman's 68 and Seve Ballesteros's 70 put them near the top of the 26 players competing for a record purse of $2.55 million.


Corrections
A report on Dec. 9 about the wedding of Hilarie Anne Cohen and Bruce Leigh Perlin misstated the bridegroom's occupation.
He is a lawyer at Central States, Southeast and Southwest Areas Health and Welfare and Pension Funds, the benefit funds for the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, in Rosemont, Ill.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Saturday about evidence suggesting that a nearby star blew up 35,000 years ago misstated the source of the data.
They were collected by Soviet, French, American and South African researchers, not by Grant E. Kocharov, who interpreted the findings at a scientific meeting.
The article also omitted a group that reached a similar conclusion.
It was led by Dr.
Charles Sonett of the University of Arizona.


Coping With Padded Costs
Consumers feel the impact when doctors or hospitals increase their charges by creative manipulation of billing codes on an insurance claim.
Consumers are often responsible for costs not covered by insurance.
So the "unbundling" of medical procedures, with a separate charge for each component, can increase costs for consumers as well as for health insurance companies.


For Children
'The Wonderful Story of the Babes in the Woods'  Synchronicity Space 55 Mercer Street, between Broome and Grand Streets SoHo (212) 808-0745 Recommended ages: 3 and up Through Sunday
The British are quite fond of celebrating Christmas with the peculiar vaudevillelike romp called the panto, a relatively uncommon phenomenon this side of Greenland.
"The Wonderful Story of the Babes in the Woods," written and directed by Vernon Morris, a former director and actor with the Royal Shakespeare Company, and presented by Bare Bones Productions, is a traditional panto.
A story is woven around a fairy tale, the actors cross dress and behave like buffoons, and the jokes are definitely daft.


Kennedy Film Puts Originator of a Conspiracy Theory in Limelight
About eight months ago, Judge Jim Garrison called his longtime friend Judge Jim Gulotta with a pressing question.
He had just received a large check from Oliver Stone, the director of "J. F. K," the new movie about Mr.
Garrison's investigation of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
"Look, Jim, I got a check," Judge Gulotta recalled Mr.
Garrison telling him.
"What do I do with it?"


The Urge to Bundle Was Universal


LaFontaine 'Excited' About Returning to Ice
PAT LaFONTAINE says he will be back in a Buffalo uniform today for the first time since his jaw was broken against the Calgary Flame more than five weeks ago.
The Sabres, mired in a team-record 11-game streak without a victory (0-8-3), say they need their star center more than ever.
They will face the Edmonton Oilers tonight in Buffalo.


The Convergence of the Two Joe Namaths
On the weekend before Christmas, it's time for the harmonic convergence of the two Joe Namaths: Joe I, who will analyze the Back-Into-the-Wild-Card Bowl between the New York Jets and Miami Dolphins Sunday at 1 P.M. on NBC, and Joe II, who will push electronics around the local TV dial as the Nobody-Beats-the-Wiz pitchman.
Joe I refuses to pass judgment on the dubious quality of the Jets-Dolphins game, despite the prospect that a Jets victory will put them into the playoffs with an 8-8 record or that a Dolphins' victory will put them into post-season play at 9-7.


Leader of North Korea Denies Atom Arms Plan
Despite Western reports that his nation is only a year away from making an atomic bomb, the North Korean leader, Kim Il Sung, denied anew today that the country intended to make nuclear weapons and proposed conditions for allowing inspection of North Korea's nuclear research center.
In a conversation with a visiting American Congressman, Mr.
Kim was reported to have said:


Idle, Angry Hard Hats Tell Off City Hall
Fifty thousand angry construction workers took to the streets yesterday, marching across the Brooklyn Bridge to City Hall, where they protested delays in the city's rebuilding projects that they said have cost them jobs.
Waving American flags and chanting "Prime the pump!" the union members called on city, state, and Federal officials to increase capital spending programs to help revive their ailing industry.


Diner's Journal
A Star at Raphael
Some enticing Provencal food is being stirred up at Restaurant Raphael, 33 West 54th Street in Manhattan.
The new chef is Jean-Michel Bergougnoux, who ran the kitchen at the three-star Le Cygne until it closed last summer.
His dinner menu carries beguilements like a wonderful combination of salmon glazed with periwinkle juice and dill ($20), loin of rabbit with bacon and braised endive ($22) and sirloin steak with a red wine sauce and bone marrow, and a gratin of salsify, fava beans and prosciutto ($24).


4 Giants Field Question of the Ages
In recent years, they have been key members of Giants teams accustomed to success.
But this season, last season's Super Bowl champions carry a 7-8 record into Saturday's finale here against the Houston Oilers (11-4), and four veteran players wonder if they will be Giants again next season.
Ottis Anderson is 34 years old, Maurice Carthon 30 and Gary Reasons and Steve DeOssie 29.
Among them, they have 38 years in the National Football League.


CENSUS REFLECTS RESTLESS NATION
Nearly half of the population of the United States, historically one of the world's most restless nations, moved from one home to another from 1985 to 1989, with about 18 percent of the nation's households pulling up stakes in 1989 alone, according to the most recent data from the Federal Census Bureau.
In nearly three decades from 1960 to 1989, more than 91 percent of the nation's households had moved, the new report said.


Review/Film: J.F.K.; When Everything Amounts to Nothing
IN one of the dizzying barrage of images with which Oliver Stone begins "J. F. K.," President Dwight D. Eisenhower is seen on television not long before he left office in 1961.
It is one of Ike's finer moments.
There he is, the former five-star general, the man who salvaged the Presidency for the Republican Party, warning the American people to beware of the military-industrial complex, a vested interest that, one might reasonably suppose, was oriented more toward the Republicans than the Democrats.


For Some, the Suspense Over Cuomo Has Faded
Sometime before 5 P.M. on Friday, someone will walk into the New Hampshire Statehouse here, take the stairs or the elevator up to Room 204, and file a declaration of candidacy for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
Or they won't.
It's all pretty much the same to Debbie Ascani.
"We'll treat them as cordially as we treat anyone else," said Ms.
Ascani, an assistant in the Secretary of State's office, pausing briefly from her work of processing Presidential primary forms.
"As long as they meet the qualifications, we let them all in."


Major Issue Dismissed In Suit Against Intel
A Federal judge has thrown out a major chunk of the antitrust suit filed by Advanced Micro Devices Inc. against the Intel Corporation, ruling that Advanced Micro had waited too long to file the suit.
United States District Court Judge James Ware in San Jose, Calif., dismissed allegations made by Advanced Micro Devices that Intel had secretly schemed to deny Advanced Micro the rights to make the 386 microprocessor chip, in violation of a cooperative agreement between the two companies.
Until this year, Intel had been the sole supplier of the 386, which is the central chip in millions of personal computers.


The Spoken Word
READINGS, Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Manhattan.
Readings of Dr.
Seuss stories by the composer Elizabeth Swados; the author Judy Blume; Michael Pollack, host of a children's radio show on WNYE-FM (91.5), and others, Sunday at 2, 5 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15; proceeds benefit children's service organizations.
Information: (212) 228-6300.
READING, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
Readings of their own works by the writers Joseph Brodsky, Anthony Hecht and Mona Van Duyn, Sunday at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $10.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Review/Film; Pre-Wedding Jitters, Mostly Dad's
Vincente Minnelli's 1950 "Father of the Bride" is an affectionate reminder of the days when parties required stiff protocol, suburban life was martini-filled and gracious, a majority of one's college classmates were likely to be married and a father was truly a patriarch, valiantly meeting the fiscal and emotional needs of everyone in his household.
It's an antique with a story that doesn't quite track in a world where Mother runs a business and Daddy's little girl plays basketball.
But "Father of the Bride" has been charmingly if improbably remade, with Steve Martin as the embattled father who suffers new indignities at each stage of his daughter's wedding plans.
Mr.
Martin, following in the very large footsteps of Spencer Tracy, is meant to be a sturdy, house-proud businessman and the long-married, devoted father of a 22-year-old daughter.
He's not believable in any of these capacities, but he can be very funny, especially when the director, Charles Shyer, gives him room to depart from Tracy's indelible performance and make the role his own.


Chase Promotes Executive To Chief Information Officer
Chase Manhattan Bank has named Craig D. Goldman, a senior vice president, to the newly created position of chief information officer for all parts of the bank, putting him in charge of the computer systems throughout the institution.
Mr.
Goldman, who oversaw the development in the late 1980's of the computerized information system used by Chase's corporate finance officers in North America, has been with the bank for more than six years.
Most recently, he has been expanding the information system used in corporate finance to Chase Securities, as well as to the bank units for leasing, real estate finance and credit policy.


Marriott to Offer Preferred Stock
The Marriott Corporation, the Washington-based hotel and hospitality services company, said yesterday that it would offer $200 million in convertible preferred stock through Merrill Lynch &amp; Company and Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The amount was increased from $150 million.


49ers' Young to Start
San Francisco quarterback STEVE BONO, hobbled by a sprained left knee, will miss the 49ers' final regular-season game on Monday night against Chicago.


Progress on South African Talks
On the eve of a convention of political parties that is to chart a non-racist future for South Africa, the Government and its foremost opponent, the African National Congress, resolved a key point of contention by compromising over how the decisions reached are to be put into effect.
In advance of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa, which will meet Friday and Saturday to pave the way for talks on a new democratic constitution, the African National Congress had made it clear that it wanted the decisions of the meeting to have the force of law.
For its part the Government and the ruling National Party have said that the resolutions reached by consensus, could not be treated as Parliamentary legislation.


Let Bridge Commuters Buy 20 Tokens at a Time
To the Editor:
New York's bridges and tunnels have almost daily traffic tie-ups.
On the free bridges, they are due to congestion and construction, but the daily jams on the Triboro, Whitestone and Throgs Neck are largely the fault of toll collection.
The Triboro Bridge and Tunnel Authority plans electronic drive-through collection, but an immediate solution is at hand.


I.B.M. Official Is Named President of McKesson
The man who has been in charge of internal computer use at I.B.M.'s United States operations was yesterday named president and chief operating officer of the McKesson Corporation, a large distributor of pharmaceuticals and other products.
David E. McDowell, 49, who has been at the International Business Machines Corporation for nearly 30 years, will succeed Rex R. Malson, 60, who is retiring from McKesson on March 31.
Alan Seelenfreund, 55, remains chairman and chief executive of McKesson, which is based in San Francisco and had revenues of $8.4 billion in its most recent fiscal year.


Gory Anti-Semitism Fills Ukraine's History
To the Editor:
"A 'Borderland' Whose History Reflects That Troubled Role" (The Week in Review, Dec. 1), your overview of Ukraine, omits that republic's tragic record of anti-Semitism.


New Chairman For Lonrho
Roland (Tiny) Rowland, who in August 1991 temporarily assumed the chairmanship of the British mining and industrial conglomerate Lonrho P.L.C., announced on Wednesday that he was stepping down in favor of Rene Leclezio.
Mr.
Rowland, 74 years old, will remain chief executive and managing director of Lonrho, a position he has held for 31 years.
He took over the chairmanship after Sir Edward du Cann, 67, former chairman of the Conservative Party and chairman of the small investment bank Keyser Ullman Holdings Ltd., relinquished the position following a decision by the Department of Trade and Industry to take legal action to remove him from office.


Review/Dance; Affectionate Tribute To Ailey Choreographer
Christmas came early to City Center, arriving on Thursday night with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater's sumptuous, loving tribute to Donald McKayle and his dances.
The dancers performed with extra intensity.
There were funny and poignant speeches by men and women who worked with Mr.
McKayle over his 40 years as a modern dance choreographer.
Then, at the very end, Mr.
McKayle strode onto the stage to join the dancers, accepting a bouquet from Judith Jamison, company director, and a standing ovation from the audience.
The dances celebrate black lives in an outstandingly gentle way.
Mr.
McKayle is not an overtly political choreographer.
The suffering and jubilation evoked in dances like "Games," "Rainbow Round My Shoulder" and "District Storyville" are universal.
The random violence against children that he portrays in "Games" remains at least as much a part of daily urban life as it ever was.
Mr.
McKayle does not make points, except in the subtlest ways, preferring simply to tell his story directly in fresh and luminous bright colors rather than by suggestion or preaching.


Law on 'Living Wills' Doesn't Go Far Enough
To the Editor:
Both the Dec. 1 front-page article and Dec. 3 editorial on the Patient Self-Determination Act, the new Federal law on "living wills," report that the law requires hospitals and other health-care facilities to ask patients if they wish to execute a living will.
This is incorrect.
Hospitals are only required to tell patients of their right to execute a living will or proxy and to give patients information about state law and hospital policies.
There is no obligation to ask patients their desires or to assist in the preparation of these documents.
This is left to the individual facility.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Fed Rate Cut
In a bold move to revive the economy, the Fed chopped its discount rate by a full point, to 3 1/2 percent, the lowest level since 1964.
The surprisingly big cut was seen as part of a broad effort to stimulate borrowing.
The Fed also signaled that it had lowered the Federal funds rate by half a point.  [ Page 1. ]


Next Stop? A Fine Restaurant
Grouse are hard to hit.
They move quickly and they favor heavy cover.
Swinging on a fast-flushing grouse is hard enough without the added difficulty of obstructive, albeit pretty, foliage.
When the leaves came down this year, when the last apples lay fermenting on the ground, I called my hunting companion, Ben Montanelli.
We made an appointment to hunt our favorite grouse covert: an overgrown orchard on a northern slope in the Catskills.
Although grouse can be found wherever there are spruce and aspen, abandoned orchards provide the right mix of food and cover to concentrate this most challenging native upland bird.


William Rosenau; Stock Trader, 63
William W. Rosenau, a Wall Street stock trading executive, died at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan on Thursday, his 63d birthday.
He was a resident of White Plains.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


Law on 'Living Wills' Doesn't Go Far Enough; Not a Death Plan
To the Editor:
Although my colleagues and I have been critical of the Government's financially grounded effort to push patients to sign advance directives through the Patient Self-Determination Act, "living wills" and health-care power-of-attorney documents are not "death plans," as the unfortunate headline of your Dec. 1 front-page article terms them.
Sadly, few patients who have such directives know exactly what they mean or even when they apply.


Toys 'R' Us Opens Doors in Japan
Toys "R" Us opened its first store in Japan today, and judging by the 17,000 people who showed up, an American company may have finally found a weapon to crack the formidable Japanese market.
It's called children.
In the first half-hour after the doors opened at 10 A.M. in the suburban hamlet of Amimachi, 1,500 people arrived, many of them mothers and grandmothers led by their pint-size charges.
They made their way through the gymnasium-size structure, eyeing the Barbie and Ken dolls, battery-powered fire engines and Pampers lining aisles nearly as wide as many residential streets in Japan.


Kahane Juror Asks for Discharge
A juror in the Rabbi Meir Kahane murder trial asked last night to be discharged, saying that another juror had called her a "jackass" and that they might come to blows.
After receiving a note from the jury about the dispute, Justice Alvin Schlesinger recessed the deliberations in State Supreme Court in Manhattan and urged the jurors to resolve their difficulties.
Justice Schlesinger directed the jury of nine women and three men to resume deliberations today.


University Hopes to Reopen After Break


Lawyer's Widow Sues Bomber for Damages
The widow of a lawyer killed by a mail bomb two years ago has filed suit seeking damages from the man convicted of sending the explosive device.
The woman, Ann L. Robinson, maintains in the lawsuit that Walter Leroy Moody Jr. violated the civil rights of her husband, Robert E. Robinson, by killing him because of his "race, profession and the advocacy of legal positions." Mr.
Robinson was black; Mr.
Moody is white.


Assembly May Be Required, but Panic Is Not
In the final days before Christmas -- and after the holiday, too -- help is available for parents who are reduced to panic by the phrase "some assembly required."
For a fee, some stores will assemble larger items, the kind that seem to have holes too small for the screws provided.
Most major toy companies also offer telephone help lines staffed by specialists who will talk parents through construction of those smaller toys which seem to have hundreds of tiny pieces.
Most of the lines operate only during regular business hours and, astonishingly, most are closed on Dec. 24.
Getting More Complicated
Assembly has become more complicated as children demand toys with more pizazz, said Donna Gibbs, a spokesman for Mattel.
"Kids are requiring more features in their toys," Ms.
Gibbs said.
"They live in a world that's full of stimulus, and a simple toy doesn't keep their interest. They want bells and whistles."


Airlift to Somalia's Capital Begins As Strife Between Clans Continues
A Belgian transport plane this week began an airlift of medical supplies and food to Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia, where fierce fighting has left more than 4,000 people dead and 10,000 wounded in the last month.
With 18 tons of supplies on each of 15 planned flights, the airlift, which got under way on Thursday, is providing the first major infusion of badly needed supplies for wounded and starving civilians since the fighting broke out, aid officials said.


Merrill Is Sued in Florida Over Ties to Shaky Insurer
Florida insurance regulators brought a lawsuit yesterday against Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, charging that it arranged false trades with a troubled insurance company to help hide the insurer's deteriorating financial condition from regulators.
The $300 million lawsuit involving the failed Guarantee Security Life Insurance Company also named Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the insurer's auditors, and Shereff, Friedman, Hoffman &amp; Goodman, a New York law firm that represents the insurer's parent, accusing them of malpractice and breach of fiduciary duty.
The suit also named the insurer's former top managers.


Breast Implant Maker Accused on Data
A member of the Food and Drug Administration's advisory panel on silicone breast implants said today that he believed a leading manufacturer of the implantshad improperly withheld documents raising safety concerns about the devices.
F.D.A. officials said they were investigating the assertions made by Dr.
Norman Anderson, a plastic surgeon at Johns Hopkins University Hospital in Baltimore, that the Dow Corning Wright Company had kept data from the agency and the public.
The officials have sent investigators to the Dow Corning offices in Arlington, Tenn., to search the records, and have asked the company to produce a list of documents.


Israelis Plan Poll on Wagner
An advisory committee to the Israel Philharmonic has decided to poll subscribers on plans to play works of Richard Wagner, who was vehemently anti-Semitic.
If a majority of the subscribers vote against the plan, it would increase pressure to cancel a concert of the 19th-century German composer's music.
The concert, to take place in Tel Aviv on Friday, would be the first time the Israel Philharmonic has scheduled a program including the music of Wagner.
The program is to include "The Flying Dutchman" and portions of "Tristan und Isolde."


YUGOSLAV BREAKUP GAINS MOMENTUM
Yugoslavia tumbled further toward complete disintegration today when the government of the ethnically mixed republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina decided to apply to the European Community for recognition as an independent state.
At the same time in Belgrade, the empty shell of Yugoslavia's federal Government shattered as Prime Minister Ante Markovic resigned.


For Car Renters, New Options for Insurance
In the consumer jungle of automobile rentals, the foliage is getting thicker.
The issue is insurance.
Until recently, renters faced a simple question: Do I want it or not?
Many consumer advocates say such coverage is a very poor deal and should probably be turned down.


Two Women
Two months ago a young woman sat in the Senate Caucus Room and said she had been sexually harassed by a nominee to the Supreme Court.
Many people believed her, but not enough to halt his confirmation.
Even so, her testimony may yet parallel in importance his ascent.
By bearing reluctant witness, Prof.
Anita Hill cast light on a somber subject on which many women have been silent and many men have been indifferent.
This week another young woman insisted on television that she had been raped by the nephew of a former President.
A jury had not believed her, and now she was taking her case to the public.
She was also making herself public.
"I am Patricia Bowman," she told ABC's Diane Sawyer.
"I'm not a blue blob. I'm a person."


CHRONICLE
Deputy Secretary of State LAWRENCE S. EAGLEBURGER jokingly suggested yesterday that a new White House political strategy may be in the works when he officiated as RICHARD B. STONE took the oath as the new Ambassador to Denmark.
Mr.
Eagleburger pointed out that Presidents seldom name members of the opposite party to be ambassadors.
But he noted that the naming of Mr.
Stone, a Democrat and former Senator from Florida, followed the appointment of another Democrat, ROBERT S. STRAUSS, to be Ambassador to Moscow.


Dr. Janet Louise Mitchell Is Married
Dr.
Janet Louise Mitchell, the chief of perinatology at Harlem Hospital Center in New York, was married yesterday to Arthur Glass Jr., the vice president for development and public relations at the Jackie Robinson Foundation, a philanthropy in New York.
Judge Betty Staton of the New York State Family Court in Brooklyn officiated at the home of the bride and bridegroom in Brooklyn.
Dr.
Mitchell, 41 years old, is keeping her name.
An assistant professor of obstetrics and gynecology at Columbia University, she graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received an M.D. from Howard University and a master's degree in public health from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Richard O. Mitchell.
Her father was a jockey and later a butler at the estate of C. V. Whitney of Lexington, Ky., a breeder of thoroughbreds.


Holiday Tipping
In lean times, it is tempting to eliminate seasonal tipping.
But it is worth remembering that this may have been an even more difficult year for the people who make the lives of others run smoothly.
Try giving a little less if it is truly a financial hardship to match last year's tips.
If you think a reduction might seem insulting, consider organizing a communal bonus -- especially if the person being thanked is someone like a day-care helper or doorman who may have looked after friends and neighbors, too.
Other alternatives include giving a small gift like a bottle of wine or home-baked bread with a card and personal note.
The following are some typical cash amounts.
If the person has given exceptional service during the year, it is customary to give a little more than usual and to include special thanks.
Doorman or other building staff: $10 to $30 each Nanny or other personal helper: A week's salary, or a gift of similar value.
Cleaning help: A week's salary.
Hairdresser, barber, manicurist: 20 percent of the cost of a normal visit, or a gift of similar value.
Newspaper deliverer: $10 to $30 depending upon frequency of use. (You normally receive a card with the name and address.) Maitre d'hotel: at least $50 in places where you have dined on a regular basis.
Sources: Service and professional organizations


Israelis Question 3 Taken in Lebanon
Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon captured three Lebanese today and took them to Israel for what the army described as questioning of "terrorist suspects."
About 18 hours later, the army announced that the three men would be released on Saturday, but it did not say if that meant that its troops had seized innocent people.


Editorial Notebook; Behind Mel Miller's Downfall
Mel Miller's days as one of the most powerful politicians in New York State are over.
His conviction last week on Federal fraud charges meant automatic expulsion from the State Assembly, and a new Assembly Speaker, Saul Weprin, now serves in his place.
But questions linger about the case, prompted by the high political stakes and the relatively minor nature of the charges on which Mr.
Miller was ultimately convicted.
Was this a reasonable prosecution for the United States Attorney in Brooklyn, Andrew Maloney, a Republican, to bring against the Assembly's top Democrat, or was it overreaching?


Investment By Motorola
Motorola Inc. will invest $20 million in the Echelon Corporation, a Silicon Valley company that is developing electronic systems to control machines and appliances.
Motorola will own 19 percent of Echelon and Gary L. Tooker, Motorola's president and chief operating officer, will take a seat on Echelon's board.
The agreement is "a financial investment and a vote of confidence," said M. Kenneth Oshman, president and chief executive of Echelon.


Dinkins, 90 Homeless Women and Cinderella
Ask Anna Rodriguez about her life in a Bowery shelter, separated from her children while she kicks a crack habit, and she seems to close in on herself.
Her shoulders hunch down; her head drops.
Hands splayed across half a gray metal desk, she describes large rats roaming the shelter's first floor and days without soap, shampoo, detergent, toothpaste and even toilet paper.
But ask Mrs.
Rodriguez about her dinner under the ornate chandeliers of Gracie Mansion last week and she breaks out in an irrepressible smile.
"It took me two hours to get dressed," she recalled.
"I didn't know what to wear. I wanted to look beautiful, to look glamorous.


General Dynamics
A unit of the General Dynamics Corporation has paid the Government $8 million to settle charges it defrauded the Army on a contract to make the M-1 Abrams tank, the Justice Department said.
It said the payment settled a suit filed in Detroit in 1990 charging that the unit failed to provide the Army with its most current, complete and accurate cost data for production of the tank in 1983.
The suit charged General Dynamics had a computer tape that listed the prices it planned to pay various subcontractors for 4,600 parts, but did not make it available to the Army.


Beliefs; Doing Unto Others in Christmas Season
It will be a different kind of Christmas for the Cardall family of Salt Lake City.
All this week, they have been down in the basement, sorting and packing clothes, shoes, kitchen utensils, blankets and toys donated by friends and neighbors for two orphanages in Mexico.
Today, 10 Cardalls will pile into the big Chevy Beauville van and a pickup truck and begin the 2,500-mile round trip to Chihuahua.


Lamu Journal; Kenyans Alter Little. Will Tourists?
In many ways, this island in the Indian Ocean still resembles the city-state that prospered in the 18th and 19th centuries from sea trade with Arabia and established a flourishing example of the Swahili culture.
The people here, known as Swahili from the melding of Arab intruders and indigenous Africans, have done much to preserve the traditional way of life.
Dhows still ply the waters, and three dozen mosques, one dating to 1370, are well attended.
The muezzin's cry echoes at dawn through stone alleys wide enough for donkeys but too narrow for cars.
The only vehicle on this island of 20,000 people belongs to the District Commissioner.


Sports of The Times; Recycle Paper, Not Coaches
ONE day not so long ago, the New York Nets, as they were once known, made the basketball gods very angry.
The franchise had enjoyed a run of good fortune in the American Basketball Association, winning an A.B.A. championship in 1974, a division championship in 1975 and the A.B.A.'s final championship in 1976.


Your Money; Software to Help Monitor Finances
THEY might not fit the stereotype of the "computer nerd," but a group of Houston women are showing considerable enthusiasm in using their personal computers to take charge of family finances.
With the new year approaching, and with recently enhanced versions of popular financial software available, it is a good time for many more people to follow their example.
Even those with little computer experience can get their finances organized with relative ease -- perhaps even move from owing money to saving money.


EXECUTIVES
*
American Waste Services Inc., Warren, Ohio, a waste-management company, named Scott C. Blauvelt executive vice president-technical services. *
Biogen Inc., Cambridge, Mass., a biopharmaceutical company, named James C. Mullen vice president-operations.


Cuomo Says He Will Not Run for President in '92
After 10 weeks of tortuous public deliberation that seemed to take him to the brink of candidacy, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo stepped back today and announced that he would not run for President in 1992.
Only two months before the New Hampshire primary, his announcement gave final form to a Democratic field that had been largely overshadowed by Mr.
Cuomo's potential entry.
Less than 90 minutes before the 5 P.M. filing deadline for the New Hampshire primary, Mr.
Cuomo told a crowded news conference in the Capitol that he could not run because of the lack of progress in negotiating a solution to the state's severe fiscal problems.


Jansen, Blair in Games Again
The speed skating team that will represent the United States in the Albertville Olympics in February began taking tangible and familiar form tonight when Dan Jansen and Bonnie Blair, both members of the last two Olympic teams, assured their places again with the fastest times in the 500-meter sprints.
Blair, the gold medalist in the 500 and bronze medalist at 1,500 in the last Olympics, also qualified in the 1,500, along with Mary Docter, who made her fourth Olympic team.
Eric Flaim and Brian Wanek qualified for their second team in the men's 1,500 meters.


As Free Election Comes to Taiwan, Will the End of Claims to China Follow?
Emerging from a maze of political taboos, illusions and restrictions, the people of Taiwan vote Saturday in their first full general election in four decades, a free and bitter electoral brawl that will shape this island's future for years or decades to come.
The vote will elect National Assembly members who will revise the Constitution and, if the opposition has its way, perhaps the country's name, flag, territory and relationship with China.


Ernest K. Gann, 81, An Author Of Many Books Made Into Films
Ernest Kellogg Gann, author of popular adventure novels, painter and pilot, died on Thursday evening at his home on San Juan Island, Wash.
He was 81 years old.
He died of kidney failure, said his wife, Dodie.


Haitians Get a Reprieve on Returning Home
The Government cannot return more than 6,500 Haitians to their homeland until they have a chance to speak with their lawyers, a Federal judge ruled today.
Federal District Court Judge C. Clyde Atkins accepted the arguments of lawyers that they have the right to speak with the refugees being held at the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.


Review/Dance; Moving to the Sounds of Urban Clamor
"Extended Metal," the hourlong work that the Shelley Lee Dance Company brought to the Merce Cunningham Studio last Saturday night, was notable for the power of its music and the talent of its cast.
Although it eventually proved deficient in one crucial respect, its virtues deserve to be mentioned first.
Bruce Odland's score, which combined electronic sounds with live percussion sequences, played by Mark McCoin and the composer, was based on noises collected one evening when Mr.
Odland attached a microphone to the wheels of a car traveling across New York's bridges.
The music rattled, scraped, thumped and buzzed, yet its clamor never punished one's ears.


U.S. Decides Not to Pursue Hawkins Case
The Justice Department yesterday closed its books on the 1989 racial killing of Yusuf K. Hawkins in Brooklyn, saying it had concluded an extensive investigation and would file no Federal civil rights charges in a case that came to symbolize the conflict of whites and blacks in America.
The officials said that Federal charges in the Bensonhurst killing were unwarranted because New York State had "vigorously pursued" criminal prosecutions that had led to the convictions of the gunman, Joseph Fama, and three other defendants on felony charges, as well as another young man on a misdemeanor violation.


Admiral Is Permanently Removed For Response in Sex Abuse Case
The Navy has decided to remove an admiral from his command permanently because he failed to take "timely action" in response to complaints of sexual abuse at a convention of naval aviators in September, the service said today.
The officer, Rear Adm.
Jack Snyder, was temporarily relieved last month from command of the Patuxent River Naval Air Test Center in Maryland while the Navy proceeded with two inquiries to determine what had happened at the convention and in the period following it.


The Cuomo Money Morass: $5 Billion and No Quick Fix
The fiscal morass that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo cited today as his reason for staying out of the Presidential race consists of gaps totaling at least $5 billion in the current and the next state budget.
The Legislature has not made any headway in closing either, despite six weeks of intensive negotiations here.
But while a Cuomo candidacy was widely seen as a new dynamic that could have made resolving the problem even more difficult, there was little immediate sense today that the converse might be true: that a decision not to run would automatically pave the way for an agreement.


Holiday Air Trips May Be No Bargain
The Christmas and New Year's holiday season is upon us, and a lot of people are suddenly deciding that they want to see far-away family members or just take a vacation.
But getting a last-minute travel bargain this year may prove far more difficult than in Christmases past.
Fewer airlines are operating than last Christmas, and those still flying are less likely to cut their rates, and discount seats to some cities, like Miami and Orlando, Fla., are all but impossible to get.
For travel purposes, the holiday season runs from tomorrow through Jan. 5.


A Fed Grasp For The Reins
The striking action of the Federal Reserve today in pushing the interest rates it directly controls to their lowest levels since the 1960's may have been a desperate attempt to wrest control of the economy back from the politicians.
For almost a decade, the dominant view in Washington has been that the astronomical budget deficit means that the White House and Congress have no leeway to cut taxes or increase spending, the normal Government response to bad times.
Only the Federal Reserve through its monetary policy, the thinking went, could keep the economy on its feet.


Dow Up 20.12, to 2,934.48, in Busy Day
Stocks closed broadly higher yesterday in the heaviest trading in nearly a year, as investors took the Federal Reserve's rate cut as a signal that it was serious about jolting the economy to life.
The Dow Jones industrial average advanced to 2,934.48, up 20.12 points for the day and the week.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 318.4 million, barely eclipsed by the 318.9 million shares traded on Jan. 17, the day after the Persian Gulf war started.
There were nearly twice as many advancing issues as losing ones on the Big Board: 1,138 to 618.


Raiders' Marinovich Gets Shot To Show Chiefs He's 'Special'
For 15 weeks, Todd Marinovich has spent his Sunday afternoons like a spectator, watching while others played.
But on the final day of the Los Angeles Raiders' regular season, in a game of some importance, he will be the starting quarterback about two years before his time.
Why?
Theories abound, but the feeling in camp this week is that the 22-year-old Marinovich is less an emergency stop-gap for the Raiders than he is a tool that Coach Art Shell is employing to confuse his opponent on Sunday, the Kansas City Chiefs.


Law on 'Living Wills' Doesn't Go Far Enough; What California Has
To the Editor:
"Living Wills: Their Current Status," a graphic with your Dec. 1 front-page article on the new Federal law about "living wills," indicates that California has a law authorizing living wills.
California recognizes, not the living will, but the durable power of attorney for health care, which allows an agent to follow your desires on life-sustaining treatment if you are terminally ill and cannot make the decisions because you are in a coma or otherwise mentally incapacitated.


Blue Route Journal; Terrifying Line on Map Grows Up to Be a Road
It was an all-American event.
There was a high school marching band, uniformed veterans carrying flags, Santa Claus and a secretary from the state highway department singing the national anthem.
Public officials cut a red, white and blue ribbon across a new $750 million highway.
A woman, possibly a mom, served apple Danish and coffee.
Missing from the American tableau on the highway here on Thursday was any sign of the thousands of suburbanites who had fought this road for nearly four decades, making it one of the nation's most bitterly contested public projects, in a league with Manhattan's defunct Westway.


COMPANY NEWS;
The Eastman Kodak Company said yesterday that it would take a $495 million charge against fourth-quarter earnings, primarily because more than twice as many employees as expected had enrolled in an early retirement program announced earlier this year.
The write-off also covers expenses for streamlining overseas film production and selling some unidentified "non-strategic businesses." It brings to $930 million the after-tax total of special charges the company has taken against earnings this year as it attempts to reduce overhead and focus on its core photography business.


The Continuing Education of the Jets' Nagle
There is no doubt in Browning Nagle's mind how he's going to spend his off season.
Instead of sunning himself on a beach or swooshing down a slope, Nagle expects to be huddled over the Jets' playbook and throwing passes.
Lots and lots of passes.
"I plan on it," he said.
"It's not really an anticipation or a thought: 'Maybe, I'll be around to do this or work on that.' No. I'm going to be here.


Moscow Begins Withdrawal of Its Nuclear Weapons From Ukraine
Moscow has already removed some of the 4,000 nuclear arms it has on Ukrainian soil and will finish most of the withdrawal in the next six months, Soviet and Ukrainian officials here say.
The warheads are being removed by the two militaries in a joint operation that has special precautions against terrorist thefts and accidental explosions, the officials said.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall
A sense of event was woefully slow to come at the New York Philharmonic subscription concert on Thursday evening, but it finally did arrive.
To conclude the program, conducted by Erich Leinsdorf, the American soprano Carol Vaness made her Philharmonic debut, singing the climactic passages of Richard Strauss's "Daphne" in Mr.
Leinsdorf's own conflation of the opera's prelude, soliloquy and finale.


2 Islanders Go Home
While their Islander teammates headed from Philadelphia to St.
Louis yesterday for a game against the Blues tonight, PATRICK FLATLEY and KEN BAUMGARTNER returned to Long Island for further medical attention.
Both players were injured Thursday night in a 6-2 loss to the Philadelphia Flyers at the Spectrum, and both will be out at least two weeks.


Economic Pulse: Long Island - A special report; After Decades of Prosperity, Long Island Confronts a Stagnant Economy
Long Island residents are beginning to learn that they just can't have it all.
The island, frequently listed in surveys in the 1980's as one of the country's most desirable spots, is struggling now, not just with the effects of the national recession that have battered states throughout the Northeast but also with stubborn home-grown problems that will make it harder to bounce back when the region's recovery begins.


Nets Fail To Confuse The Bulls
Bill Fitch remained as coach of the New Jersey Nets tonight, the Nets held in their confused and losing pattern and a sellout crowd hardly seemed to notice, as all eyes were trained on Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls, who bullied the Nets, 115-98.
Jordan, the man who defies gravity, also conquered the Byrne Meadowlands Arena laws of nature, filling it for pro basketball for the first time this season with 20,049 fans.
Two were named Marla Maples and her date, Donald Trump, the fourth-row guests of minority Nets' owner Joe Taub.


New Orleans Outlaws Bias By Mardi Gras Parade Clubs
The New Orleans City Council has voted unanimously to outlaw discrimination in the carnival clubs that sponsor the city's Mardi Gras parades.
Mayor Sidney Barthelemy said today that the action sends a strong message "that New Orleans is an open town and everyone is recognized."
The law stops clubs from excluding anyone because of "race, color, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, ancestry, age, physical condition or disability."


Marshall Going to Japan
MIKE MARSHALL, whose major league career became bogged down by back trouble and backbiting, is going to Japan.
Marshall, 32 next month, has signed a two-year contract to play for the Nippon Ham Fighters.
Marshall spent 11 seasons in the majors, batting .270 with 148 home runs and 550 runs batted in.
He was with Boston then California last season.


The Mets Go Back for a Second Helping and Sign Randolph
The financial investment -- $850,000 -- was almost negligible given the present free-agent marketplace.
The organizational commitment -- one season -- was minimal.
But for the Mets, that's all that was modest about their signing of Willie Randolph yesterday.
Their workload for the second baseman will be great, their expectations concerning his contributions high.


Simone Beck, a Cook, Dies at 87; Co-Wrote Book With Julia Child
Simone Beck, a passionate cook, author and teacher who collaborated with Julia Child on the influential cookbook "Mastering the Art of French Cooking," died yesterday at her home in Placassier, a small village in southern France.
She was 87 years old.
Miss Beck, who preferred to be called Simca, had been having heart problems for several months and had stopped eating, said Harold Earle, a cousin.
"The doctor said that because she wouldn't eat, she died," he said.


Desegregation Plan Scaled Back
Jefferson County's six-member school board passed a new school desegregation plan Thursday that will allow a substantial reduction in the busing of schoolchildren for integration, prompting an angry reaction from some civil rights leaders today.
Civil rights leaders say the change could resegregate Louisville's public schools and reverse the benefits of 15 years of court-ordered busing.


Laserscope Promotion At a Time of Transition
Laserscope Inc., a maker of medical laser systems based in San Jose, Calif., yesterday named Robert V. McCormick president and chief operating officer.
Mr.
McCormick joined Laserscope in March as senior vice president for marketing and field operations.
Mr.
McCormick, who is 47, succeeds Herbert G. Taus, who retired in October at age 63.
Dr.
Rodney Perkins, a physician, continues as Laserscope's chairman and chief executive.


Levi's Names a Leader Of North America Unit
Anticipating shifts in the global market, Levi Strauss &amp; Company has formed a unit to encompass all of the company's marketing divisions in the United States, plus Levi Strauss Canada and Levi Strauss de Mexico.
The company named Robert D. Rockey Jr. president of the new unit, which will be called Levi Strauss North America.
"Our markets are becoming more global, and consumers are becoming much less confined to the boundaries of specific countries," Thomas W. Tusher, the company's president and chief operating officer, said in a statement.
"These challenges suggest a greater level of interdependence and the need for a significant structural change."


BRIEFS
*
American Cyanamid Co., Wayne, N.J., said that it would restructure its global chemical operations by forming a new entity that will be composed of all the company's current chemical businesses. *
BellSouth Enterprises Inc., Atlanta, said it had reached a definitive agreement to acquire Scientific Software Inc., Atlanta, a data communications software concern, for an undisclosed price.


Public &amp; Private; Naughty And Nice
Dear Ms. Quindlen,
The other day at the mall a little boy passing by my throne said that if he didn't find "Game Boy" under the tree somebody was going to be in big trouble, adding a word that in my day was spelled *#!!$@**&amp;!
What happened to the nice little boys and girls of yesteryear?
Are there any left?
Be good for goodness' sake, SANTA CLAUS Dear Mr.
Claus,
Yes, Santa Claus, there is a Virginia.
And despite everything you've seen on television and read in magazines, the amazing thing about her is how little she's changed since she asked for an orange in her stocking so many years ago.
The boy you mention is exactly the sort who once would have said, "Your mother wears army boots." He would not have said it in front of you, however, because he believed that you knew who was naughty and nice.
The world they live in has changed plenty.
Master Mall probably learned that word at home.
A lot of us moms are more loose in our language than in the days when my mother once said "Oh, hell!" -- she probably had just broken her toe at the time -- and then clapped her hand over her mouth.
Our children's speech is anatomically correct, which seems like a good idea until the moment, in a crowded restaurant, when a 2-year-old announces stereophonically, "Grandmom, I have a penis!"
They inhabit a far harsher place than the world in which I waited for you each year.
Five million of them under the age of 6 are living in poverty, which means that their toys may come via some church collection program rather than the traditional chimney route.
Fifty years ago, teachers said their top discipline problems were talking, chewing gum, making noise and running in the halls.
The current list, by contrast, sounds like a cross between a rap sheet and the seven deadly sins: drug abuse, absenteeism, alcohol abuse, vandalism, assault, teen-age pregnancy, suicide, gang warfare, rape and arson.
But let's not fall prey to good-old-daysism.
Let's not pretend that none of the children you visited 50 years ago had abusive parents or empty stomachs.
Let's not pretend that the world of Bedford Falls was perfect.
I grew up safe, secure and insulated in a suburb in which a Protestant was a rarity and a black family an impossibility.
At this holiday season, my kids consider it one of my great shortcomings that I am ignorant of how to spin a dreidel.
This is a good thing.
They grow up faster, Santa.
Too many of the Virginias of the world have babies when they are still babies themselves.
Too many of them equate maturity with cynicism, and hope with disappointment.
But there is a part of many of them, even some of the most superficially sophisticated or the most deeply scarred, that accounts for the continuing existence of you in a world that seems at odds with everything you stand for.
It is that sense of infinite possibility, the genuine "Wow!" It is that sense that the blinds are not yet drawn between the windows of their eyes and the houses of their hearts.
The preternatural maturity we see in so many of them comes from us adults.
It is our response to raising them in a world in which people die from sex and kill for pennies.
It is to protect ourselves, to trade their innocence for street smarts for our own sake.
The Virginias of the world will tell you they want a Madonna cordless microphone and a pair of hoop earrings.
But it is amazing how many of them still sleep with a tattered fur thing, part bear, part bunny.
You may be conscious of how many of them no longer believe.
I marvel at how many of them do.
I marvel at the pain it causes even the toughest customers to see beneath your beard and discover you are only a man in costume.
It will be many, many years before some of them understand that you are a stand-in for what is best within themselves.
Those are the Virginias who grow wise but never weary.
My New Year's resolution is to try to be one of them.
May your days be merry and bright, ANNA QUINDLEN$!


Yeltsin Says Russia Seeks to Join NATO
In yet another sign that the disintegration of the Soviet Union was turning global politics upside down, the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, wrote to NATO today saying Russia hoped to join the alliance some time in the future.
Mr.
Yeltsin's letter was sent in conjunction with the first meeting ever held at the headquarters of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization between NATO foreign ministers and those of the former Warsaw Pact -- the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and Romania.


Miss Stroehle, An Editor, Wed
Barbara Lydia Stroehle, a senior editor of the Diplomatic World Bulletin, which reports on the United Nations, was married yesterday to Hugh Timothy Dugan, a diplomat in the United States Mission to the United Nations.
The Rev.
Damian O'Connell officiated at St.
Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Dugan graduated from the University of Hartford.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Stroehle of Westfield, N.J.
Her father is a real-estate investor.
Her mother, Alice Van De Mark Stroehle, who is retired, owned Lenox Realty in Westfield.


Quote of the Day
"It seems to me I cannot turn my attention to New Hampshire while this threat hangs over the head of the New Yorkers that I've sworn to put first." -- GOV.
MARIO M. CUOMO.  [ 1:1. ] "Now we can get down to the selection process in earnest, without any doubts about what the final field will be." -- RONALD H. BROWN, the Democratic national chairman.  [ 1:2. ]


Wrong Symbolism on Mayoral Pay
From the beginning, Mayor David Dinkins's voluntary 5 percent pay cut was more important for its symbolism than its impact on New York City's budget.
It didn't save a lot of money, but by taking that small cut in his own salary and those of about 800 managers, the Mayor was saying that he understood the impact of the recession and was willing to do his bit.
That's what mayors are supposed to do -- set a tone.
That is why Mr.
Dinkins's latest decision -- to rescind the cuts -- is so disappointing.
In a city where more than 138,000 jobs have disappeared in the last year, including 6,000 in city government, people need a sense that their most prominent political leader cares about their plight.


PRETORIA IS READY TO NEGOTIATE PLAN FOR INTERIM RULE
Addressing a conference of political parties convened to begin charting the end of white minority rule in South Africa, President F. W. de Klerk said today that he was ready to negotiate constitutional amendments that would create an interim government and an expanded Parliament that included blacks.
Mr. de Klerk said that all South Africans would be allowed to vote in a referendum on the changes, which would provide for a measure of power-sharing until a new, nonracial constitution was drafted.
Up to now, the country's black majority has been excluded from political decisions.


Strong Quake Hits Myanmar
A strong earthquake was recorded today in Myanmar, formerly Burma, the Hong Kong Observatory reported.
The observatory said that the quake, measuring 5.5 on the Richter scale, had been detected at 10:10 A.M. local time and that its epicenter was about 627 miles north of Yangon, formerly Rangoon.
The observatory had no further details.


Whitfield to Turn Pro
All-America tackle BOB WHITFIELD will give up his final year of eligibility at Stanford to turn pro.
The junior player, speaking before he departed Thursday to Hawaii for the Aloha Bowl, said that two years of financial struggle as a self-supporting student athlete left him no choice but to go for the money.


Yanks Stand By Troubled Pitcher
Officials of the New York Yankees said yesterday they would stand by Steve Howe, despite his arrest Thursday on a Federal drug charge and the inevitable concern that his long battle with drug addiction was being lost.
The club's chief operating officer, Leonard Kleinman, scrambled beyond midnight Thursday to secure a lawyer for Howe.
The left-handed relief pitcher was released without bail yesterday in Kalispell, Mont., after being arraigned on a charge of possession of dangerous drugs.
The trial date was set for Jan. 30.


Burns Leaves U.S.T.A.
After 21 years with the organization, MICHAEL BURNS resigned yesterday as director of tournaments of the United States Tennis Association to pursue other business interests.
The announcement was made by M. MARSHALL HAPPER 3D, executive director of the U.S.T.A., who said Burns would remain as a consultant to the organization for the next two years.


Employee Walkout Shuts Down Gallagher's
Union workers protesting stalled contract talks walked out of Gallagher's restaurant, a popular midtown steakhouse, just before dinner last night and said that a similar strike would follow on Monday at the Oyster Bar and Restaurant in Grand Central Terminal.
The action forced the 300-seat restaurant at 228 West 52d Street to close for the evening.
Workers said it was the first time it was shut because of a labor dispute.


RESULTS PLUS
Celtics Beat Jazz  The Boston Celtics won their 11th straight home game and the Utah Jazz dropped to 0-21 lifetime at Boston Garden as Larry Bird scored 10 of his 20 points in the fourth quarter in the Celtics' 112-101 victory last night.
Boston, which leads the Atlantic Division, has won 12 of its last 14 games.
Utah, the Midwest leader, had its three-game winning streak stopped as it lost for just the second time in 10 games.


4 Firefighters Die in Pennsylvania Blaze


Fed's Interest-Rate Cuts Welcomed by Business
From chief executives to car dealers, business people across the country welcomed the Federal Reserve's sharp cut in interest rates yesterday as a dramatic confidence-building gesture that should help revive the sluggish economy.
No policy move, they stressed, could be expected to reverse, single-handed, the reluctance of consumers and companies to spend and invest.
But they added that the Fed's action did show that Washington was concerned about the economy and was making a concerted effort to turn things around.


Newman Helps Make Neediest's Day
Fueled by a generous contribution from Paul Newman's food company, The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund soared past the $2 million mark in total contributions yesterday.
The $100,000 donation from Newman's Own Inc. combined with a $20 check from Arpy Kashmanian of Forest Hills, a $100 contribution from June Danielson of New Rochelle, N.Y., and hundreds of other gifts enabled the Neediest Cases to post its biggest day this year: $178,187.37.


FED CUTS KEY RATE IT CHARGES BANKS TO A 27-YEAR LOW
In a bold move to revive the slumping economy, the Federal Reserve chopped its bedrock discount rate today by a full point, to 3 1/2 percent, the lowest level since 1964.
The surprisingly big cut was seen as part of a broad effort to stimulate borrowing and perk up an economy whose signs of recovery from recession have all but vanished.
The discount rate is what the Federal Reserve charges on loans to banks but its significance is in the message it carries to the financial markets and businesses and consumers.


Trenary Quits Her Bid For Spot in '92 Games
The intense competition that was building for the women's singles title at the United States national figure skating championships next month was muted yesterday when Jill Trenary, a three-time national titleholder and once a world champion, withdrew from the event.
Her decision, announced in almost somber tones during a brief telephone news conference, makes her ineligible for the 1992 Olympic Games in February at Albertville, France.
Only the three leading finishers at the nationals can represent the United States, and with Trenary out, they are virtually certain to be Kristi Yamaguchi, Tonya Harding and Nancy Kerrigan.
Those three swept the medals at this year's world championships, nine months ago in Munich.


Fed Cut Explosive for Bonds
Prices in the credit markets exploded and short- and long-term interest rates fell sharply yesterday after the Federal Reserve Board lowered the discount rate by a full percentage point, to 3 1/2 percent.
The cut in the discount rate, the biggest in a decade, was followed later by confirmation that the Fed had also pushed down its target for the overnight Federal funds rate by half a percentage point, to 4 percent.


Santa With AIDS Spreads Cheer
THE moral of this story is that you can't keep a good Santa down.
Mark Woodley, the Santa with AIDS whom Macy's refused to re-hire, is back on the sleigh.
He has been putting on his crimson suit and wild whiskers and sprinkling Christmas magic.


Jane Perduto Weds William Garvey
Jane Marilyn Perduto, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James V. Perduto of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to William Paul Garvey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William P. Garvey of Glen Cove, L.I.
The Rev.
William Meyer, a Lutheran minister, officiated, assisted by the Rev.
Ray Carlo, a Roman Catholic priest, at the Lutheran Church of the Resurrection in Garden City.
Mrs.
Garvey was until recently a sales associate with Group W Satellite Communications, a television advertising sales company in New York.
She graduated from St.
John's University.
Her father is a senior vice president at the Stella D'Oro Bisquit Company in the Bronx.


Political Memo; Finally, Relief in Rival Camps
Now the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination can begin anew.
No more Mario scenarios.
No more excuses for Democratic contributors or party organizers who wanted to hold back their money or support until they saw what the Governor of New York would do.
No more opinion polls that showed most of the announced candidates clustered in the single digits, while Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, so much better known, loomed, tantalizing Democrats with his potential, his stature, his oratorical heft.


Leslie Schine, Executive, Wed
Leslie Schine, the vice president of corporate development at Viacom International, the diversified entertainment and communications company, and Nils Nilsen, a senior vice president at First Atlantic Capital, a leveraged buyout concern, both in New York, were married yesterday at the bridegroom's home in Greenwich, Conn.
Stanley Atwood, a justice of the peace in Westport, Conn., performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Schine Nilsen, a cum laude graduate of Connecticut College, has a master's degree in management from Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She is a daughter of Lois Gildersleeve Schine of Westport, and the late Leonard Schine.
Her father was a lawyer.
Her mother, a mechanical engineer, is the president and executive director of the Westport Chamber of Commerce.


INSIDE
Japan Trade: Toys, Troubles
Breaking through Japan's barriers, Toys "R" Us opened its first store there.
But trade disputes continue: in a preliminary ruling, the U.S. said Japanese minivans were being sold here for less than fair value.
Page 33.
Yugoslavia Crumbles Further
Yugoslavia tumbled further toward complete disintegration when the republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina moved toward independence.
Page 3.
Home for the Holidays
In a sputtering economy, fewer Americans than usual are planning winter vacations.
Page 7.
World Premiere of 'Ghosts'
The Met finally performed "The Ghosts of Versailles," written for its centennial in 1983.
Edward Rothstein's review is on page 11.


Debate on Health Care: Long on Posturing, Short on Details
Seizing on what is expected to be a powerful campaign issue, the various Democratic candidates sought to portray themselves at a debate Thursday night as the most committed to improving health care.
The debate, which was sponsored by the New Hampshire Democratic Party and took health care as its theme, was marked largely by sloganeering and posturing as some of the candidates were hard pressed to explain their proposals in detail.


Critic's Notebook; When Broadcast Matter Is Considered Offensive
The ball is over; the mask comes off, but the music lingers.
There, from behind the blob, emerges Patricia Bowman, former Alleged Victim and accuser of William K. Smith in the rape trial that resulted a week ago in his instant acquittal.
And there, on a San Francisco news program is the President of the United States sharing his worry "about so much filth and indecent material coming in through the airwaves and through these trials into people's homes."
Should the entire trial have been blobbed out?
Should Ms.
Bowman's face and name have been left in?
What are Ms.
Bowman and Mr.
Bush trying to tell the nation?


U.S. Finds Japan 'Dumps' Mini-Vans
The Commerce Department issued a preliminary ruling today that Japanese mini-vans were being sold for less than fair value in the United States.
But the agency said they were being underpriced by less than Detroit's auto makers had contended.
The ruling that the Japanese were "dumping," as the practice is known, came as the United States trade deficit with Japan is increasingly becoming a political issue in the approaching Presidential primaries.
Hours before the Commerce Department delivered its verdict, several Democratic leaders in Congress from car-producing states proposed legislation to limit Japanese auto makers' sales in the United States.


Broad Turnout for Republics' Summit
Leaders of most Soviet republics converged today on the capital of Kazakhstan, Alma-Ata, for a weekend summit meeting on their future while President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, left behind in Moscow, suggested that he might soon shift from politics to "social activity."
The latest reports said leaders of all former Soviet republics except the three Baltic nations would be represented, though there was some question whether the Georgians were coming as participants or observers.


Russell O'Neil; Novelist and Playwright
Russell O'Neil, a novelist and playwright, died on Wednesday at the Veteran's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 64 years old.
He died of respiratory failure, said his brother, John O'Neil, of Norristown, Pa.


Assembly Democrats Weigh Foes' Tax Repeal Bills
The Assembly Appropriations Committee, still under Democratic control, began public hearings today on a series of Republican bills that would repeal, rescind, replace or alter all or part of the $2.8 billion tax package that was approved 18 months ago.
The hearing came a day after the Democratic majority in the Senate approved five bills that would "sunset," or let lapse, the entire $2.8 billion tax package.
The bitter partisan fighting accompanying that vote broke out again today amid pointed fingers, swapped charges and frequent yelling across the committee table.


I.R.S. Ruling On LYON's
A corporate scare over the tax treatment of zero-coupon convertible bonds, which had threatened to cost companies large sums and perhaps halt the issuance of such securities, appears to be ending.
Merrill Lynch, the firm that has underwritten most of these securities, said yesterday that a client, which it declined to identify, had received a private letter ruling from the Internal Revenue Service stating that the tax benefits were legal.


New Explanation Given For van Gogh's Agonies
In his brief life, Vincent van Gogh painted with grand passion, fasted for days on end, drank abundant quantities of alcohol, including the potent liquor absinthe, and suffered a host of physical and mental agonies.
He wrote of those agonies with almost clinical precision in letters to his brother Theodorus, and physicians and other researchers reviewing the letters have had a field day ever since, attempting a posthumous diagnosis of the great artist's illness based on the symptoms he described as well as a few notions of their own.
Now two researchers propose a new diagnosis of van Gogh's illness that they insist accounts for his constellation of woes more persuasively than any other theory yet devised.
Dr.
Loretta S. Loftus of the University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Medicine in Missouri and Dr.
Wilfred N. Arnold of the University of Kansas Medical Center in Kansas City, Kan., have suggested that the artist suffered from acute intermittent porphyria, a hereditary metabolic disorder.


Menorah Ruling Belies Civil Liberties Stance
To the Editor:
The most liberal segments of Jews in New York State's Westchester County, including the reform rabbinate and the American Jewish Committee, have persuaded the White Plains Common Council to protect the local citizenry from a Lubavitch-sponsored nine-foot menorah in Tibbets Park (news article, Dec. 3).


Largest Amount of Cocaine Seized by Customs Agents in New Jersey


Santa With AIDS Virus Is Back on the Ho Ho Ho Trail


Stephen Birnbaum, A Travel Journalist And Editor of Books
Stephen Birnbaum, a well-known travel journalist and guidebook editor, died on Friday at Mount Sinai Medical Center.
He was 54 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications of leukemia, according to officials of the Hearst Corporation, the publisher of Diversion Magazine, a travel and leisure magazine for doctors, where Mr.
Birnbaum served as editorial director.


Grant Is Suspended For Punching Robinson
HARVEY GRANT of the Washington Bullets was fined $7,500 and suspended for one game and DAVID ROBINSON of the San Antonio Spurs was fined $5,000 yesterday for their roles in an incident during a game on Wednesday night in San Antonio.
Grant, who sat out last night's game at Dallas, was cited for starting the incident with 5 minutes 59 seconds remaining in the fourth quarter by hitting Robinson with a forearm to the chest and then punching him.
Robinson was fined for slapping Grant.
Both players were ejected from the game, which Washington won by 96-93.


Kent Rhodes, 79, Spent 33 Years In Many Posts at Reader's Digest
Kent Rhodes, the former chief of Reader's Digest and retired spokesman for the nation's magazine industry, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 79 years old and also lived in Fishers Island, N.Y.
He died of cancer, relatives said.


Classical Music in Review
American Academy in Rome Paul Recital Hall Juilliard School
A listener attending a program of works by Elliott Carter, David Diamond and Richard Trythall may expect thoughtful lightness of the sort conveyed by Mr.
Carter's "Con Leggerezza Pensosa," but not stand-up comedy.
Unless, that is, the famously caustic Mr.
Diamond is allowed to speak.


Shhhh, There's a Kings Game Going On
Let's not jump to conclusions.
The hockey season is two weeks short of the halfway point and many teams, many times, have managed to reverse their declines en route to the Stanley Cup playoffs.
Still, a recent peek at the Los Angeles Kings gives one the feeling of arriving at the party too late and staying a little too long.
Are we having fun yet?
Or ever again?


On Keeping Sexism Out of Today's Usage
To the Editor:
"In Linguistic Eden, the Sexes Were Equal" by Adam Redfield (letter, Dec. 6) argues that because the word "man" was historically gender-free in English, words like "chairman" should continue to be viewed as gender-free today.


Israelis and Palestinians Protest Housing Takeover
About 3,000 Israelis and Palestinians poured into an Arab quarter of East Jerusalem today to protest the recent takeover of six houses there by militant Israelis who have both political and financial support from the Government.
It was one of the larger public demonstrations here in many months, and it reflected a concern bordering on anger among many Israelis over the Government-backed move into the Silwan neighborhood, which they believe threatens to upset fragile religious and ethnic balances in this always-charged city.


Irene Jackson and Herbert Schon Are Married
Irene Marie Jackson, a public relations representative at Japan Airlines in New York, and Herbert Schon, president of Herb Schon Associates, bakers of Grandma's Recipe Rugelach, also in New York, were married yesterday in Hendersonville, N.C.
The Rev.
Charles Grady, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at Methodist Brumson Chapel, assisted by Morris Kaplan, a Jewish lay leader.
Ms.
Jackson, 44 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Earl Jackson of Hendersonville.


News Summary
International 3-6 DE KLERK OFFERS INTERIM DEAL
President de Klerk said he was ready to negotiate creation of an interim government and an expanded Parliament including blacks before a new, nonracial constitution for South Africa is completed.  1 RUSSIA HOPES TO JOIN NATO
In another sign that the disintegration of the Soviet Union is turning global politics upside down, President Yeltsin raised the possiblity of Russia's joining NATO sometime in the future.  5  Leaders of Soviet republics gathered for a fateful summit meeting.  5  Moscow has begun removing nuclear arms from Ukrainian soil.  5  U.S.
MAY LIFT CAMBODIA EMBARGO
Washington appears to be on the verge of lifting the embargo on Cambodia that has been in effect since 1975, when Americans fled the advancing Khmer Rouge.  3  YUGOSLAVIA CRUMBLES FURTHER
Yugoslavia tumbled further toward complete disintegration when the ethnically mixed republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina decided to apply to the European Community for recognition as an independent state.  3  FREE ELECTION IN TAIWAN
The people of Taiwan are voting today in their first full general election in four decades, a free and bitter contest that will shape the island's future for years to come.  4  AN ISLAND GUARDS ITS TRADITIONS
Lamu Journal: Some longtime residents say new hotels threaten the character of the Kenyan island of Lamu, which melds Arab and African influences.  4  Relief supplies are going to Somalia by air, but a ship cannot unload.  4  TAKEOVER OF HOUSES PROTESTED
About 3,000 Israelis and Palestinians protested the recent takeover of six houses in an Arab quarter of East Jerusalem by militant Israelis who have political and financial support from their Government.  6  ISRAEL CAPTURES 3 IN LEBANON
Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon captured three Lebanese and took them to Israel for what the army described as questioning of "terrorist suspects." 6  National 7-9, 46-47  BIG SLASH IN DISCOUNT RATE
In a bold effort to revive the slumping economy, the Federal Reserve reduced the rate it charges on loans to banks by a full point, to 3 1/2 percent, the lowest level in more than a quarter of a century.
The surprisingly big cut was seen as part of a broad effort to stimulate borrowing and thereby perk up an economy whose recovery from recession has all but vanished.  1  News analysis: The Fed vs. election-year politics.  1  CUOMO SAYS HE'S NOT RUNNING
Less than 90 minutes before the filing deadline for the New Hampshire primary, Governor Cuomo announced that he would forgo a Presidential campaign.
He attributed his decision to a lack of progress in negotiating a solution to New York State's fiscal problems.  1  News analysis: Cuomo was trapped by his own ambivalence.  1  Political Memo: Now the Democratic race begins anew.  1  The Governor's decision portends no solution for the state budget.  46  HEALTH CARE AND '92
Debating what is expected to be a powerful campaign issue, the various Democratic candidates sought to portray themselves as the most committed to improving the nation's health care system.  47  THE MEANING OF CHRISTMAS
Beliefs: Those Americans who observe Christmas by helping others are still a tiny minority.
Increasing their number is the aim of a group called Alternatives.  1  HARD TIMES IN TRAVEL INDUSTRY
Because of the economy, fewer Americans than usual are planning winter vacations.
Even among those lucky enough to get away, many are being forced to stay closer to home and return sooner than they would have wanted.  7  BIAS AND THE MARDI GRAS
The New Orleans City Council voted unanimously to outlaw discrimination in the carnival clubs that sponsor the city's Mardi Gras parades.  7  NEW QUESTIONS ON IMPLANTS
New options in rental-car insurance.
Arts/Entertainment 11-14, 47  World premier of "The Ghosts of Versailles." 11  New theory on van Gogh's illness.  11  Music: Israeli orchestra to poll subscribers on Wagner concert.  12  Classical music in review.  14  Dance: Ailey troupe honors a choreographer.  11  Shelley Lee company in "Extended Metal." 12  Television: Critic's Notebook.  47  Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19  Editorials 18  What the 70 days cost.
Two women.
Symbolism on mayoral pay.
Dorothy J. Samuels: Miller.
Letters 18  Anna Quindlen: Naughty and nice.  19  Geoffrey Garin and Peter D. Hart: Now, Bush is the issue.  19  Clifford Winston: Building a better traffic jam.19  Maria Elena Cruz Varela: Fidel Castro, Cuba's own worst enemy.  19


What the 70 Days Cost
In the way he said no yesterday, Mario Cuomo showed America the complexity that New Yorkers long ago discovered in their Governor: He is eloquent, and exasperating.
His political behavior can be masterful, if occasionally also martyred.
He brims with sophistication, but sometimes only with sophistry.
He will not run for President --
he cannot run
, he said -- because the State Senate Republicans are viciously obstructing critical budget negotiations.
Yet almost in the next breath, he couldn't resist displaying how well he, the voice of "the big steelworkers with the thick fingers who can't handle computers," might have flayed George Bush.


A Cage of Equivocation
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo brought his strangely drawn- out drama of indecision to a close today, not with a bang, but with a news conference.
And even as the final uncanny act was playing out, he remained firmly in character: equivocal, eloquent and ultimately trapped by his own ambivalence.
The thought process that led the Governor to today's decision -- he made it even as two chartered planes sat on the runway in Albany waiting to take him and reporters to New Hampshire -- will undoubtedly remain obscure.


CHRONICLE
JOHN WILLIAMS, who has won 4 Academy Awards and 15 Grammys and whose latest compositions include the scores for the films "J.F.K." and "Hook," announced yesterday that he would retire as conductor of the Boston Pops Orchestra at the end of the 1993 season.
Mr.
Williams, 59 years old, succeeded Arthur Fiedler as conductor of the Pops in 1980.
He told the orchestra's management of his decision last week and told the musicians at a Christmas concert on Thursday.
But he will have a full schedule before he departs: He is to lead the Pops Esplanade Orchestra on a national tour in the summer and will take the Boston Pops to Japan in 1993.


Azinger Manages the Wind and a Two-Stroke Lead
In a flagstick-bending, wave-crashing wind that made par a very elusive score, Paul Azinger survived an out-of-bounds penalty and a missed 10-inch putt today as he took a two-shot lead after two rounds of the $2.55 million Johnnie Walker World Championship.
Relying heavily on his skill at maneuvering the ball, Azinger battled 45-miles-per-hour gusts and shot a one-over-par 72 at the Tryall Golf Club for a 36-hole total of one-under-par 141.


Oscar A. Ornati, 69, Economics Professor
Oscar A. Ornati, an economist who focused on poverty, discrimination and the social responsibility of businesses, died on Sunday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications of cancer, his family said.


Patents; Ulcer Drugs May Help Mentally Ill
IN a textbook example of serendipity, a psychiatrist at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York City has discovered that a familiar class of anti-ulcer drugs may provide a potential treatment for a form of schizophrenia.
The results thus far are still preliminary and far from conclusive, cautioned Dr.
Ram Kaminski, the assistant professor of psychiatry who stumbled on the approach by happenstance.
Nevertheless, the initial results were surprising enough that the hospital quickly began formal clinical trials that are now under way.


For Queens Prosecutor, New Faces, New Disputes
In the half year since he took over as Queens District Attorney, Richard A. Brown says, he has spent much of his time getting ready: "restructuring" the office to give it more punch and starting "a number of major investigations."
He says he has infused the top ranks with new energy by bringing in outside talent and by promoting talented people who were already in the office when he succeeded John J. Santucci.
Mr.
Santucci retired June 1 after 14 sometimes-stormy years as the borough's chief prosecutor.


Tidings of Discomfort And No Joy Hit Nassau
When it came like a bolt at 4 P.M.
Thursday, the message to Diane Calabritto was enough to ruin any Christmas.
"You would think, at this time of year, some sense of kindness and charity would set in," said Ms.
Calabritto, a 43-year-old assistant detective investigator, who has worked in the Nassau County District Attorney's office for eight years.


A Move to Break World Trade Deadlock
After five tense years of negotiations over liberalizing world trade, the head of the world's principal trade organization sought to break the deadlock today with a proposed agreement that calls for cutting subsidies to farmers worldwide, phasing out import quotas on third-world textiles and giving more protection to patents and copyrights.
In piecing together the complex 500-page document, Arthur Dunkel, Director General of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, sought to present, on a take-it-or-leave-it basis, a package of compromises that would set rules for world trade well into the 21st century.
In effect, he cast himself as a binding arbitrator, hoping that GATT's 108 nations will go along, even though no nation would get everything it wanted.
Success Is Uncertain
Mr.
Dunkel is betting that the promised benefits of this complex agreement will be enough to persuade nations to ignore the intensive lobbying of the many special-interest groups that oppose certain provisions.
But whether he will succeed is far from certain.
Some negotiators said tonight that the continuing dispute over farm subsidies could torpedo the whole package.
And on Thursday, even before Mr.
Dunkel's plan was distributed, France's Agricultural Minister said his nation would seek to bury the Dunkel draft because he assumed it would go too far toward meeting Washington's demands to cut the subsidies.


Diplomats Without a Country; Life After the Fall: Representing Neither Soviet Nor Union
For Alexander Denisov, spokesman of the Soviet Mission to the United Nations, the rudest reflection of his country's disintegration came not from Washington, but at a discount electronics shop in Manhattan.
He went there a month ago to buy a stereo receiver, and was shocked when the salesman turned down the tax exemption card he carries as a diplomat.


Beukeboom Suspended
Rangers defenseman JEFF BEUKEBOOM received a somewhat unexpected four-game suspension yesterday from National Hockey League Executive Vice President BRIAN O'NEILL after a disciplinary hearing about a stick-swinging incident against the San Jose Sharks Monday night at Madison Square Garden.
With 14 seconds left in the third period, San Jose center PERRY BEREZAN raised his stick near the face of Beukeboom, who then swung his own stick at Berezan and missed.
Beukeboom received a match penalty.


Bridge
After a year of play, the 1990-91 Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship of the Greater New York Bridge Association ended Wednesday night at the Beverly Club, 130 East 57th Street.
The title went to the defending champions, Rick Zucker, Jim Krekorian, Warren Rosner, Steve Sanborn, and Mark and Stasha Cohen, who won by 21 imps against Michael Radin, Michael Kopera, Brad Moss, Jon Heller, and Bob and Jill Blanchard.
This was a rubber match, for each team had defeated the other once in earlier rounds.
Most of the margin of victory was accounted for by the diagramed deal, which seems to show that optimism pays and pessimism is punished.
The bidding shown, with Rosner and Sanborn sitting North and South, needs explanation.
One diamond by East was the Nebulous Diamond of the Precision System, showing no particular length in the suit.
West's two clubs was an artificial request for a major suit, and the sequel suggests that he would have been wiser to bid his spades.


Texas Adds 2 Assistants
Notre Dame defensive coordinator GARY DARNELL and Illinois offensive coordinator GENE DAHLQUIST were added to the staff of new Texas Coach JOHN MACKOVIC yesterday.


Union President Endorses Combining 3 Police Forces
A major obstacle to merging the New York City Police Department with the transit and housing police has been removed, with the president of the city's largest police union agreeing to support the move.
Phil Caruso, president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, which represents 20,000 city police officers, told Deputy Mayor Milton Mollen in a letter on Dec. 13 that the union now endorses a merger of the police forces and that "tremendous savings" would result from the consolidation.


Far From Bronx, Howe Is Arraigned and Released
The community where Steve Howe had come for solace from repeated drug problems has turned into the center of his latest nightmare.
The 33-year-old Howe, a reliever for the New York Yankees, was arraigned here today by United States Magistrate James H. Oleson on a Federal misdemeanor charge of possession of dangerous drugs.
Sheriff James Dupont of Flathead County, said that Howe was arrested on a Kalispell street Thursday afternoon while buying a gram of cocaine from a law-enforcement informant.


Today, the Motivated vs. the Moribund
The Giants will close their season here Saturday against the Houston Oilers, and Coach Ray Handley said it had come down to this: "The Oilers are playing for something. They have a lot of motivation. We have to be ready to play or we'll be embarrassed."
Last season, when the Giants won the Super Bowl, they were seldom embarrassed.
This season, Handley's first as the head coach, they have often played lethargically and are struggling with a 7-8 record.


METRO DIGEST
CUOMO DECLINES TO RUN IN 1992
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo announced that he would not run for President because of the lack of progress in finding a solution to the state's fiscal problems.
He ended 10 weeks of deliberation that had largely suspended the campaign for the Democratic nomination.
Pages 1 and 46.
NEW YORK CITY  HURDLE CLEARED IN POLICE MERGER
The president of New York City's largest police union has agreed to support the merging of the city's Police Department with the transit and housing police.
The city, which had put off the idea, can now begin seriously considering combining the three forces.
Page 23.
NEW DISTRICT ATTORNEY TALKS OF CHANGE
The Queens District Attorney, Richard A. Brown, says he has spent much of his first six months in office "restructuring" and starting "a number of major investigations." While judges and lawyers say it is too soon to assess the changes, he says he has infused the top ranks with new blood and energy.
Page 23.
FROM THE STREETS TO GRACIE MANSION
For one short night last week, 90 homeless women set aside the despair of life on the streets to attend a lavish Christmas dinner at Gracie Mansion.
They ate foie gras, salmon mousse and filet mignon.
Instead of foil or plastic trays, they dined with porcelain, silver and crystal.
Page 23.
A dispute erupts between jurors in the Meir Kahane murder trial.
Page 23.
REGION  HEARINGS BEGIN TO REPEAL TAXES
As bitter partisan fighting continued in New Jersey after the Senate approved five bills that would "sunset" the $2.8 billion tax package, the Assembly Appropriation Committee, still under Democratic control, began public hearings on a series of Republican bills that would repeal, rescind, replace or alter the package.
Page 25.
NEW JERSEY SCHOOLS' PIE IS SLICED
The Education Department in New Jersey released its school aid figures for next year, spelling out which half of the state's school districts will receive a bigger share of the $4.2 billion fund under the Quality Education Act and which half will receive less.
Page 25.
THE LONG ROAD TO PAY FOR THE THRUWAY
When President Bush signed a $151 billion transportation bill this week, Senator Daniel P. Moynihan won his 30-year battle to make the Federal Government repay New York for building the New York State Thruway, proving that political perseverance and seniority pay off.
Page 25.
LAYOFF NOTICES ARRIVE IN NASSAU COUNTY
The first of hundreds of Nassau County employees received notices that they will be laid off.
Those notices will be followed by several thousand others next year under steep budget cuts enacted on Monday by the county's Board of Supervisors.
Page 24.
STUDENT SODOMIZED, L.I.
POLICE SAY
A male student at Westbury High School was forced into a school bathroom on Thursday by five other students and then sodomized by one of them, the Nassau County police said.
The five suspects were arrested shortly afterward and were arraigned yesterday.
Page 25.
About New York 22  Neediest Cases 22


What Happened to Bormann's Plunder?
To the Editor:
In "Argentina's Nazi File Has Answers to Mystery"(letters, Dec. 7), R. H. Hodges and Gerald Posner obscure larger issues than the Argentine connection when they call on President Carlos Menem to release information on whether or not Martin Bormann walked the streets of Buenos Aires or deposited death-camp booty in that city's banks.


Review/Dance; Affectionate Tribute To Ailey Choreographer
Christmas came early to City Center, arriving on Thursday night with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater's sumptuous, loving tribute to Donald McKayle and his dances.
The dancers performed with extra intensity.
There were funny and poignant speeches by men and women who worked with Mr.
McKayle over his 40 years as a modern dance choreographer.
Then, at the very end, Mr.
McKayle strode onto the stage to join the dancers, accepting a bouquet from Judith Jamison, company director, and a standing ovation from the audience.
The dances celebrate black lives in an outstandingly gentle way.
Mr.
McKayle is not an overtly political choreographer.
The suffering and jubilation evoked in dances like "Games," "Rainbow Round My Shoulder" and "District Storyville" are universal.
The random violence against children that he portrays in "Games" remains at least as much a part of daily urban life as it ever was.
Mr.
McKayle does not make points, except in the subtlest ways, preferring simply to tell his story directly in fresh and luminous bright colors rather than by suggestion or preaching.


European Currency Revives an Old Coin
To the Editor:
One of the results of the European summit at tongue-twisting Maastricht, the Netherlands (the city's name means "Meuse Crossing," founded by the Romans as Mosae Trajectum), is the decision to establish a single currency by the end of this decade (front page, Dec. 10).


After Driver Passes Out, Boy, 12, Halts School Bus
A sixth-grader who is classified as having an attention disability is being credited with saving 33 classmates from injury by scrambling to stop a runaway school bus after its driver fainted.
The boy, Kenny Perrone, 12 years old, went to the side of the unconscious driver Wednesday when he slumped in his seat as he started to pull off U.S.
Highway 41 and into the school parking lot.


Koch Takes the Road to Recovery Right Back to Work


Winter Vacation Forecast: From Bleak to Cloudy
If "a sad tale's best for winter," as Shakespeare put it, the nation's travel industry is preparing to tell a bleak one.
In a sputtering economy, fewer Americans than usual are planning winter vacations.
And for those lucky enough to get away, economic necessity is forcing many to stay closer to home and return sooner than they would have wanted.


Review/Opera; For the Met's Centennial, A Gathering of Ghosts
It was the best of operas; it was the worst of operas.
It was an opera of wisdom; it was an opera of foolishness.
It was an opera of belief; it was an opera of incredulity.
With my apologies to Dickens for the litany, John Corigliano's "Ghosts of Versailles," with a libretto by William M. Hoffman, was deliberately all of these things when it received its world premiere on Thursday night at the Metropolitan Opera.
A roaring ovation was offered the work's creators.
This tale of the French Revolution with its death-crossed lovers, its purloined necklace, its musical invocations of Mozart, Rossini and the operatic tradition itself, was also a stunning success for James Levine, who commissioned the opera 12 years ago for the 1983 centennial of the Met.
He gave it an immaculately polished performance.
The company spared no expense in its (dare one say?) haunting and fantastical production by Colin Graham and its first-rate cast, including Teresa Stratas and Haken Hagegard.
For all my strong reservations about the work, the result was a beguiling entertainment that served to commemorate not only the Met centennial but the Mozart bicentennial and, rather sardonically, the 1989 bicentennial of the French Revolution.


Dangerous Bridge Exit Is Easily Improved
To the Editor:
For years I've been frighteningly aware of the easily corrected dangers of the first Brooklyn exit of New York City's Brooklyn Bridge, Cadman Plaza West, where cars and cabs illegally crisscross the tiger-striped area.
Exiting is treacherous, near-collisions are a constant.
Yet years of imprecations have been fruitless.
I've implored local officials (by now, two City Council members) and the Department of Transportation.


A Challenge To Maxwell's Directors
A battle for control of the Maxwell Communication Corporation erupted today after an English court appointed three partners of Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm, to be administrators of the bankrupt British company.
Also at today's court hearing, the lawyer for many of the banks with loans to Maxwell Communication suggested that some of the company's current executives might have been involved in Robert Maxwell's shifting of assets from the company to prop up his family-owned businesses.


U.S. Government to Pay for New York Thruway, 35 Years Late
WASHINGTON, Dec. 20 --
When Daniel P. Moynihan, then a professor at Syracuse University, went to the 1960 Democratic Convention, he fought for a plank in the party platform calling for the Federal Government to repay New York for building the New York State Thruway.
It was one of the few commitments John F. Kennedy's campaign managers declined to include in an almost bottomless grab bag of promises.
But this week Mr.
Moynihan received the $5 billion commitment.
Culminating a 30-year battle by the Senator, President Bush in Dallas signed a $151 billion transportation bill that includes authorization to pay New York $338 million a year for 15 years for having built the 570-mile highway, now the Gov.
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, and contributing it to the interstate highway system.
The money can be used for any transportation-related purpose.


5 Boys Charged in Sodomy Of Fellow Student at School
In an episode that shocked this community, a male student at Westbury High School was forced into a school bathroom on Thursday by five other students and then sodomized by one of them, the Nassau County police said today.
The five suspects were arrested shortly afterward and were arraigned today at First District Court in Hempstead on charges of sodomy.


Trenton Announces Round 1 of School Aid Reshuffling
The state Education Department today released its school aid figures for next year, spelling out the first round of cuts in aid to wealthy districts under the Quality Education Act, which is intended to equalize school spending between rich and poor districts.
Half of the state's 608 public school districts will get a bigger share of the $4.2 billion school aid fund, and the other half will receive less, while about 44 percent of the total in general aid is earmarked for 30 districts singled out by the courts as requiring special help.


End to Cambodian Embargo Seems Near
The Bush Administration appears to be on the verge of lifting a United States embargo on Cambodia that has been in effect since 1975, when Americans fled the advancing Khmer Rouge and their brutal restructuring of the nation.
Members of Congress, who have been urging the Administration to end the embargo since a Cambodian peace accord was signed in Paris on Oct. 23, say an announcement may be made to coincide with President Bush's trip to Asia beginning Dec. 30.
The State Department says only that action is expected "in the near future."


Nat Werner; Sculptor, 84
Nat Werner, an American sculptor, died on Wednesday at Cabrini Hospital.
He was 84 years old and lived in New York City.
He died after a long illness, his wife, Geri Pine, said.


Neighbor Held in Fatal Robbery Stabbing
A 51-year-old Brooklyn woman was stabbed to death in her apartment yesterday after waging a fierce struggle against a would-be robber, a 24-year-old woman who lived downstairs, the police said.
The younger woman then jumped six stories in an attempt to escape as officers battered down the door, the police said.


The Highest Ratings For 'Prime Time Live'
The first television interview with Patricia Bowman, the woman who accused William K. Smith of rape, pushed the ABC News program "Prime Time Live" to its highest rating ever on Thursday night.
The program usually finishes third in its time period, behind "L.A. Law" and "Knots Landing," but this week it finished first.
The program scored a 17.7 rating, well above its previous high of 14.2, which it reached in April with a show in which Diane Sawyer interviewed Marla Maples.
Ms.
Sawyer also conducted the interview with Ms.
Bowman.


Mutual Funds; Piercing the Volatility Myth
SOME investors shy away from funds that invest in stocks because they believe the stock market has become become more volatile in recent years.
While market professionals say volatility within the trading day has risen, average monthly volatility -- a more relevant measure for long-term investors -- has not.
As shown by the chart, which reflects statistics on the standard deviation of monthly moves of the Standard &amp; Poor's stock index since 1920, the October 1987 crash caused a big spike, but the peak was still no greater than in the mid-1970's.
Over 70 years, the average level of volatility has been no higher recently than the long-term norm, said H. Bradlee Perry, chairman of David L. Babson &amp; Company, an investment management and mutual fund group in Cambridge, Mass.


Making a Difference; Ms. Siebert Plays Santa
TWENTY-FOUR years ago this month, when Muriel F. Siebert became the first woman to buy a seat on the New York Stock Exchange, the demure, debutante-like image that appeared on the front pages of the nation's newspapers was distinctly at odds with the woman whom friends described as "bubbly and ebullient and fortyish."
In the intervening years, Ms.
Siebert has not given up her maverick ways.
She is still rattling cubicles on the Street, lately by giving away to charity half of her firm's "takedown" -- its fee for expenses and risk-taking from underwriting new debt and equity issues.
"Someone said to me, 'Mickey, you're doing this to embarrass us,' " Ms.
Siebert said.


CRIME
"On the Sunshine Coast that year, summertime was long and hot and dusty, and the world smelled of raspberries and roses," writes L. R. Wright in FALL FROM GRACE (Viking, $18.95), the fourth mystery in her atmospheric series set in western Canada.
Give it a chance, because the author takes her sweet time getting to the action; but eventually this luscious world will also smell of blood.
The coastal village of Sechelt is all agog when Bobby Ransome returns home after 10 years, most of them spent in jail.
Beaming charisma, Bobby unsettles his eccentric aunt and drives his former sweethearts to distraction.
"I tell you," one neglected husband complains, "the man's an infestation." No wonder people barely notice Steven Grayson -- who has also come home after a long absence -- until his body tumbles off a cliff and onto a beach.


Joanne Moore, Lawyer, Weds
Joanne Christine Moore, an associate at the law firm of Liddle, O'Connor, Finkelstein &amp; Robinson, was married yesterday to Ulysses Henry Howell Jr., a media supervisor at the Uniworld Group Inc., an advertising agency, both in New York.
The Rev.
Arthur Grayson, a minister of the nondenominational New York City Church of Christ, performed the ceremony at the Union Congregational Church in Richmond Hill, Queens.
Mrs.
Howell, 28 years old, graduated from Princeton University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Aileen J. Moore of Laurelton, Queens, a registered nurse, and Linval Moore of Kitchener, Ontario, Canada, a welder.


How to Stop Layoffs . . .
To the Editor:
In "More Layoffs? Hold the Applause" (Forum, Dec. 1), Gordon B. Pye says layoffs are a primary cause of recession.
To turn the situation around, he advocates "moral suasion from Washington" and a shift by decision-makers from laying people off to developing ways of generating higher revenue.


Foreign Millionaires in No Rush to Apply for Visas, U.S. Finds
The United States put its new "millionaire visas" on the market this month, offering American citizenships to big-time investors.
But it discovered that among the world's rich, there are not many takers.
After months of preparation and publicity, the Government has just issued its final regulations for the special visas, which offer permanent residency status to foreigners who invest $1 million or more in a business that employs at least 10 people.


America's in the Balcony as Europe Takes Center Stage
IS United States influence in Europe going the way of the dollar?
For much of this century, the mighty greenback was worth more than four Deutsche marks; today, it has sunk below 1.60.
Not that long ago, about the time when Stormin' Norman had flattened the last Iraqi berm, folks were celebrating the birth of a "unipolar" world in which one power towered above the rest -- and that was the United States.
But where is the United States today?


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
FASCINATING RHYTHM The Collaboration of George and Ira Gershwin.
By Deena Rosenberg.
Dutton, $29.95.


Great Artistry Goes CD-Less
To the Editor:
As welcome as it was to see Harold C. Schonberg's glowing, repeated references to Shura Cherkassky's teacher Josef Hofmann  [ "Cherkassky a Romantic? 'I Don't Know. I Only Play,' " Dec. 1 ] , it is distressing to realize that the recording industry has yet to release a single CD devoted exclusively to Hofmann's artistry.


Yugoslavia's Deadly Friday the 13th
THE Yugoslav civil war is turning into a Balkan vendetta.
After a generation of living together, Serbs and Croats are killing each other with increasing brutality as villager is pitted against villager, neighbor against neighbor.
Rumors of atrocities, many false or unprovable, fed the conflict in its initial stages.
Now the images have become gruesomely real.


CAMPUS LIFE: Connecticut; 3-Tier System For Dean's List Is Given a Try
A last-minute student-faculty compromise has created a temporary three-tier system for the dean's list at Connecticut College and ended at least for now a monthlong debate over higher academic standards.
The agreement, which passed with only one negative vote at a faculty meeting this month, stipulates that the college retain the current requirement of a 3.0 grade point average for the dean's list and add a 3.3 average for dean's honors and 3.7 for dean's high honors.
In 1995, when this year's freshman class is to graduate, the 3.0 designation will be dropped.


Spain Sets Up '800' Number
Anticipating widespread interest in the Olympic Games in Barcelona and Expo '92 in Seville, the Tourist Office of Spain, American Express and Iberia Airlines have set up a toll-free information line.
The number, (800) 772-4692, has English-speaking and Spanish-speaking operators.
Operators provide information on such areas as lodging, eating and attractions.


Style Makers; POTTER: Joan M. Platt
Nothing matches, exactly, in Joan M. Platt's matching tableware.
And so, in a set of hand-made plates or stew bowls, each item has individual curves, and if a client wants the same dish he or she ordered the year before, there's no guarantee.
"You never get the same effect twice," she said.
"I think an element of fun and pleasure should be associated with eating."


Wall Street; Three Companies, One Profile
HOLIDAYS are the time to gather with family and friends, to be generous with them and overlook their past shortcomings.
Unfortunately for unwary investors, some public companies practice that holiday spirit all year 'round in dealings with their officers and principal stockholders.
Three such cases are Fountain Pharmaceutical, Dimensional Visions Group Ltd. and the Keystone Medical Corporation.
All were brought to life, and to market, through the efforts of J. Morton Davis, the chairman of D.H.
Blair &amp; Company, a New York brokerage firm; Joseph Py, a Philadelphia investor, and Clark A. Marcus, a New York lawyer.


She Walks, She Talks


Oliver Ames Jr. Weds Miss Simmons
Elizabeth Bradlee Simmons, an English teacher at the Dana Hall School in Wellesley, Mass., was married yesterday to Oliver Filley Ames Jr., an associate at the law firm of Choate, Hall &amp; Stewart in Boston.
The Rev.
Rhys Williams performed the Unitarian service at the First and Second Church in Boston.
Mrs.
Ames, 27 years old, graduated from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Sarah B. Simmons of New Canaan, Conn., and Hardwick Simmons of Katonah, N.Y., the president and chief executive of Prudential Securities in New York.


Chocolate Concoctions to End the Meal
CHOCOLATE has strange properties.
It is said by some scientists to excite a chemical in the brain that produces a reaction similar to that brought on by a passionate love affair.
Others say chocolate gets to work on the mind the way strenuous exercise does: it relieves depression and makes one feel great.
Whatever its qualities, in my view, there is no better way to end a meal than with a dessert made from chocolate.
I like chocolate desserts that are rather plain, without a lot of rich pastry cream, frosting or marzipan, but gooey, dark and not too sweet.
When I was growing up my favorite was hot chocolate souffle.
My initial efforts to make it received a mixed reception -- it took me a couple of tries to figure out what was meant by folding in egg whites.
My first souffles rose nicely but came out piebald.


Via the Director's Viewfinder
To the Editor:
I am sorry that Tom Wicker, whom I respect as a journalist -- and who wrote so insightfully on President John F. Kennedy and so movingly about his death -- chose to attack my film "J.F.K."  [ "Does 'J.F.K.' Conspire Against Reason?" Dec. 15 ] .


Corrections
An article on Dec. 1 about Florence included an erroneous identification of a Pieta by Michelangelo obtained from the official catalogue of the Mu seo dell'Opera del Duomo, in Florence.
The work shown was an unfinished Pieta; the "Pieta Rondanini" is in Milan.


Country French Inn Reopens to Italian Fare
FANS of good food feel pangs of sadness on learning that a good restaurant has departed.
Such was our feeling when L'Hotellerie des Bois closed its doors in West Redding.
We were not terribly reassured to learn that a casual Italian restaurant had taken over the space across from the West Redding railroad station.
After all, it was created in the style of a French country inn, with white lace curtains at the glass doors of the small dining room, terra cotta floor, a low-beamed ceiling and a fireplace.
We wondered what would happen to this beautiful, romantic-looking place.


Meg Marion Is Wed in Rye
Margaret Wood Marion, the daughter of Mrs.
Haig Costikyan of Rye, N.Y., and the late Benjamin P. Marion, was married yesterday to Christopher Bryan Price, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lorne H. Price of Glen Cove, L.I.
The Rev.
Sharon H. C. Clayton, an Episcopal priest, officiated at Christ's Church in Rye.
The bride, 30 years old and known as Meg, is the national advertising manager of Parenting Magazine in New York.
Both she and the bridegroom graduated from Middlebury College.
Her stepfather is a senior executive editor at Matthew Bender Inc., a legal text publisher in New York.


Lucy Anne Coco Has a Wedding
Lucy Anne Coco, an associate in the law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson, was married yesterday to Nicholas Emil Brusco, a real estate lawyer, both in New York.
The Rev.
Joseph Martin, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Patrick's Church in Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
Mrs.
Brusco, 26 years old, graduated from Iona College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Giuseppe Coco of Yorktown Heights.
Mr.
Brusco, 30, graduated from Columbia University and received his law degree from Fordham also.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicola Brusco of Yonkers.


Business Diary
ECONOMY Earth to Washington: The Recession Continues
When Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, testified before Congress, last week he cautioned the House Ways and Means Comittee not to move hastily on a plan to cut taxes even though, he admitted, "the economy is struggling." Cutting taxes is a "quick fix," he said.
He also said he may have underestimated the country's economic woes.
The White House, with a new chief of staff, is worried about how the economy will affect President Bush's standing in the polls also changed its view about the economy.
"The recession continues," it said reversing its view that a turnaround had occurred.
On Friday, Mr.
Greenspan put those new insights into action.
The Federal Reserve pushed the discount rate, what the Fed charges banks for short-term loans, down a full percentage point to its lowest level in nearly 30 years -- 3.5 percent.
There is nothing like a looming election to focus the mind.
Little Hope From a Lower Prime
If banks can borrow more cheaply from the Fed, the argument goes, they can charge their best customers less when they drop by for a loan.
That should get the country going.
Last week at least part of that scenario played out.
The most aggressive banks in the country began cutting their prime rates. (Banks compete with each other to make loans, after all).
The first to cut its prime was Morgan Guaranty Trust &amp; Company, the nation's fourth largest bank.
It cut a full percentage point, to 6.5 percent from 7.5 percent.
But will cuts in the prime add enough snap to get the economy going?
"Not in the near term," said Mickey Levy, chief economist at CRT Government Securities.
"Monetary policy was already easy enough for an expansion." he said.
The real problems, Mr.
Levy said, have to do with debt-encumbered consumers and overbuilt real estate.
A Record Housing Bust
Buy a home and pretty soon you'll have to gussie it it up with everything from drapes to dishwashers.
That's why economists say the housing industry is a leading indicator for the rest of the economy.
But last week's numbers did not exactly presage a boom.
According to the Commerce Department, housing starts fell by 2.1 percent in November.
"We are now guaranteed the lowest annual total since World War II," said David F. Seiders, a housing industry economist.
Vox Populi or Else
Bedtime reading at the White House must be Lao-tse, the ancient Chinese philosopher who said the best way to lead a country is by following the voice of the people.
In September, the White House declared the recession over.
Then last week Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said "for all practical purposes the recession continues." The reason for the switch?
"The people of this country know that the economy is in trouble and it doesn't make any sense to play games," he said.
That's candor.
Reading the Economy's Entrails
For the economic mavens studying each minor move of the economy, last week's revision of the gross domestic product did not do much to calm their frazzled nerves.
According to the Commerce Department, G.D.P. inched up in the third quarter by a meager 1.8 percent.
Since recessions usually end in a torrent of growth -- 6.7 percent is average -- last quarter's figures put the recovery in doubt.
"It's a double dip," said Josh Stiles, an analyst at IDEA Inc., a research firm in New York.
Yet Another Bad Omen
Industrial output is the Government's gauge for measuring the tangible economy (it excludes services).
It even includes the output of the nation's mines.
After languishing for three months, industrial output fell by four-tenths of 1 percent, the Federal Reserve said last week.
That decline -- led by the automobile industry -- is worrisome because it forecasts further shrinkages in the labor force.
Business is not exactly infused with confidence right now, and its spending plans show it.
According to a survey by the Commerce Department, business plans to increase its capital outlays by a timid 5.4 percent next year -- half the rate in the 1980's.
COMPANIES Stempel Stymied
Paleontologists say it took nearly a minute from the time a dinosaur's tail was nipped to the time it felt the pain.
For the General Motors Corporation, that nip came way back in the 1970's when imports first started creeping in.
Since then, the No. 1 auto maker has been fumbling its way toward competitiveness by trimming jobs and output.
Last week, Robert C. Stempel, the company's chairman, said G.M. would become competitive by doing more of the same.
The company will trim its work force by 70,000 and close 21 assembly plants.
But Mr.
Stempel did not say which jobs or plants would go, casting a pall over the holiday season for the entire workforce.
With losses this year expected to be as high as $8 billion, Mr.
Stempel said he had to act.
"G.M. will become a much different corporation," he said.
Drexel's Joseph Gets a Rap
Last week, Frederick H. Joseph, the former chairman of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., admitted he probably hadn't done enough to supervise his firm.
It was on his watch that Drexel came to dominate the junk-bond business.
It was also on his watch that the firm collapsed and Michael Milken, the head of its junk-bond desk, was sent to jail.
For his errors, the New York Stock Exchange rapped Mr.
Joseph's knuckles -- very softly.
The Exchange censured him and barred him from associating with or owning a member firm for two years.
The agreement "is an appropriate resolution to a difficult issue," Mr.
Joseph said.
"One I can now put behind me so that I can go forward with my career." The settlement allows Mr.
Joseph to remain as a consultant to Drexel at $350,000 a year.
Obviously, This Guy Is No Joker
At least one investment is rising in value.
Comic books.
Last week at Sotheby's, Harold M. Anderson, the owner of a baseball museum based in Florence, Ala., paid $55,000 for the first Batman comic book ever printed.
Mr.
Anderson spent $229,845 on 21 books.
The Faith of American Express
With the travel business in a slump and so many airlines filing for bankruptcy, you have to have a lot of faith to spend $100 million to buy a travel agency.
The American Express Company must be imbued with it.
Last week it said it was buying closely held Lifeco, the nation's fifth-largest agency, with $1.20 billion in ticket sales.
American Express is the No. 1 travel agency, with $3.25 billion in sales.
With the acquisition, American Express will become twice the size of its nearest rival, the Carlson Travel Network.
That will give it extra clout to negotiate fares with the airlines -- the ones that stay in business, that is.
McDonnell Douglas Gets Choosy
Corporations are supposed to believe in the invisible hand of the market -- but in a pinch there's always the Government.
McDonnell Douglas announced it was shopping for a new site on which to build a factory for the MD-12X, its newest passenger jet.
Since it will employ about 10,000 workers, McDonnell Douglas wants a building that's roomy, on about 600 acres and adjacent to an airport.
But it also wants hundreds of millions of dollars in aid from state and local governments, including tax breaks and worker training programs.
Nine sites around the country are competing.
Sandoz Rides to the Rescue
When Sandoz Ltd., the big Swiss drug company, said it was acquiring 60 percent of Systemix Inc., for $391.8 million, it was part of a familiar pattern.
A group of sharp-minded scientists follow their ideas but suddenly need big money to commercialize them as products.
That's when the giants step in.
Systemix, is developing ways to separate stem cells from bone marrow cells for the treatment of cancer and AIDS.
INTERNATIONAL An Inharmonic Divergence
While the United States was pushing its interest rates down last week, the Germans were raising theirs.
In a global economy, that combination may not only be disharmonious, but downright dangerous.
The Bundesbank raised both of its key rates -- the Lombard and the discount -- by one-half of a percentage point.
That puts them at 9.75 percent and 8 percent respectively.
That's a tremendous spread compared with 3.5 percent discount rate and 6.5 percent prime rate in the United States.
Since investors seek the highest yields, many are expected to flee the dollar and buy German marks.
That could drag the dollar down sharply.
"The Germans made their move with total disregard for its impact on any other country," said Carl Weinberg, chief economist at High Frequency Economics in New York.
Letting the dollar fall a little, is not a catastrophe.
But "there is a one in three chance of the dollar going into free fall." If the dollar collapsed, "there is nothing we could really do to support it," he said.
Maxwell on the Defensive
Last week, the Maxwell Communications Corporation, the largest of the late Robert Maxwell's holdings and the one with the greatest presence in the United States, made a move that riled its British creditors.
The company filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
Maxwell Communications owes its creditors about $2.37 billion.
The move was aggressive and defensive.
Since Britain does not have a Chapter 11 law, filing in New York was designed to keep the company from being broken up by its creditors to pay back its loans.
Maxwell owns Macmillin Inc., the big publisher, and the Official Airline Guide, which publishes airline schedules.
After the filing, even Britain's most stiff-lipped bankers were concerned.
"We are absolutely livid," one of them said.
They haven't been that exercised since, well, Mr.
Maxwell was alive.
Any Way to Run an Airline?
Not only is the Soviet Union collapsing, running out of food and trying to determine who controls its tens of thousands of nuclear weapons but now Aeroflot, the world's largest airline, is running out of jet fuel.
Aeroflot, the national airline of a country that has all but ceased to exist, closed 92 major airports in the republics and announced that 38 others were on the verge of shutting down.
Passengers were left stranded throughout the Soviet Union.


Neediest Fund Aids Grandmothers Rear 2d Generation in New York
Violet J. has four children, nine grandchildren and six great-grandchildren, so she has had a sense of where her life should be by now, in her seventh decade of life.
She thought, for example, that she had got parenthood out of the way.
As it turns out, she has not.


How Final Curtain Fell on a 10-Week Melodrama
The melodrama that ended on Friday at the Capitol, where a grim Mario M. Cuomo declared that he was taking himself out of the Presidential race, began exactly 10 weeks earlier, at a breakfast meeting of 150 of his financial supporters at the Regency Hotel in Manhattan.
After months of issuing a standard refrain, that he had "no plans and no plans to make plans" to run, Mr.
Cuomo told his friends that he had at last concluded that he would "think about" a campaign for President.


When a Rose Is Really a Buttercup
MANY plants, particularly poinsettias, cyclamens, needled evergreens and hollies, are part of the Christmas tradition.
The holiday is filled with legends that intertwine with these plants.
Their stories are told and retold each year.
One tradition that has become a part of the commercialization of Christmas has caused a bit of confusion.
It is the naming of a particular flower as a Christmas rose, when it just isn't so.
This may be a good time to set the record straight.


Ms. Light Weds David Grimes
Libby Light, an account supervisor at J. Walter Thompson Company, and David MacKenzie Grimes, a lawyer, both in New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Herbert Anderson officiated at Brick Presbyterian Church in New York.
Ms.
Light, 29 years old, graduated cum laude from Amherst College.
She is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
A.
Light of North Bethesda, Md.
Her father is a surgeon and the director of organ transplantation services at the Washington Hospital Center.
Her mother is a real-estate broker with Prudential Preferred Properties in Bethesda, Md.


Samoan Islands Are Staggering From Big Cyclone
Tropical Cyclone Val, which lashed the Samoan islands for five days this month, has destroyed most of the food crops, disrupted economic activity and left thousands of people homeless, officials say.
The full story of damage done by the cyclone is only beginning to come out because telecommunications and electricity were disrupted.
International telecommunications were restored with Pago Pago in American Samoa on Dec. 12, almost a week after the cyclone struck the islands, and on Tuesday with the post office at Apia, the capital of Western Samoa, officials said.


Helping Fulfill Postgraduate Ambitions
"TWO years ago, I was living what I think of as a traditional suburban existence in Bedford," said Jean Farber, who is in her early 40's.
"My two children were both in school all day. I was doing volunteer work in the community, yet it wasn't enough. I didn't know what I was going to do with the rest of my life."
Today she does, after participating in an innovative program at Sarah Lawrence College that combines post-bachelor's degree study with adult internships.
Mrs.
Farber, who is married to a lawyer, recalled that what she had missed most was work.


Chocolate Concoctions to End the Meal
CHOCOLATE has strange properties.
It is said by some scientists to excite a chemical in the brain that produces a reaction similar to that brought on by a passionate love affair.
Others say chocolate gets to work on the mind the way strenuous exercise does: it relieves depression and makes one feel great.
Whatever its qualities, in my view, there is no better way to end a meal than with a dessert made from chocolate.
I like chocolate desserts that are rather plain, without a lot of rich pastry cream, frosting or marzipan, but gooey, dark and not too sweet.
When I was growing up my favorite was hot chocolate souffle.
My initial efforts to make it received a mixed reception -- it took me a couple of tries to figure out what was meant by folding in egg whites.
My first souffles rose nicely but came out piebald.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
KWANZAA IN YONKERS
The African-American cultural festival of Kwanzaa created in 1966 by Dr.
Maulana Karenga, a California professor, as a festival of African-American life, will be celebrated by the Yonkers Public Library Thursday through Dec. 31.


Dean Witter, Proving Itself at Retail
DEAN WITTER seemed to be left behind by the hectic 80's.
While the company sought to control costs, many of its competitors spent freely.
While it tended to individual investors, others courted giant institutional customers.
But now, Dean Witter executives are smiling.
So are executives at the parent, Sears, Roebuck and Company, to which Dean Witter contributed profits of $260 million in the first three quarters of this year, a robust 48 percent above year-earlier totals.


Let's End Practice of Research Servitude
To the Editor:
Your analysis of the David Baltimore affair at Rockefeller University, which tarnished the reputation of one of the country's greatest researchers, neglects an ethical lapse that contributed in no small part to the debacle: the common custom in the scientific community of a senior researcher's appending his name to a paper whose substance and grunt work have been performed by a junior staff member.


N.F.L. Needs AIDS Policy
To the Sports Editor:
At this point, the NFL leaves the option of AIDS testing up to the individual ("N.F.L.'s AIDS Policy? There Isn't One Yet," by Timothy W. Smith, The Times, Nov. 10).
I don't think you can do that anymore: Not a football game goes by in which players don't get cuts and scrapes.
If we don't test players for AIDS we are putting everyone, including other players, coaches, trainers and doctors, at risk.


Social Events
Party for GRAB
Dec. 23 -- Dancing and entertainment along with appearances by several New York Jets will be the elements of a party from 10 p.m. to 4 A.M. at Tatou, 151 East 50th Street.
The evening is for the benefit of Guidance, Referral, Academics and Beyond -- or GRAB -- an agency based in New Cassel, L.I., that seeks to steer school dropouts back to school or into one of several training programs.
Tickets, $15, at the door.
Information: (516) 997-1855.
Village 'Christmas Carol'
Dec. 24 -- For 25 years, the Ridiculous Theatrical Company has been a champion of the irreverent, with its frequently barbed look at the classics.
That will continue, with the company's Christmas Eve reading of Dickens' "Christmas Carol." The 7 P.M. benefit performance will be at the Charles Ludlam Theater, 1 Sheridan Square, at Seventh Avenue and West Fourth Street.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 921-7979 or at the door.
Debutante Ball
Dec. 28 -- With 38 young women from 11 countries and 13 American states, the annual International Debutante Ball will be held at the Waldorf-Astoria during a formal evening to benefit the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmens' Club of New York.
The evening is to start with cocktails and a receiving line at 7:30 P.M. followed by dinner, dancing and the presentation of the debutantes.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 861-5911.


Credit Cards Cost Exactly What They Say
To the Editor:
"Credit Cards Cost More Than You Think" (letter, Dec. 16) by Prof.
S.
A.
Ravid reflects fundamental misunderstanding of credit-card interest.


An Odd Couple's Flight In Musical 'Grand Tour'
BEHOLD the ritual the chanting of the prayer, the breaking of the glass -- during the second-act number "Mazel Tov" in the Forum Theater Group's production of "The Grand Tour."
The wedding scene in Jerry Herman's Broadway failure highlights this theater's twofold purpose: to revive unheralded musicals and to preserve Jewish themes.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Disappearing Peat
Q.
I am starting to feel guilty about using peat moss in my garden since I know that this is an ancient and nonrenewable resource.
Is there anything else I can use? -- Peter Jackson, Pittsburgh.


The Rules Governing In-House Behavior
WHEN residents at 870 U.N.
Plaza get a yen for stir-fried Chinese food, they have to send out for it.
Wok cooking is banned in the co-op at East 48th Street and First Avenue, which overlooks the United Nations enclave.
In Edgewater, N.J., a strictly enforced edict at Admiral's Walk, a condominium tower atop the Palisades, requires curtains, shades and blinds to be white or ivory.


POSTINGS: First 'Distinguished' Award; Real Estate Honor For Harry Helmsley
The legal cloud that has darkened the later years of Harry B. Helmsley's long career will never be lifted, as he was deemed mentally incompetent to stand trial on charges that he and his wife, Leona, had evaded some $1 million in state and Federal income taxes.
She was convicted, however, and is appealing the verdict.
But the Real Estate Board of New York, believing that a lifetime's work should not be eclipsed, is to present Mr.
Helmsley with its first Distinguished New Yorker Award, at its banquet Jan. 16.


A la Carte: Last Chance
THE name of the Last Chance Cafe conjures up images of cactus, sagebrush and tumbleweed.
A saloon where gunfighters of the Old West downed shots of rotgut before dueling to the death on the dusty streets of Durango and Deadwood.
The Last Chance Cafe this writer visited was not in the Lone Star State, but on Long Island, and its food is more Sicilian than Southwestern.


Jansen, Blair in Games Again
The speed-skating team that will represent the United States in the Albertville Olympics in February began taking tangible and familiar form Friday night when Dan Jansen and Bonnie Blair, both members of the last two Olympic teams, assured their places again with the fastest times in the 500-meter sprints.
Blair, the gold medalist in the 500 and bronze medalist at 1,500 in the last Olympics, also qualified in the 1,500, along with Mary Docter, who made her fourth Olympic team.
Eric Flaim and Brian Wanek qualified for their second team in the men's 1,500 meters.


Miss McNally Plans to Wed
Mrs.
Richard L. McNally of Flourtown, Pa., and Avalon, N.J., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Marilyn Joan McNally, to Neil Kahler Newsham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald F. Newsham of Chicago, Ill.
Miss McNally, 30 years old, is the daughter of the late Mr.
McNally.
She graduated from Marymount College of Virginia and is an account executive at Reimel Carter, a Philadelphia advertising agency.


When a Rose Is Really a Buttercup
MANY plants, particularly poinsettias, cyclamens, needled evergreens and hollies, are part of the Christmas tradition.
The holiday is filled with legends that intertwine with these plants.
Their stories are told and retold each year.
One tradition that has become a part of the commercialization of Christmas has caused a bit of confusion.
It is the naming of a particular flower as a Christmas rose, when it just isn't so.
This may be a good time to set the record straight.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the engagement of Ira Stuart Taub rendered the name of his fiancee incorrectly.
She is Shelley Rosen.


Tia Cudahy to Marry Next August
Judge and Mrs.
Richard D. Cudahy of Winnetka, Ill., have announced the engagement of his daughter Theresa Ellen Cudahy to Philip Joseph Deutch, a son of Prof.
John M. Deutch of Cambridge, Mass., and Samayla D. Deutch of Lexington, Mass.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cudahy, 27 years old, graduated from Amherst College and is a third-year law student at the University of Chicago.
She is known as Tia.
Her father is a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago.
Her stepmother, Dr.
Janet Cudahy, is an internist at the Women's Health Resources Clinic of the Illinois Masonic Hospital in Chicago.
Her mother was the late Ann Cudahy.


'Black Orpheus,' in a New Space
ONCE a year, at carnival time, Sweet Mout' Virgil comes down from the mountain to tell his tales and sing his songs among the ruins of a sugar plantation in Trinidad.
That's how he sets the theme for the celebration before Lent, and this year it's Greek mythology, though the singer's surname refers to the myth's Roman origin.
Such is the groundwork for the splashy world premiere of "Black Orpheus," the first production in the Crossroads Theater Company's spiffy new $4 million space.
The piece, by the playwright Oyamo, is a new variation of the oft-told and tampered-with story about the lyre-playing poet who is allowed to go to hell and back for his love, but messes up the resurrection of Eurydice by taking a forbidden look at her.


Jets-Dolphins Outlook As Pondered by Namath
Listen to Joe Namath and you can make cases for both the Jets and the Miami Dolphins, who will play Sunday for the National Football League's final playoff spot.
Namath, the former Jet quarterback who will serve as color analyst in NBC's telecast of the game, was at Miami's practice today at St.
Thomas University, squinting into the midday sun and offering plenty of opinons on the game.


Hard Realism Wins the Day
The formation of the commonwealth on the still-warm corpse of the union was hardly a pretty process.
But after six years of illusions and false starts, it had a certain crude realism to it.
It began with what was basically a power play by the leaders of the three Slavic republics, who met in a Byelorussian wood on Dec. 8 and devised a plan to overthrow the old union and declare a new league around themselves.


Ben Davidson, 90, a Co-Founder Of the Liberal Party in New York
Ben Davidson, a co-founder of the New York State Liberal Party and executive director when it was an occasionally pivotal force in state and local politics, died yesterday in the Guardian Rehabilitation Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 90 years old and lived in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He died of complications from myasthenia gravis, his family said.


Topics of The Times; An Unmerry Christmas From G.M.
There's no gentle way to announce the bad news of corporate retrenchment, but General Motors takes this year's prize for unnecessary roughness.
Seven days before Christmas, it told its 400,000 employees that it will close 21 plants -- it didn't say which -- in the next four years.
The company says it made the disclosure to head off escalating public speculation about its plans.
Others say it was rushing to head off the possibility that its debt securities were about to be downgraded by Wall Street's credit-rating agencies, thus raising the company's borrowing costs.


Ms. Lippmann To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Lippmann of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Valerie Anne Lippmann to Daniel Avery Doran Jr., the son of Marion A. Doran of Westlake Village, Calif., and the late Mr.
Doran.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lippmann, 36 years old, is the vice president of Anne Taylor Davis Communications, a fashion advertising and public relations concern in New York.
She graduated from Goucher College.
Her father is a purchasing agent for Pauline Trigere Inc., the women's clothes maker.
Her mother, Rosalie Lippmann, is a purchasing agent and the director of customer relations for Hirschberg Schutz &amp; Company, a wholesaler of clothes trimmings in Union, N.J.


Valvano Is Reported To Agree on Nets Pact
Is he or isn't he?
The Charlotte Observer says it knows for sure that JIM VALVANO has reached an agreement to become head coach of the New Jersey Nets and, according to the newspaper, the former North Carolina State coach can take over the Nets as soon as he wants.
However, the 45-year-old Valvano isn't expected to assume the post until after Christmas.
Valvano is believed to have agreed late Friday night to a five-year, $2.7 million contract, which would rank among the top half of N.B.A. salaries for head coaches.
Reached at his hotel room in Bristol, Conn., Friday night, Valvano refused to comment.


For McVie, Special Units Are Proving Spectacular
Coach Tom McVie of the Devils is convinced that the way hockey is played now --with officials calling penalties for very little reason, as he sees it -- special units are vital.
"Teams are spending more than one-third of their games playing special teams," McVie said before the Devils' game here tonight with the Chicago Blackhawks.
"If you want to succeed, you'd better be good in those areas."


11 SOVIET STATES FORM COMMONWEALTH WITHOUT CLEARLY DEFINING ITS POWERS
Eleven former republics of the Soviet Union formally constituted themselves today as the Commonwealth of Independent States, dedicated to reversing their slide toward economic and political chaos.
Putting aside seven decades of central dictatorship, the republic leaders meeting in the Kazakh capital, near the Chinese border, negotiated and signed a broad commonwealth agreement that guarantees their separate sovereignties but leaves unsettled such important issues as how to create an acceptable system of command to administer common military policy and nuclear weapons control.


U.S. Shouldn't Concede Asian Market to Japan
To the Editor:
Accolades for "Power of the Yen Winning Asia" (Business Day, Dec. 5).
American business faces an uphill struggle in East Asia and the Pacific, but it is not a struggle we should forfeit.
It is important to remember how much the Asia-Pacific market means to the United States.


Three Testaments To Nat (King) Cole
The career of Nat (King) Cole is as good a place as any to view the sprawl of American popular music in the 20th century.
Most worthwhile musical roads -- orchestral and small-group jazz, for example, and the distinctly American style of popular singing invented by Louis Armstrong -- led up to Cole, and he left a nicely contradictory legacy: both elevator music and hundreds of worthy musical disciples, from George Shearing to Ray Charles and countless other singers.
Even today's black pop, 40 or 50 years after the fact, owes much of its upward mobility to Cole.
The amount of his work alone warrants attention.
This year three box sets have arrived.
The largest is the mammoth "Complete Capitol Recordings of the Nat King Cole Trio" (Mosaic 138; 18 CD's, 27 LP's; Mosaic Records, 35 Melrose Place, Stamford, Conn. 06902).
Then there are two relatively puny sets: "Nat King Cole, the Trio Recordings" (Laserlight/Delta Music 15 915; five CD's; 2275 South Carmelina Avenue, Los Angeles, Calif. 90064) and "The Complete Early Transcriptions of the King Cole Trio: 1938-41" (Vintage Jazz Classics; VJC-1026/27/28/29-2; four CD's).
If anybody wonders about the viability of this music, the Cole estate makes more than half a millon dollars a year in royalties.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 8 about houses on Long Island that were used as movie locations mislocated Malmaison, the chateau once owned by the Empress Josephine.
It is in Rueil-Malmaison, a suburb of Paris.


Lifted Spirits
In 1983, four years after Karen Thompson exchanged rings with her lover, a high school gym teacher named Sharon Kowalski, a car accident left Ms.
Kowalski brain-damaged and paralyzed.
Ever since, Ms.
Thompson has fought with the woman's parents over who should take care of her.
It wasn't until 1988 that Ms.
Thompson, a physical education professor at St.
Cloud State University in Minnesota, won the right to visit Ms.
Kowalski in a nursing home.
But last year when Ms.
Kowalski's father said his health would no longer allow him to care for his daughter, a judge gave guardianship to Karen Tomberlin, Ms.
Kowalski's high school track and volleyball coach.
Last week an appeals court overturned the ruling and made Ms.
Thompson the guardian.
"Karen and Sharon talked today about what they were going to do to celebrate," said M. Sue Wilson, Ms.
Thompson's lawyer.
"Sharon doesn't have the short-term memory to remember what happened an hour ago, but she does remember Karen and the past, and that she is a lesbian."


250 Words Every 15 Minutes
TROLLOPE
A Biography.
By N. John Hall.
Illustrated. 581 pp.
New York:  Clarendon Press/ Oxford University Press. $30.


Sampling the Songbook of Rodgers and Hart
STOP fretting over the moribund state of American musicals.
Forget that the one and only new Broadway song-and-dance show with an original score scheduled for this season ("Nick and Nora") is already closed.
Never mind that one of Manhattan's glorious theaters (the Mark Hellinger, once the home of "My Fair Lady") was recently sold to the Times Square Church.
Or that writers who would otherwise be working for the stage are snared by Hollywood, and there they stay.
Think instead of how Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart, Broadway sophisticates, were lured to Tinseltown but escaped its inanities, knowing they could "turn Manhattan into an isle of joy" -- again -- and that they once had six new shows going in one season.
That was in 1926.


Hotel Chains Move to Meet New Law on Disabled
THE public-accommodations part of the Americans With Disabilities Act will start being enforced next month.
Is the hotel-motel industry now preparing to conform to requirements that it at first fought?
A large part of it is.
John P. S. Salmen, an architect who is head of University Designers and Consultants in Silver Spring, Md., a specialist in the field, said chains like Ritz-Carlton, Hilton and Sheraton were deeply involved in examining what they could and should do to welcome and provide for wheelchair users, the deaf, the blind and other guests with major disabilities.


Carolyn M. Campbell Is to Marry Mark Brzezinski, a Fellow Lawyer
Carolyn Margaret Campell, a lawyer, and Mark Francis Brzezinski, a Fulbright scholar, both in Warsaw, are engaged to be married in June.
Ms.
Campbell, 25 years old, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Connecticut with bachelor's and master's degrees in economics and French.
She has a law degree from the University of Virginia and is an associate with the New York law firm of White &amp; Case.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ian P. Campbell of Rowayton, Conn.
Her father is the engineering manager in Norwalk, Conn. for the Gruma Corporation, a Los Angeles-based food products manufacturer.


Moon and Oilers Left A Little Windblown
This place isn't like the Astrodome, where the wind is listed officially as 1 mile per hour.
No, outdoors in Giants Stadium today was an indoor quarterback's nightmare.
The winds swirled in Warren Moon's face at better than 30 miles an hour, and it was an opponent as much as the Giants, who produced a 24-20 victory over the Oilers.


New Belts for Justice
DAVID JUSTICE is getting a kick up on the new season.
The Atlanta Braves' outfielder is taking karate lessons from JOE CORLEY, a sixth-degree black belt, in hopes that the new discipline will help his coordination and limber his lower back.
A strained back muscle limited him to 109 games with the Braves last season.


A Flourishing Industry's Shining Star
IN the busiest period of the year for shopping, one retail chain that has been shining most brightly makes little use of the glitzy Christmas promotions so prevalent at department and discount stores.
The company, Costco, is in the prosaic business of running membership warehouse stores, the cavernous outlets that offer everyday products in large sizes while providing spartan service.
But if the Costco Wholesale Corporation's business is humdrum, analysts are excited by the fact that it is the fastest-growing company in the fastest-growing segment of retailing.
As the Dow Jones industrial average was drifting further from its record levels, Costco's stock hit its all-time high on Dec. 13.


'Hook' Deals Lavishly in Guilt-Edged Bonds
Rarely has the happy family been in worse shape than it is on movie screens this holiday season.
The mood may be festive, but dysfunction is everywhere.
In "The Addams Family," the children are intent on killing each other, much to their parents' delight.
In "The Prince of Tides," a man is forced to confront memories of a violent father and deeply dishonest mother, memories that have very nearly ruined his sister's life.
In "Cape Fear," a teen-age girl is the catalyst in making her parents examine the hollowness of their marriage.
And in "Bugsy," a father's efforts to celebrate his daughter's birthday are so scrambled and halfhearted that the candles on her cake burn out from sheer neglect.
There is also "My Girl," in which the heroine's mother is dead, her father is a mortician and her first little sweetheart is killed by a swarm of bees.
And "All I Want for Christmas" presents a sunny look at a household disrupted (though only mildly, since the film is so toothless) by the parents' divorce.


Holiday's Final Fling
AMONG the remaining Christmas programs is one being given this afternoon at 2 in the Blackstone Library in Branford by the Ensemble Singers of the town's high school.
"We in Branford are very proud of this group," said Peter Borgemeister, a volunteer for the library.
"The 22 members have been selected from the Branford High School Chorus, which performed in Carnegie Hall earlier this year, and the concert itself is a benefit to help cover expenses when the singers go to the West Sussex Youth Festival in England next April." Kathy Rothermel, choral director at the school, will conduct the program of Renaissance music and seasonal carols (488-3882).
Other choral concerts await at 4 this afternoon, in the Congregational Churches of New Britain and Old Greenwich.
In candlelit South Church in New Britain, Richard Coffey will conduct the Festival of Lessons and Carols, the program preceded by carols from the 1903 bell tower chimes and followed by an audience singalong.
The biblical passages of Christmas will be read by various members of the choir and community, with the organist David Westfall accompanying the anthems, carol settings and other music of the season (223-3691).


GRADY'S GIFT
It would be wrong to assume that all the old attitudes are gone, just because the Birmingham of today is peaceful and seems remolded.
This is not the case, as witnessed by the recent cross burning in St.
Paul, and the emergence of David Duke as a political force in Louisiana.
What has changed, however, is the passivity of people toward threats of injustice and discrimination, and Howell Raines's childhood experiences bring back to many of us this passage of attitude in the South of the 1950's.
CHARLES C. COX 3d
Lincoln, R.I.


Fielder Rejects Tigers' Offer
First baseman CECIL FIELDER rejected a four-year, $17 million offer from the Detroit Tigers.
Fielder, who is eligible to file for salary arbitration next month, thinks his two-year numbers -- 95 home runs and 265 runs batted in -- should receive compensation similar to the five-year, $29 million contract BOBBY BONILLA got from the Mets, The Oakland Press of Pontiac, Mich., reported.
Fielder, who was paid $1.75 million this year, wasn't eligible for free agency. (AP)


Q and A
Legal Fees in a Purchase Question: I have heard that the legal fee for a real estate purchase is 1 to 1.5 percent of the purchase price.
Is this what lawyers charge? . . .
Debbie Weinstein, Manhattan Answer: Some do, but all legal fees are negotiable costs.
"Many lawyers and firms, including mine," said William J. Lippman, a lawyer specializing in real estate matters, "believe the fairest fee structure is an hourly rate based on the time spent on the work."


FROM VICE TO NICE
I was astonished to see so many happy homesteaders on the fringes of Las Vegas in Trip Gabriel's article "From Vice to Nice" (Dec. 1).
Gabriel might have investigated another story only 60 miles away, at the Department of Energy's Nevada test site.
According to the Las Vegas-based American Peace Test Organization, the Department of Energy explodes nuclear devices on a regular basis there, and what this is doing to the environment and geology of the region is not clearly known.
Over 900 of these underground explosions have registered on the Richter scale over the past 10 years, but I doubt if any developer would mention such volatile neighbors.
JANET C. MILLS
Staatsburg, N.Y.
ILS&gt;Photo of a family that just moved in the Las Vegas suburbs. (Photograph by David Graham/Black Star for The New York Times)


We Need National Standards for Those Who Give Child Care; Training Programs
To the Editor:
Parents concerned about the sad state of child care, as portrayed in your Dec. 9 article on the nanny business, may get in touch with the American Council of Nanny Schools, Delta College, University Center, Mich., for a list of approved schools.


Review/Pop; Slowed but Never Dragging, Metallica Shows Its Muscle
Metallica aims its music straight for the gut.
The pioneering speed-metal band has honed its music for clean-lined impact, without distortion or many other distractions from a pummeling beat, jackhammer rhythm-guitar chords, grim lyrics and bare-boned tunes.
James Hetfield's lyrics distill adolescent rage, fear, confusion, distrust of authority and obsession with death into telegraphic verses, and the music hurls them at listeners.
By sharing what had been nearly unmentionable, Metallica has become one of the most popular cult bands, filling arenas with fans who know every word.
Yet in its current tour, which opened a three-night stand at Nassau Coliseum tonight, Metallica still has something to prove.
Its fifth album, "Metallica" (Elektra), which zoomed to No. 1 in its first week of release, moves away from the band's distinctive high velocity and whiplash tempo and meter changes to bash out more basic hard-rock riffs.
The band has to show longtime fans, who prize the group for its purity and forcefulness, that it has not grown slack.
While tonight's set had a slower average tempo than previous tour shows did, Metallica showed that its muscle was intact.


Sex? Viewers Are Shocked. Shocked!
The age of X-rated educational television has arrived, with flourishes.
The William Kennedy Smith rape trial and the Senate committee hearings on Anita F. Hill's charges against Judge Clarence Thomas may have owed their popularity to the spicy nature of the encounters.
But viewers who managed to keep their calm, while all around them were being titillated by uncommonly explicit discussions of common doings, could glimpse matters that are usually treated in drier fashion.
There was much to be noted about the interplay of money, class, race and gender in America today.
Alert viewers could see how Kennedy money and power play to a nation of outsiders looking in, through the tube.
They could see class differences being used to influence a society that often deludes itself into thinking it is classless.
They could see expectations of black failure, based on long experience and ingrained assumptions, upset by displays of education and success.
And they could be even more confused than usual by the mixed messages about sexual relations that have for some time been sent forth by television.
And so unlike the packaged goods that fill television, most of these events came through unedited, unpolished, raw.
They made "The MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour" seem like junior high school.


GRADY'S GIFT
It was with joy and hope that I read Howell Raines's article "Grady's Gift" (Dec. 1).
Raines's integrity shines through the story of his family and his friendship with Grady Hutchinson and the things he learned from her.
We are living at a time when those courageous enough to blow the whistle and tell the truth about corruption and dishonesty are seldom rewarded.
To paraphrase the words of Thurgood Marshall when he resigned from the Supreme Court: "Vipers come in all colors." Howell Raines reminds us that people of integrity come in all colors, too.
JEANNETTE BERNSTEIN
Cranston, R.I.


Defendants Increasingly Skip Bail
THE growing number of criminal defendants who are indicted, arrested, released on bail and never return to court to stand trial is putting an additional strain on the state's criminal-justice system, law-enforcement officials and representatives of an advocacy group say.
The officials attribute the increase in fugitive defendants, in part, to prison overcrowding, which has caused judges to set ineffectively low bail.


The Atchison, Topeka And the Bullet Train
THE nine railroad books sitting on my desk -- a sampling from the cream of the latest crop -- are extraordinary documents: bold and buoyant and some of the first fruits produced by the emerging post-interstate approach to transportation thinking.
This approach is a collaborative process that looks ahead a generation or so to a unified network of transportation links in North America, a system in which high-speed trains, medium-speed trains, light-rail lines, scenic roads, bicycle paths and even hiking trails will have taken on the same importance the interstates and the airports have already assumed.
Similarly, an open-space group based in Washington wants the country to designate and preserve at least 10 percent of the highways we already have as a national system of scenic back roads.
And the National Park Service's 1990 National Trails Agenda Project recommends "that a trail exist within 15 minutes of most Americans' homes."


CORRECTION
An article about wind shear on Nov. 24 inaccurately described a detection system being developed by the Lockheed Corporation.
The system uses lasers, not microwaves.


Consciousness Explained?
To the Editor:
In order for a computer to win the Turing Test by fooling a panel of judges into thinking it is a person, human intelligence will have to further decline to the level of machine intelligence.
We are coming close.
Two live contestants in a recent version of the test mistook the bromidic prattle of their programmed opponents for human reflection.
Daniel C. Dennett, who is the chairman of the committee that will award the prize, says, "I could unmask any computer in a minute." What's hard to understand here is his modesty.
A whole minute?
I'm betting that some
thing,
maybe even an economy model from Radio Shack, will collect the $100,000 before the next Presidential election.
JULIAN MOYNAHAN Princeton, N.J.


POLLUTION LIMITS DEBATED FOR CARS
State air pollution regulators and representatives of the automakers squared off for a debate Wednesday over whether New York should adopt California's tough standards on tailpipe pollution, and succeeded in making the audience, about 80 auto dealers, very nervous.
But perhaps because of heightened environmental consciousness among their customers and among the dealers themselves, the New York State Automobile Dealers Association has not taken a position on the rules.
The reason, one dealer suggested, is that the people who sell cars do not trust either the Government or the auto manufacturers.


... The Fat on the White-Collar Side
To the Editor:
To suggest corporations stop layoffs so workers have income to support purchases from other corporations is ridiculous ("More Layoffs? Hold the Applause").
Such an act of goodwill will bankrupt corporations over time, hurting the economy.
What's more, most of the current white-collar layoffs have little to do with the ups and downs of the business cycle; they are the result of the buildup of large administrative bureaucracies during the 50's, 60's and 70's.


Miss Carlson Plans to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
Dean L. Carlson of Westfield, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Anne Carlson to Barratt Heywood Jaruzelski, the son of John J. Jaruzelski of Westfield, and the late Katharine H. Jaruzelski.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Carlson, 30 years old, is a senior account executive with Arts and Communications Counselors, a New York public relations firm.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Westfield.


Consciousness Explained?
To the Editor:
As an assistant professor of psychiatry, I think George Johnson's review of the diverting but ultimately reductionistic and tendentious tract "Consciousness Explained" by Daniel C. Dennett (Nov. 10) proves the acolyte as wrongheaded as the mentor.
Facile analogies of the mind to a computer are fashionable nowadays because computer science is in its heyday, just as Freud's hydraulic model of the mind became fashionable for a time in part because thermodynamics was a prime scientific development of the late 19th century.


The Cocaine War's Biggest Success: a Fungus
In the war on cocaine, a humble root fungus is having a greater impact on Peru's coca leaf harvest than the will of Washington.
Leaving a trail of wilted bushes in its path, the fungus, a strain of fusarium oxysporum, has devastated about 10 percent -- or 15,000 acres -- of the coca fields in the Upper Huallaga Valley over the last two years.
Bushes in the valley provide leaves for about half the world's cocaine production.


The Price of Health: When Doctors Chase Miracles - A special report.; Costs and Hope Battle in Intensive Care Units
The first of November, five days after a car accident broke nearly every bone in his body, the Rev.
Clair Frederick Yohe, 87 years old, lay semiconscious in the surgical intensive care unit of the Albany Medical Center.
Given his advanced age, the multitude of broken bones, the collapsed lung and the lacerated internal organs, doctors had known from the start that he had scant chance of surviving.
Yet every one of his injuries could in theory be fixed, and his brain was intact.
So the doctors and nurses were doing everything they could, and doing it well.


For God and Richard Nixon
A PROPHET WITH HONOR
The Billy Graham Story.
By William Martin.
Illustrated. 735 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company. $25.


Trouble Aside, G.M. Keeps on Truckin'
CAR nuts do nutty things. Just ask.
There was me, for example, 30 years ago, down in the gravel with my reel-to-reel Webcor, hunkered with the microphone behind Jake Baer's 2-year-old Chevrolet Corvette.


Miss Gerstell To Wed in June
Barbara K. Gerstell of Greenwich, Conn., and A. Frederick Gerstell of Beverly Hills, Calif., have announced the engagement of their daughter Daphne Ford Gerstell to Thomas Wilson Eglin Jr., a son of Mrs.
Thomas W. Eglin of Lawrenceville, N.J., and the late Mr.
Eglin.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Gerstell, 25 years old, graduated from Connecticut College, as did her fiance.
She is a student at the Gately/Poole Acting Studio in New York.
Her father is chairman and chief executive officer of Calmat Company, a construction supply company in Los Angeles.


Chills, Spills, Cavorting Mice
WEDNESDAY: God's Love We Deliver was the beneficiary of a party at Gallery Stendhal.
Artists had collaborated with fashion designers, using the designers' shirts as canvases.
The results will be sold through the Saving Grace Boutique, 220 East 60th Street.
God's Love We Deliver prepares and delivers hot meals to homebound people with AIDS.
TUESDAY: B. Gerald Cantor, the art collector and financier, celebrated his 75th birthday in a forest of glittering white and silver trees at the St.
Regis Roof.
His wife, Iris, invited 300 friends.
A birthday cake was topped with a chocolate reproduction of "The Thinker" by Rodin.


On Installing Dowels In New or Old Pieces
DOWELS, wood pegs that act like nails or screws but are held in place by glue, are used to fasten furniture, even antiques.
Expertly installed dowels usually create stronger longer-lasting joints than metal fasteners.
But no matter how well installed, they may break if loosened by age or abuse of the furniture.
Repairing dowel joints is not too difficult for those with moderate woodworking experience and the right tools.
The chief requirements are patience and careful workmanship.
Fine and antique furniture should be repaired by a professional restorer.


Moving Toward Justice, One Step at a Time
Social commentary has long played a distinctive role in modern dance.
But the broad strokes and bright, passionate colors of early protest and commentary have been largely replaced by more subtly nuanced work.
That was the message, at least, of a group of dances by Marta Renzi and Amy Pivar presented by the Danspace Project last month at St.
Mark's Church.
One of the most provocative programs of the year, it also made a case for social commentary as a healing force, whether through the breadth and warmth of Ms.
Renzi's choreographic voice or through Ms.
Pivar's barely mediated rage.
Early modern-dance choreographers kicked over the ballet barre out of a need, in part, to create works about themselves and the world they lived in.
Early in this century, in her "Marseillaise" and "Marche Slave," Isadora Duncan threw in her lot with revolutionaries everywhere.
In 1933, Ted Shawn started a company of male dancers to prove that dance was not only a woman's art.


Ms. Daniels to Marry
Dr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Daniels of Oakhurst, N.J., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Barrie H. Daniels, and David C. Markowitz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Erwin G. Markowitz of Worcester, Mass.
Ms.
Daniels, 26 years old, is an assistant manager at American Express Travel Related Services, and Mr.
Markowitz, 29, is a vice president of Etkin &amp; Company, a mergers and acquisitions advisory concern, both in New York.
Both graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and have M.B.A. degrees from New York University.


New Yorkers, etc.
Sometimes -- who knows how these things come to be -- one can tell instinctively that no matter how magnificent the wrapping paper, no matter how breathtakingly big the bow, within the box itself under mounds of tissue lurks what may very well be the Ugliest and Most Unwanted Gift in the World.
Properly prepared to be the recipient of such an item, one can wing it and fib a polite "how thoughtful of you" or some such generic phrase.
The real danger occurs on those occasions when the warning voice has malfunctioned, and under the watchful eyes of the gift-giver, one unwraps an Unexpectedly Ridiculous Present.
What to say?


Lifted Melody
Critics can talk all they want about rap music as a post-modern pastiche of borrowed sounds, but when the songwriter Gilbert O'Sullivan learned that his sentimental ballad "Alone Again (Naturally)" had been excerpted on the singer Biz Markie's latest album, "I Need a Haircut," he decided it was a question for the lawyers to decide.
In the rap world, borrowing a piece of music is called sampling.
Mr.
O'Sullivan's song, which was No. 1 on the Billboard charts for six weeks in 1972, has been recorded by Andy Williams, Ray Coniff, Sarah Vaughan and other singers who obtained the rights.
But Mr.
O'Sullivan contends that Biz Markie used eight bars of the song without permission.
Last week a Federal judge in Manhattan concluded that there was abundant evidence that the singer violated Mr.
O'Sullivan's rights.
He referred the case to the United States Attorney for prosecution and issued an injunction barring distribution of the album and ordering the return of unsold copies.
A lawyer for the singer said he would appeal.


The Future Is Now, With Russia Unready
LAST week would have been the 85th birthday of Leonid I. Brezhnev, the late Soviet leader who presided over 18 years of what is now called, longingly by some, the era of stagnation.
Stagnant it was.
But in these days it is also recalled as a time when, in the words of a popular wisecrack, "We lived as if under Communism."


60 Songs That Sting and Effervesce
STOP fretting over the moribund state of American musicals.
Forget that the one and only new Broadway song-and-dance show with an original score scheduled for this season ("Nick and Nora") is already closed.
Never mind that one of Manhattan's glorious theaters (the Mark Hellinger, once the home of "My Fair Lady") was recently sold to the Times Square Church.
Or that writers who would otherwise be working for the stage are snared by Hollywood, and there they stay.
Think instead of how Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart, Broadway sophisticates, were lured to Tinseltown but escaped its inanities, knowing they could "turn Manhattan into an isle of joy" -- again -- and that they once had six new shows going in one season.
That was in 1926.


Ozone Rules Said to Be Outdated
OUTMODED guidelines for ozone in New Jersey are disguising a serious public health problem that is adversely affecting the breathing of half of the state's residents, air quality experts say.
In scientific meetings and public hearings over the last six months, these experts, from both the private and governmental sectors, have reviewed new medical evidence indicating that even healthy adults who exercise outdoors and children at play are suffering varying degrees of wheezing, allergic and asthmatic symptoms and permanent lung damage attributable to high ozone levels.


Liane Lamere Has Wedding
Liane Strickland Lamere, a daughter of Mrs.
James R. Lamere of Duxbury, Mass., and the late Mr.
Lamere, was married yesterday to James Philip Seppala, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Seppala of Duxbury.
The Rev.
Michael Marrone, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
John the Evangelist Church in Duxbury.
The bride, 30 years old, is a marketing representative for Prime Computer in Framingham, Mass., and a graduate of Smith College.
Her father was an editor and columnist for The Boston Herald American and the senior public relations officer of the United States Naval Reserve.


When a Rose Is Really a Buttercup
MANY plants, particularly poinsettias, cyclamens, needled evergreens and hollies, are part of the Christmas tradition.
The holiday is filled with legends that intertwine with these plants.
Their stories are told and retold each year.
One tradition that has become a part of the commercialization of Christmas has caused a bit of confusion.
It is the naming of a particular flower as a Christmas rose, when it just isn't so.
This may be a good time to set the record straight.


Ms. Heifitz Wed To Brian Caesar
Lauren Elise Heifetz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Saul Heifetz of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y., was married last night to Brian William Caesar, a son of Miriam Caesar of Miami, and the late Jay M. Caesar.
Rabbi Louis H. Frishman officiated at the Hotel Westbury in New York.
Mrs.
Caesar, 30 years old and a commercial litigator for the New York law firm of Santangelo, Santangelo &amp; Cohen, graduated magna cum laude from Boston University and received her law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
Her father is the president of HEI Development, builders in Chestnut Ridge.
Her mother is a secretary in the office of the vice president of Rockland Community College.


Tracie Fream Weds Cary Noel
Tracie Morin Fream, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David W. Fream of Middletown, N.J., was married yesterday to Cary Wade Noel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James B. Noel of Cadiz, Ky.
The Rev.
Robert Bulman officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in New Monmouth, N.J.
The bride, 28 years old, is a senior communications representative for the Ohio Hospital Insurance Company in Columbus, Ohio.
She graduated from Ohio State University.
Her father retired as an advertising and public relations manager of Westvaco Corporation, a paper company in New York.
Her mother, Suzanne, is the coordinator of special education at Thompson Middle School in Middletown, N.J.


South Asian Leaders Declare Poverty to Be a Top Priority
Leaders of seven South Asian nations with a billion of the world's poorest people declared today that they would make fighting poverty a top priority and said economic rights were as important as human rights.
"We have been able to make far-reaching decisions," said President Ranasinghe Premadasa of Sri Lanka in his closing remarks at the end of the one-day meeting.


Jets-Dolphins Outlook As Pondered by Namath
Listen to Joe Namath and you can make cases for both the Jets and the Miami Dolphins, who will play Sunday for the National Football League's final playoff spot.
Namath, the former Jet quarterback who will serve as color analyst in NBC's telecast of the game, was at Miami's practice today at St.
Thomas University, squinting into the midday sun and offering plenty of opinons on the game.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Dec. 7  MANHATTAN  Battery Park City 187,000
380 Rector Place  (Liberty Terrace)  663-sq.-ft. alcove studio-condo in a 5-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, balcony, Hudson River view; common charge $366, taxes $1,200 (Broker: Battery Park City Realty)  Fort Washington 72,250
200 Pinehurst Avenue  (Tryon Towers)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 725-sq.-ft. co-op; dining foyer, sunken-living room, 2 exposures; maintenance $534, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Simone Song Properties)  Greenwich Village 525,000
200 Mercer Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,700-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, fireplace, 14 1/2-ft. ceilings, 2,200-sq.-ft. private roof deck; maintenance $1,127, 50% tax-deductible (Brokers: William B. May - Eychner Associates)  Greenwich Village 295,000
35 West 9th Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 975-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; part-time doorman, fireplace, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,051, 38% tax-deductible (Broker: Sheila Cornacchini Real Estate)  SoHo 940,000
85 Grand Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 3,600-sq.-ft. co-op; elevator, 17-ft. ceilings, 1,300-sq.-ft. mezzanine; maintenance $1,320, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Court International Realty I.B.C.)  Upper West Side 195,000
410 Central Park West (101st St.)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 970-sq.-ft. co-op; 24-hr. doorman, renovated kitchen and bath, Central Park view; maintenance $856, 27% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  BRONX  Riverdale 93,000
640 West 239th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,050-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, eat-in kitchen; 100% owner occupied; maintenance $534, 52% tax-deductible (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  South Bronx 140,000
673 Jefferson Avenue  2-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement; 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $700 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope 138,500
576 5th Street  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. duplex co-op; dining room, recreation room, windowed kitchen, private rear garden; maintenance $498, 65% tax-deductible (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  Windsor Terrace 158,000
811 Greenwood Avenue  2-family, attached, brick house; dining room in one unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath, den, eat-in kitchen in each; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Mary Anne Barron Realty)  QUEENS  College Point 208,000
24-11 15th Avenue  2-family, detached, aluminium-sided house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; hospitality suit; 3-car garage; 35- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Jamaica Estates 22,000
175-20 Wexford Terrace  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 852-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, terrace; maintenance $634, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Century 21/Elms Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Eltingville 145,000
77 Bartlett Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached frame house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/ Schlott Realtors)  Westerleigh 154,000
31 O'Connor Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, frame Colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 25- by 125-ft. lot; taxes $1,059 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


U.S. Shouldn't Concede Asian Market to Japan; Job Discrimination
To the Editor:
Allegations by Prof.
Yoshi Tsurumi in "A New McCarthyism" (letter, Dec. 2) that I influenced the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to "punish Japanese companies regardless of the merits of the complaints" are off the mark.
His charge that the commission denied him a consultancy because his criticism angered me is absurd.


Topics of The Times; An Unmerry Christmas From G.M.
There's no gentle way to announce the bad news of corporate retrenchment, but General Motors takes this year's prize for unnecessary roughness.
Seven days before Christmas, it told its 400,000 employees that it will close 21 plants -- it didn't say which -- in the next four years.
The company says it made the disclosure to head off escalating public speculation about its plans.
Others say it was rushing to head off the possibility that its debt securities were about to be downgraded by Wall Street's credit-rating agencies, thus raising the company's borrowing costs.


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
DIANNE FYFFE-WASHINGTON knocks on a front door so hard that the glass rattles, and no one inside but the deaf or the desperate would dare say they didn't hear her.
This morning, as on every weekday morning, she is at Carl Johnson's door on 13th Avenue and South 19th Street, one of Newark's lost neighborhoods.
Mr.
Johnson, a 46-year-old rail-thin former farmer, opens the door smartly and nods in silent recognition.
He and Mrs.
Fyffe-Washington have known each other since last June, when he was hospitalized with a shattering cough.
Doctors told him then he was one of a growing number of inner-city residents with tuberculosis, the disease that had once nearly disappeared but was making a comeback.


Coins
Clue: Think Like Christie
Medals have come a long way in the last few years.
Gone are the round flat castings, which look like something Lincoln would have presented to Grant.
Instead, medals are miniature sculptures.
A recent medal by Marika Somogyi shows a technique both imaginative and apropos.
The medal celebrates the mystery writer Agatha Christie, and it is a bit of a mystery itself.


POSTINGS: Enhancing Life for Homeless Adults; A City-Built S.R.O. for the Bronx
Single-room-occupancy housing is most often associated with grim hotel living.
But in the spring New York City will break ground for an $18 million S.R.O. residence that is expected to enhance life for 200 homeless adults.
The residence, being developed by the Department of General Services and the Human Resources Administration, will go up at 1075 Webster Avenue in the Morrisania section of the Bronx.


Let's End Practice of Research Servitude
To the Editor:
Your analysis of the David Baltimore affair at Rockefeller University, which tarnished the reputation of one of the country's greatest researchers, neglects an ethical lapse that contributed in no small part to the debacle: the common custom in the scientific community of a senior researcher's appending his name to a paper whose substance and grunt work have been performed by a junior staff member.


CAMPUS LIFE: Virginia; Undergraduates Drink Heavily, Survey Discloses
A survey of 1,109 undergraduates at the University of Virginia has found that nearly half of them are heavy drinkers.
But campus officials say that many of the university's 11,000 undergraduates are trying to help the school shed some of its longstanding drinking traditions.
Coming just months after a well-publicized drug raid, a fatal drunken driving accident involving one university student and the alcohol-related drowning of another, the survey also found "a clear connection" between heavy drinking and certain kinds of crime and unsafe behavior common to college campuses.
Spokesmen for the university's Institute for Substance Abuse Studies, which conducted the survey, said that more incoming freshmen are starting to drink before they even reach the university.


Jansen Battles the Vision of Disasterous '88 Spills
For an athlete, the defining moments of a career can come at any time and with any result, and beyond them, along the continuum of a career, the performer then projects a certain fixed image in the public mind.
For Dan Jansen, the speed skater who on Friday night qualified for the United States Olympic team for a third consecutive time, one such moment lingers as a snapshot of incredulity.
It came in the Winter Games in Calgary, Alberta, nearly four years ago when his skates betrayed him, leaving him splayed at a turn on the ice, sliding into the restraining wall, then shuddering in stunned disbelief.
He had been favored to win a medal in the race, a 500-meter event, possibly the gold.
Now this.


Alcohol, Sports Just Don't Mix
To the Sports Editor:
In "What's Baseball Without Beer?" (The Times, Oct. 25), Robert Lipsyte states: "Baseball will never come down heavily on alcohol abuse, among players or in the stands, so long as the sport floats on a river of beer."


In the Nation; What's To Debate?
Mario Cuomo warned the nation that he would not run for President unless New York's massive budget crisis was resolved first.
Those who thought he was merely playing games found out last week that he meant what he said.
That's a welcome change from the usual political double talk and deniability.
But there's no use pretending, as some Democrats are doing, that the party's chances for 1992 have not been hurt.
Mr.
Cuomo would have been the most commanding and articulate figure the Democrats could have put up -- and articulateness is one quality, among many, badly needed in the White House.


Sports of The Times; But What Do You Really Think?
THE other night, I watched a young basketball player named Kenny Anderson commit four mental mistakes within 10 seconds, which is not easy, if you think about it.
First, he lost the ball out of bounds because he was being hounded in backcourt.
Then he moped, and let himself get burned for a quick layup.
Then he dribbled upcourt and flung the ball toward the basket while there were still a couple of ticks left on the clock.
Then he stumbled toward the Nets' bench while Coach Bill Fitch was talking, and gazed into the upper deck, no doubt admiring the new decor in the Garden.


U.S. Shouldn't Concede Asian Market to Japan
To the Editor:
Accolades for "Power of the Yen Winning Asia" (Business Day, Dec. 5).
American business faces an uphill struggle in East Asia and the Pacific, but it is not a struggle we should forfeit.
It is important to remember how much the Asia-Pacific market means to the United States.


Bonilla Signing: Gross Greed
To the Sports Editor:
As an avid sports fan, I wanted to express my concern over the Mets' decision to escalate players' salaries to an even more ridiculous level.
Their actions in the Bobby Bonilla case will undoubtedly create a feeding frenzy of greed for all future player negotiations.
Why didn't the Mets just offer him a percentage of America's gross national product?
DARRYL HILD Portland, Ore.


TAKING SIDES AGAINST OURSELVES
I'd like to thank Rosemary Bray for her insightful overview of the Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas affair ("Taking Sides Against Ourselves," Nov. 17).
It disgusted me that so many black men and women rushed to Thomas's side, accusing Hill of somehow conspiring with white men to "bring a good black man down." Hill, not Thomas, should have been the one to cry "high-tech lynching." Her reputation, integrity and mental state were put on trial.
What happened to her was despicable -- racist and sexist.
It's a shame that some blacks are so "committed" to the race that they would throw their support to someone who never liked his dark skin and doesn't care about anyone with skin similar to his own.
JAMES EARL HARDY
Brooklyn


Credit Cards Cost Exactly What They Say
To the Editor:
"Credit Cards Cost More Than You Think" (letter, Dec. 16) by Prof.
S.
A.
Ravid reflects fundamental misunderstanding of credit-card interest.


When a Rose Is Really a Buttercup
MANY plants, particularly poinsettias, cyclamens, needled evergreens and hollies, are part of the Christmas tradition.
The holiday is filled with legends that intertwine with these plants.
Their stories are told and retold each year.
One tradition that has become a part of the commercialization of Christmas has caused a bit of confusion.
It is the naming of a particular flower as a Christmas rose, when it just isn't so.
This may be a good time to set the record straight.


Jennifer A. Hart To Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Hart of Wellesley, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Anne Hart to William Kingman Ludington, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin L. Ludington of St.
Louis.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Hart, 26 years old, is the program coordinator for Optima Fund Management, an investment management firm in New York.
She graduated from Denison University, as did her fiance.
Her father, formerly a vice president at International Data Group, a market research firm in Framingham, Mass., is the executive director of the Massachusetts High Technology Employment Center in Woburn, Mass.


At Yale, a 19th-Century Painter Becomes a Star at Last
THE United Technologies Corporation is playing principal angel again at the Yale Center for British Art in New Haven.
The company, which had aided a major Stubbs show, is now supporting "Richard Parkes Bonington: 'On the Pleasure of Painting' " and its 315-page, 4 1/2-pound catalogue, fully illustrated in color ($39.95, soft cover).
For Bonington, however, the show seems to be a first, at least in the United States; the only other major retrospectives accorded the artist were in England in 1937 and 1965.
This is where Bonington was born, in 1802, 15 days before the artist Tom Girtin died at the age of 27.
Turner is said to have remarked that if Girtin, his contemporary and a formative influence, had lived "I should have starved." Bonington, himself, survived 26 years, less one month, and, like Girtin, died of lung disease.


In the Nation; What's To Debate?
Mario Cuomo warned the nation that he would not run for President unless New York's massive budget crisis was resolved first.
Those who thought he was merely playing games found out last week that he meant what he said.
That's a welcome change from the usual political double talk and deniability.
But there's no use pretending, as some Democrats are doing, that the party's chances for 1992 have not been hurt.
Mr.
Cuomo would have been the most commanding and articulate figure the Democrats could have put up -- and articulateness is one quality, among many, badly needed in the White House.


Chocolate Concoctions to End the Meal
CHOCOLATE has strange properties.
It is said by some scientists to excite a chemical in the brain that produces a reaction similar to that brought on by a passionate love affair.
Others say chocolate gets to work on the mind the way strenuous exercise does: it relieves depression and makes one feel great.
Whatever its qualities, in my view, there is no better way to end a meal than with a dessert made from chocolate.
I like chocolate desserts that are rather plain, without a lot of rich pastry cream, frosting or marzipan, but gooey, dark and not too sweet.
When I was growing up my favorite was hot chocolate souffle.
My initial efforts to make it received a mixed reception -- it took me a couple of tries to figure out what was meant by folding in egg whites.
My first souffles rose nicely but came out piebald.


Marcia Guiney Weds
Marcia Ann Guiney, the daughter of Marcella B. Guiney of New York and the late William F. Guiney, was married yesterday to Michael Lloyd Turner, the son of Sylvia F. Turner of Burlington, N.C., and the late Lloyd C. Turner.
The Rev.
Leo J. Gorman officiated at Our Lady of Grace Roman Catholic Church in Greensboro, N.C.


Are Interest-Rate Cuts Any MAtch for This Recession
For economists, these are puzzling times.
The recession was supposed to be short and shallow, but it has lasted 17 months -- 11 months is the average.
And the tumble was no less deep than in other recessions.
The recovery,
supposed to be vigorous,
has stalled. Last week the White House acknowledged something was amiss:
"The economy is going very slow," said Marlin Fitzwater, a White House spokesman.
On Friday,
the Federal Reserve again cut the discount rate, this time by an eye-popping
full percentage point, to 3.5 percent. So where is the economy headed
? Has the Administration's
rel
iance
on interest-rate cuts as its major policy lever worked?
Lawrence A. Kudlow, chief economist at Bear Stearns &amp; Company Inc., Marc A. Miles, executive vice president of H. C. Wainwright &amp; Company Economics Inc. and Allen Sinai, chief economist of the Boston Company Inc., shared their views with Joel Kurtzman of The New York Times.


4 More (Count 'Em, 4) Busoni Concertos
Before 1968, Ferruccio Busoni's grandiose, Brahmsian five-movement Piano Concerto with male chorus (1904) had just one recording, a labor of love by the pianist John Ogdon and the conductor Daniell Revenaugh.
Last March, three new accounts had appeared along with a reissue of that old one, provoking wonder that such an exotic score, however worthy, should be available in four CD versions.
Since then, four more have appeared.
The new entries do not upset my earlier recommendations: the best overall performance remains the Peter Donohoe-Mark Elder version (EMI/Angel CDC 49996); the Ogdon-Revenaugh (EMI Studio CDM 69850) is a decent runner-up, and the Garrick Ohlsson-Christoph von Dohnanyi (Telarc CD-80207) is the choice for those who want to hear the piano part close-up and virtuosic.
But the new batch offers one performance all admirers of this cumbersome yet lovable score should hear for pleasure and another they should hear for the pleasure of sheer perversity.


Cambodian Peace Process Comes to Halt as Demonstrations Sweep Capital
Cambodia's fragile peace process came to a halt today when the Government told leaders of the Khmer Rouge to stay out of the country as major protest demonstrations -- the first since before the Khmer Rouge reign of terror here in the 1970's that took a million lives -- swept through Phnom Penh's streets.
While the demonstrations were occasioned by the expected return of two of the Khmer Rouge's most hated leaders, they seemed more directed today at the Vietnam-backed Government.
By the end of the day, Prime Minister Hun Sen was making broadcasts demanding an end to the demonstrations, and the protesters -- mostly students and some workers -- were ignoring him.
There were occasional skirmishes with the police and sporadic gunfire in the center of the city.


Managing; General Fain, the Team Player
MUCH of the impetus for the integrated product teams being used to build the F-22 came from Gen.
James A. Fain Jr., the Air Force's program manager for the aircraft.
General Fain is credited by industry executives with a willingness to abandon the military's traditional arms-length approach and commit the Air Force to the teams.
General Fain says the major advantage of the team approach is better communication.
The traditional process leaves each function -- engineering, manufacturing, etc. -- too isolated, a special danger for a complex, interdependent product like an airplane.


He Dies in Her Arms
HAPPY ENDINGS
By Sally Quinn. 566 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Nov. 24 about a two-week cruise along the Gulf Coast referred incorrectly to Biloxi and Gulfport.
They are in Mississippi, not Louisiana.


In From the Cold
THE CITIZENS HUMANE COMMISSION OF BERKELEY, CALIF., a city that can always be counted upon to encapsulate America's loss of knowledge about the real world, not long ago conducted a spirited debate over exempting miniature pet pigs from an ordinance banning farm animals within the city limits.
The issue, a spokesman told The Wall Street Journal, was not whether the pigs posed a threat to hygiene, or whether they would create a nuisance to neighbors, but "whether it is humane to impose domesticity on yet another animal." One commissioner argued that domestication of any animal "deprives that animal of living its own life," and vowed to fight the commission's mildly pro-pig recommendation.
Even those who don't equate the domestication of animals with their enslavement, as today's increasingly strident animal rights activists would have it, readily accept the idea that domestication of animals was something "imposed" by man, just as we imposed our will in countless other ways on the world around us.
A not too far-fetched distillation of this view was in one of Mel Brooks's 2,000- Year-Old Man routines: it was a cave man named Bernie who "discovered" the woman, the 2,000-Year-Old Man recalls.
"I think there's ladies here," Bernie announces one morning.
It is a central myth of our culture that we are the authors of our destiny; the limitless power of human invention is something we simply take for granted.


Kathryn and Sallie Castle to Marry
The engagements of Kathryn Lanktree Castle to James Payne Van Blarcom and of Sallie Buckman Castle to W. Scott HarderW.
Scott Harder have been announced by the parents of the prospective brides, Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph L. Castle 2d of Gladwyne, Pa.
Kathryn Castle, 28 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is a customer-service representative for the Eagle's Eye Corporation, a clothing manufacturer in Conshohocken, Pa.
Her father is the president of the Castle Energy Corporation in Blue Bell, Pa., an oil and gas production company.
A May wedding is planned.


Not Illegal, But . . .
To the Editor:
I agree with Jon Pareles that Ice Cube's racist recordings oughtn't be suppressed legally  [ "Should Ice Cube's Voice Be Chilled?" Dec. 8 ] .
Strictly speaking, his lyrics are not protected by the Constitution because he advocates criminal
action
(against Jews: "Put a bullet in his temple/ You can't be the nigga for life crew with a white Jew telling you what to do"; against Koreans: "Pay respect to the black fist or we'll burn your store right down").
His advocacy, however, is only theoretical in the sense that he isn't leading an actual lynch mob.


Yugoslavia's Deadly Friday the 13th
THE Yugoslav civil war is turning into a Balkan vendetta.
After a generation of living together, Serbs and Croats are killing each other with increasing brutality as villager is pitted against villager, neighbor against neighbor.
Rumors of atrocities, many false or unprovable, fed the conflict in its initial stages.
Now the images have become gruesomely real.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
STEAMY AND CLOSE TO HOME
THE line of Gold Coasters in the Gold Coast mansion stretched almost to the doors of the grand foyer.
Not since Jaclyn Smith had attended the opening of a K-Mart had a Long Island crowd gathered like this.


Times Square Ramada Is Due
New York City visitors who are drawn to the bright lights of Broadway may want to consider a new contender among the city's spate of newly completed hotels.
When it opens on Feb. 1, the Ramada Renaissance Times Square will offer 305 rooms and suites at the epicenter of neon glitter.
The pre-opening office can be reached at (212) 765-7676.
For Ramada reservations, call (800) 228-9898.


On the Street; Old Chestnuts Always Bring Cheer
Holiday cheer prevails on Fifth Avenue with echoes of times past.
There are stuffed toys so large that they all but displace the baby from the carriage and dwarf the young man carrying the six-foot-tall bear.
Youngsters scramble atop the library lions, Patience and Fortitude, who wear their holiday wreaths, for family photographs.
In the cold of Wednesday night, there was an unusual Fifth Avenue sight, a hay wagon drawn by white horses carrying 20 carolers who together had paid $750 for a three-hour ride from a West Side stable.
At the Union Square Greenmarket, families carried home trees and wreaths, while a stilt walker, Gustavo Guevara, handed out restaurant fliers, turning his job into a performance by playing games with passers-by, especially youngsters who dashed under the arch formed by his stilts.
This Christmas, the simpler pleasures seem to count most.


The Hologram Obligation: Cross Street to the Projects
MICHAEL JORDAN's smile blinks on and off at us, without end, but his eyes never move; they are staring at something only he can see.
The basket, the scoreboard, the shoe ads?
The holographic portrait of Jordan on the cover of this week's Sports Illustrated is not at all like those three-dimensional Christmas pictures in which Jesus' eyes follow you around the room.
Of course, the messages are different.
Jesus Saves.


Looking Peaked


Andrew Ship Weds Barbara Basuk
Dr.
Barbara Jo Basuk, an internist, and Andrew Geoffrey Ship, a special-education teacher and consultant, were married last evening in Schenectady, N.Y.
Rabbi Milton Feierstein officiated at Congregation Agudat Achim.
The bride, 37 years old, practices in Washington and Landover, Md.
She is a magna cum laude graduate of Brown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and she received her M.D. from Duke University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Basuk of Gloversville.
Her father is a retired dentist.
Her mother, Ruth Basuk, retired as an actuary for Metropolitan Life Insurance in New York.


Style Makers; BOXER SHORTS DESIGNER: Michael Dodson
Michael Dodson never set out to become a fashion designer, let alone a designer of men's underwear.
But two years ago, a men's wear client asked the former advertising art director for ideas on what to put on boxer shorts for Christmas.
Mr.
Dodson came up with designs that included Christmas bulbs and tiny boxer shorts.
The client loved them, and so did his customers.
In fact, Mr.
Dodson's ideas were so successful he started his own label, calling it Mike &amp; Mike.
It is the rave of the men's underwear industry.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My house is more than 30 years old and has sand-finish walls on the inside.
The walls have been painted many times, but still have a rough surface and are difficult to wash.
I suppose they can be sanded smooth, but I do not think I could do that.
Is there any other way to smooth the walls?
A.
Other than sanding with a commercial belt sander, there are two other possibilities.
One is to hire a paperhanger to cover the walls with a special heavy-duty lining that is sold for use on rough or textured walls.
That would leave a smooth surface that will take paint or wallpaper.
The other possibility is to hire a contractor to install new drywall or paneling.


Looking for Escape


Elizabeth L'Hommedieu Is Married
Elizabeth Bradley L'Hommedieu, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paige Bradley L'Hommedieu of Convent Station, N.J., and Matthew Harrison King, a son of Mary S. King and Henry L. King, both of New York, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Thomas Carl Sheffield officiated at the Presbyterian Church in Morristown, N.J.
Miss L'Hommedieu, 24 years old, graduated from Middlebury College and was until recently a reporter in San Francisco for Time magazine.
Her father is retired; he was a national accounts representative for Armstrong World Industries, a Lancaster, Pa., building products company.


Tech Notes; Sharpening Up the X-Ray With Ultraviolet Light
X-RAY technology has progressed fitfully since its discovery in 1895 by the German physicist Wilhelm Rontgen.
Now the Du Pont Company has a new technology that it claims provides a 40 percent improvement on the ghostly images used by physicians to inspect bones and organs.
In a conventional system, an X-ray is beamed through the body and onto an intensifying screen coated with a rare earth phosphor that converts the beam into visible light and exposes the film.
In Du Pont's new Ultra-Vision system, the screen is coated with yttrium tantalate, a phosphor that converts the X-ray to ultraviolet light, which has an inherently higher resolution than visible light.
The new system uses a special film that allows the absorption of light throughout the entire photographic emulsion.
It is in clinical tests in 20 hospitals and is to be on the market by mid-1992.


CAMPUS LIFE: Arizona State; Lectures by a Computer Save Class for Learning
An Arizona State University professor has narrowed the distance between teacher and student with the help of an experimental computer program that brings a more personal atmosphere to lecture-hall learning.
The professor, Paul Privateer, came up with the idea for what he calls "Odyssey," a software program that he developed as a way of increasing communication between students and teachers by leaving the lecturing to the computer.
He began using the program this fall in Humanities 110, an undergraduate course with a combined enrollment of 280 students.


America's in the Balcony as Europe Takes Center Stage
IS United States influence in Europe going the way of the dollar?
For much of this century, the mighty greenback was worth more than four Deutsche marks; today, it has sunk below 1.60.
Not that long ago, about the time when Stormin' Norman had flattened the last Iraqi berm, folks were celebrating the birth of a "unipolar" world in which one power towered above the rest -- and that was the United States.
But where is the United States today?


IN SHORT: FICTION
COMEBACK By Dick Francis. Putnam, $21.95.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Philadelphia; Biggest Lease Of '91 Signed
THE largest office lease of 1991 in Philadelphia has been signed by Atochem North America, which is taking 210,000 square feet on eight floors at 2000 Market Street, a building owned by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company.
About 720 employees will relocate to the building, which is at 20th and Market Streets, late in 1993, when Atochem's current lease expires and a renovation of its new space is completed.


Leslie Killeen Weds1
Leslie Rose Killeen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Killeen of Fair Haven, N.J., was married yesterday to Brian William Curran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Curran of Wantagh, L.I.
The Rev.
John A. Adam officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of the Nativity in Fair Haven.
Mrs.
Curran, 26 years old, is a sales representative in New York for Mead Data Central, an electronic information services company.
She graduated from Villanova University.
The bridegroom, 30, is a vice president of Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in New York.
He graduated from Amherst College.


Some Quality-Testing Methods
BEFORE looking at policy illustrations, it makes sense to compile a list of companies you might want to do business with.
Good financial planners are beginning to shop from a short list of insurers that meet specific criteria.
For example, Andrew Wray, a planner in Memphis, looks for an insurer that has been rated A+ for the past 10 years by A. M. Best &amp; Company in Oldwick, N.J., the only agency that has been rating insurers at least that long.
The insurer also must be rated at least AA by one of the other three leading ratings agencies: Standard &amp; Poor's and Moody's Investors Services in New York and Duff &amp; Phelps in Chicago.
Mr.
Wray rules out any insurer that has a rating below a "contingent A" by Best, an AA- by S.&amp; P. or Duff &amp; Phelps or an Aa3 by Moody's.
Ratings from these companies are available by calling the company and asking for the ratings desk.


Lifted Melody
Critics can talk all they want about rap music as a post-modern pastiche of borrowed sounds, but when the songwriter Gilbert O'Sullivan learned that his sentimental ballad "Alone Again (Naturally)" had been excerpted on the singer Biz Markie's latest album, "I Need a Haircut," he decided it was a question for the lawyers to decide.
In the rap world, borrowing a piece of music is called sampling.
Mr.
O'Sullivan's song, which was No. 1 on the Billboard charts for six weeks in 1972, has been recorded by Andy Williams, Ray Coniff, Sarah Vaughan and other singers who obtained the rights.
But Mr.
O'Sullivan contends that Biz Markie used eight bars of the song without permission.
Last week a Federal judge in Manhattan concluded that there was abundant evidence that the singer violated Mr.
O'Sullivan's rights.
He referred the case to the United States Attorney for prosecution and issued an injunction barring distribution of the album and ordering the return of unsold copies.
A lawyer for the singer said he would appeal.


Sex? Viewers Are Shocked. Shocked!
The age of X-rated educational television has arrived, with flourishes.
The William Kennedy Smith rape trial and the Senate committee hearings on Anita F. Hill's charges against Judge Clarence Thomas may have owed their popularity to the spicy nature of the encounters.
But viewers who managed to keep their calm, while all around them were being titillated by uncommonly explicit discussions of common doings, could glimpse matters that are usually treated in drier fashion.
There was much to be noted about the interplay of money, class, race and gender in America today.
Alert viewers could see how Kennedy money and power play to a nation of outsiders looking in, through the tube.
They could see class differences being used to influence a society that often deludes itself into thinking it is classless.
They could see expectations of black failure, based on long experience and ingrained assumptions, upset by displays of education and success.
And they could be even more confused than usual by the mixed messages about sexual relations that have for some time been sent forth by television.
And so unlike the packaged goods that fill television, most of these events came through unedited, unpolished, raw.
They made "The MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour" seem like junior high school.


Corrections
A biographical note on page 1 of The Times Book Review today with a review of "Trollope: A Biography" refers incorrectly to the reviewer.
He teaches English at the University of Southern California, not the University of California, Los Angeles.


Talks in South Africa End Hopefully
The opening phase of official negotiations on South Africa's future ended on a high note of optimism today, with the African National Congress predicting that within a year South Africa could have a new constitution enshrining political equality for the nation's black majority.
"We firmly believe that from what we have achieved to date we can have a new constitution in place by Christmas 1992," the congress leader, Nelson Mandela, told reporters.


Business Is Booming At Consignment Shops
Picture a boutique where a Chanel suit sells for less than a third of its original price.
Or a shop offering Ralph Lauren boots for $70, an Armani blouse for $150 or a sequined evening suit by Bob Mackie for $550 -- instead of, say, $3,000.
Wishful thinking?
Not at all.
These and similar bargains were recently spotted at consignment shops on Madison Avenue.
From coast to coast, resourceful shoppers with an eye toward a bargain are reaping the benefits of buying recycled designer clothes at consignment shops, which have become one of the country's booming recession-time businesses.
People are buying everything from children's overalls to men's dinner jackets and women's sparkling sequined ball gowns at a fraction of their original cost.


Life in the Black Regiments
To the Editor:
In his review of "On the Altar of Freedom" by Cpl.
James Henry Gooding, Geoffrey C. Ward states that Gooding's letters represent "the only sustained contemporaneous account of life in a black regiment I've ever seen." He overlooks "Thomas Morris Chester, Black Civil War Correspondent: His Dispatches From the Virginia Front," edited by R. J. M. Blackett and published in 1989.
As a correspondent for The Philadelphia Press, Chester, the son of a former slave, covered the crucial final year of the war, living with the black troops around Petersburg and Richmond.
He wrote vivid descriptions of black troop life both at camp and in the field in an educated, clearheaded manner, with a good sense of humor and an evident pride in his race.
YUVAL TAYLOR New York


Washington Talk; Weary of '92 Campaign? Now Try Pondering '96
Grateful that Campaign '92 started late?
Consider this about Campaign '96: It's already started.
While a half dozen Democrats are all over television trying to break out of an obscure field to win their party's 1992 nomination, an even larger group of Republicans is doing the same thing for next time around.


A Start in South Africa
The opening phase of official negotiations on South Africa's future ended on a high note of optimism, with the African National Congress predicting that within a year South Africa could have a new constitution enshrining political equality for the nation's black majority.
Article, page 14.


Parlez Vous Chat?
FRENCH FOR CATS
All the French Your Cat Will Ever Need.
By Henry Beard and John Boswell.
Illustrated.
Unpaginated.
New York: John Boswell Associates/ Villard Books. $9.95.


Hoosiers Overpower Redmen
The big man in red was almost jolly.
The little guy in the sweater was looking for something positive in his disappointment.
Indiana's Hoosiers are still committing far too many mistakes to please Bob Knight, which is to say any.
But as conference play approaches and the Hoosiers try to find positive answers -- Or Else -- their resourcefulness cannot be underestimated.


Miss Nguyen Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Nguyen Huy Loi of Virginia Beach, Va., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Catherine T. Nguyen, to William G. Connolly 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Connolly Jr. of Westfield, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Nguyen, 25 years old, graduated from the College of William and Mary, as did her fiance.
She is an assistant buyer at Barneys New York.
Her father, a former colonel in the South Vietnamese Army, and her mother, Nguyen Tam, own La Caravelle, a restaurant in Virginia Beach.


Sunday Outing; The U.N. Is Familiar And Exotic
The United Nations Headquarters is one of the world's great landmarks and a place where history is made.
Even adults who were taken to the United Nations as children may find it well worth a return visit.
Walking into the United Nations headquarters, on 18 acres along the East River between 42d and 48th Streets, is literally a trip out of United States territory and into an international zone.
Even a United States stamp is not valid if the letter is mailed from the United Nations, which has its own postal system.


On Installing Dowels In New or Old Pieces
DOWELS, wood pegs that act like nails or screws but are held in place by glue, are used to fasten furniture, even antiques.
Expertly installed dowels usually create stronger longer-lasting joints than metal fasteners.
But no matter how well installed, they may break if loosened by age or abuse of the furniture.
Repairing dowel joints is not too difficult for those with moderate woodworking experience and the right tools.
The chief requirements are patience and careful workmanship.
Fine and antique furniture should be repaired by a professional restorer.


Consciousness Explained?
To the Editor:
As a psychologist in training to be a psychoanalyst, I was intrigued by the promise of Daniel C. Dennett's ambitious title, "Consciousness Explained," so I read George Johnson's enthusiastic review with great interest.
Unfortunately, Mr.
Johnson failed to critique what sounds like a good piece of work because he accepted the author's incomplete view of consciousness, a common problem with cognitive science.
An adequate explanation of consciousness must address such complexities as emotion, motivation and psychopathology, to name but a few.
It is certainly not possible, for example, to understand the nature of mature adult love on the basis of a "virtual machine," as Mr.
Dennett calls it, or a "mental operating system," as Mr.
Johnson puts it.
LEE S. JAFFE La Jolla, Calif.


Jean Wade Rindlaub, 87, Dies; One of First Female Ad Executives
Jean Wade Rindlaub, one of the first American women to become a major advertising executive, died on Thursday at the Courtland Garden Health Center in Stamford, Conn.
She was 87 years old and lived in Stamford.
She died of complications from a stroke, her family said.
Mrs.
Rindlaub, in 34 years at the Batten, Barton, Durstine &amp; Osborn agency in Manhattan, rose to head of a copy group and in 1946 became a vice president, the first woman at that level in the company.
In 1954, she became the first woman on the company board.
The American Advertising Federation named her woman of the year in 1951 and in 1989 elected her to its hall of fame.


... Tax Breaks to Keep Workers?
To the Editor:
With corporations downsizing to maximize profits, an impossible situation has been created ("More Layoffs? Hold the Applause").
Thousands of skilled, highly educated, creative people have been forced into an unemployment pool from which they cannot recover because entire job markets no longer exist.
Consumer spending will keep dropping as more people are either laid off or live in fear of being laid off.


GRADY'S GIFT
Howell Raines has turned Grady's gift to him into a gift to the world, and The New York Times Magazine has given us the gift of publishing it this holiday season.
Thank you for this lovingly eloquent piece.
DAN WOOG
Westport, Conn.
ILS&gt;Photo: Grady Hutchibson (Photograph by Ann States/Saba for The New York Times)


Lisa Freundlich Has Wedding
Lisa Helaine Freundlich, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edgar Freundlich of West Orange, N.J., was married last evening to Samuel M. Guss, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Guss of Bellmore, L.I.
Rabbi Azriel Fellner officiated at the Livingston (N.J.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Guss, 30 years old, is the national marketing liaison in New York at Ernst &amp; Young, the accounting firm.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a master's degree in technical communications from Drexel University.
Her father owns Sophia Originals, a jewelry wholesaler in New York.
Her mother, Lillian Freundlich, is the office manager at J. P. Rudolph &amp; Company, an insurance brokerage in Livingston.


Britain Gives Aid to Struggling Homeowners
Overwhelmed by a rising tide of mortgage foreclosures, the British Government moved this week to rescue vulnerable homeowners and head off further damage to the political fortunes of the governing Conservatives in next year's national election.
The action by the Government of Prime Minister John Major, taken in league with banks and mortgage lenders, is the latest measure of official alarm here over the distressed state of the British economy.


BEST SELLERS: December 22, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
11
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
2
5
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the lives and fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
3
3
10
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
4
4
18
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
5
1
THE JOLLY CHRISTMAS POSTMAN, written and illustrated by Janet and Allan Ahlberg. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) A mailman delivers letters to nursery rhyme and fairy tale characters.
6
6
12
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.
7
10
15
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate a balloon accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force.
8
31
THE POLAR EXPRESS, written and illustrated by Chris Van Allsburg. (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.) A small boy's Christmas Eve train ride.
9 *
7
3
WLT, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $21.95.) The birth, prosperity and decline of a down-home Minneapolis radio station.
10
8
8
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) A diplomat finds that his past life in horse racing may help save others.
11
5
5
THE SAPPHIRE ROSE, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The third volume in "The Elenium," a fantasy saga.
12
9
41
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
13
11
8
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $22.50.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide. (LP)
14
6
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Macmillan, $21.95.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
15
15
3
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) The story of an Auschwitz survivor in the Catskills, told in comic-book form.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
14
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
2
3
7
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
3 *
4
17
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
4
2
10
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
5
5
3
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
6
8
3
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A reporter's account of an N.B.A. championship season spent with Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls.
7
6
7
CHILDHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Putnam, $14.95.) The entertainer recalls his boyhood and reflects on the ways of today's kids.
8
10
8
PRAIRYERTH, by William Least Heat-Moon. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A close look at the people and mores of Chase County, Kansas.
9
12
6
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene by the Texas journalist.
10
13
18
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
11
7
5
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
12
9
27
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
13
1
THE WORLD IS MY HOME, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) The autobiography of the popular novelist. (LP)
14
1
ANNIE LEIBOVITZ: Photographs, 1970-1990. (HarperCollins, $60.) An album of portraits of musicians, politicians, writers, athletes, dancers and artists.
15
11
57
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
3
THE BEST TREATMENT, by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice from a physician on a host of medical problems.
2
2
58
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
3
5
5
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
4
4
41
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
5
3
98
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
GEORGE CUKOR: A DOUBLE LIFE.
A Biography of the Gentleman Director, by Patrick McGilligan. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) A full-bodied account both of the brilliant film maker's works and of the man himself and his elegantly gay life in a Hollywood that pretended to celebrate all the middle-class decencies.
THE ABANDONED BAOBAB: The Autobiography of a Senegalese Woman, by Ken Bugul. (Lawrence Hill Books, cloth, $18.95; paper, $9.95.) This pseudonymous personal history takes a brave, ambitious young woman from her village to Brussels, where she barely rescues herself from a course of self-destruction.
WOODROW WILSON, by August Heckscher (Scribners, $35), and WOODROW WILSON: A Life for World Peace, by Jan Willem Schulte Nordholt (University of California, $34.95).
Two lives that differ in approach; Mr.
Heckscher's primary interest is the man himself and his intimate relationships, while Mr.
Schulte Nordholt explores Wilson's flaws of intellect and temperament.
CRYSTAL RIVER: Three Novellas, by Charlie Smith. (Linden/ Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) Extraordinary tales that explore the weaknesses and needs that bring people together and tear them apart, against a backdrop of the familiar details of Southern life.
LIVING AFTER MIDNIGHT, by Lee K. Abbott. (Putnam, $21.95.) In this collection of five short stories and a novella, Mr.
Abbott's prose exhibits high intensity, tight focus and a concentration on the depths and dimensions of more or less ordinary people.
THE MAN TO SEE.
Edward Bennett Williams: Ultimate Insider; Legendary Trial Lawyer, by Evan Thomas. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Though an authorized biography, this life of the justly celebrated lawyer spares none of Williams's faults, which included sexism, a terrible temper and occasional ethical lapses.


Review/Dance; Ailey Tribute to Masekela
Heat seeps out of Alvin Ailey's "Masekela Langage," presented by the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater on Tuesday night at City Center, 131 West 55th Street, where the company performs through Dec. 29.
It is the physical heat of weather in a South African township, inside a smoky, airless little bar.
It is also the emotional heat of political repression, hopelessness and poverty.
And the Ailey dancers created the illusion of both in a low-key but potent performance.
The dance is a homage to Hugh Masekela, the South African trumpet player and composer, and his searing, wistfully melodic music.
There is no particular story, just a series of desultory encounters.
A tough, sensuous woman who may be the bar's proprietor, danced by Debora Chase, draws the men around her for a moment.
A prosperous-looking man, portrayed by Andre Tyson, gets the patrons together and exhorts them to buy, in what could be a pitch for snake oil as much as for political action.
A young tough, played by Dwight Rhoden, battles him in a fistfight.


Jury Acquits Defendant in Kahane Trial
An Egyptian immigrant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, was acquitted last night of charges that he was the gunman who assassinated Rabbi Meir Kahane last year at a pro-Zionist meeting in a hotel in midtown Manhattan.
The jury also acquitted Mr.
Nosair of attempted murder of a postal officer, who, the prosecution said, tried to prevent Mr.
Nosair from fleeing the murder scene.


Jeffery Levin to Wed Ms. Einsiedler
Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Einsiedler of Yonkers have announced the engagement of their daughter, Arleen Linda Einsiedler, to Jeffery Steven Levin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Levin of North Palm Beach, Fla.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Einsiedler, 34 years old, is a senior copywriter at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rochester and has a master's degree in advertising from Northwestern University.
Her father is a retired textiles worker.


We Need National Standards for Those Who Give Child Care; Training Programs
To the Editor:
Parents concerned about the sad state of child care, as portrayed in your Dec. 9 article on the nanny business, may get in touch with the American Council of Nanny Schools, Delta College, University Center, Mich., for a list of approved schools.


Economic Warfare, 1991 Style
IT IS NOT only the Soviet Union that evaporated in 1991.
So too did the concept of economic cooperation among the leading Western economies.
That became clearer than ever last week, as the German central bank turned its back on the interests of most of Europe, let alone the United States, and jacked up interest rates.
The Bundesbank's surprisingly strong move left its discount rate at 8 percent, or more than double the 3.5 percent rate that this country's Federal Reserve adopted as it cut its rate by a point on Friday.


Into the Woods, Where Ancient Passions Lurk
I can easily tell you what thrilled me most about "The Crucible," the inaugural production of the National Actors Theater: seeing 21 actors lined up in a semicircle on the stage of the Belasco Theater for the curtain call.
That's what it takes to put on Arthur Miller's play, 21 actors of varying ages, shapes and dispositions.
Of course, we never get them all at once in the course of the evening.
They come and go, as the drama dictates, driven by the winds of hysteria blowing through Salem, Mass., in 1692.


Data Update
INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS
N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
Nov.
Oct.
Nov. 90
Rents
171.3
-0.3
+4.6
Homeowner's costs
174.5
+1.5
+5.6
Fuel and utilities
105.1
+1.4
+0.5
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester Rockland
*4*Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex, Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.74
8.82
9.87
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.31
6.38
8.03
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.65
8.72
9.70
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.24
6.31
7.85
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.63
8.71
9.72
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.22
6.29
7.93
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.90
9.05
10.01
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.86
6.82
8.25
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.44
4.61
7.08
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.78
8.78
9.69
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


World Markets; The Bundesbank's One-Two Punch
A BOXER in the ring knows that he is going to get punched.
But sometimes he is surprised by the force of the blow.
He will recoil, shake his head and wonder what has happened.
That is what occurred on Thursday when the German Bundesbank, which is becoming the rogue elephant of Europe, raised its two key interest rates -- the Lombard rate and the discount rate -- by half a percentage point each.


After Years of 'Potential,' Will Cuomo Star Still Shine?
From July 16, 1984, when he captivated the nation with his keynote address to the Democratic National Convention, until Dec. 20, 1991, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo enjoyed the elevated political status of the "potential Presidential candidate."
The presumption that Mr.
Cuomo might someday reside in the White House has bolstered his approval ratings in New York, given him a broader forum for his views and helped him command speaking fees of up to $20,000.


Two-Families
To the Editor:
Your Talking column on Dec. 8 on the application of the New York City housing antidiscrimination regulations to two-family houses was more than a little dismissive of the reasons such dwellings with an owner-occupant present have been exempt heretofore.


GRADY'S GIFT
Raines's story of his racial education was moving and provocative, but it was not the story I wanted to hear.
Instead of a meditation on how he found his moral tutor, I wanted to hear from Grady Hutchinson.
I wanted to read her thoughts about her own family and her ambitions.
Instead, we get Raines's nostalgia.
His notion that Hutchinson "had inhabited our family home and had been allowed to be fully herself." I wonder.


Donna Fletcher Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Fletcher of Waldorf, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter Donna Marie Fletcher to Stuart H. O. Sanderson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael O. Sanderson of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Fletcher, 26 years old, attended West Virginia Wesleyan College and until recently was an assistant stockbroker with Dominick &amp; Dominick, an investment firm in North Palm Beach, Fla.
Her father is a field service representative in Suitland, Md., for Pratt &amp; Whitney, the jet engine manufacturer.


Lifted Spirits
In 1983, four years after Karen Thompson exchanged rings with her lover, a high school gym teacher named Sharon Kowalski, a car accident left Ms.
Kowalski brain-damaged and paralyzed.
Ever since, Ms.
Thompson has fought with the woman's parents over who should take care of her.
It wasn't until 1988 that Ms.
Thompson, a physical education professor at St.
Cloud State University in Minnesota, won the right to visit Ms.
Kowalski in a nursing home.
But last year when Ms.
Kowalski's father said his health would no longer allow him to care for his daughter, a judge gave guardianship to Karen Tomberlin, Ms.
Kowalski's high school track and volleyball coach.
Last week an appeals court overturned the ruling and made Ms.
Thompson the guardian.
"Karen and Sharon talked today about what they were going to do to celebrate," said M. Sue Wilson, Ms.
Thompson's lawyer.
"Sharon doesn't have the short-term memory to remember what happened an hour ago, but she does remember Karen and the past, and that she is a lesbian."


250 Words Every 15 Minutes
TROLLOPE
A Biography.
By N. John Hall.
Illustrated. 581 pp.
New York:  Clarendon Press/ Oxford University Press. $30.


Concert Society at 20th Anniversary
IT started with a small group of musicians meeting at the Shrub Oak home of Arthur White, a pianist, and through the years grew into the Concert Society of Putnam and Northern Westchester, one of the leading cultural organizations of the region.
Now the society is 20 years old, and the celebration continues as Richard Serbagi, one of the society's founding members and its current president, conducts a holiday concert Saturday at 8 P.M. at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in Somers.


Christmas in Naples, Home of the Creche
FEW tourists are in Italy at Christmastime -- which adds to the country's attractions.
Restaurants that were crowded in the summer now have proprietors willing to make anything special you request.
The street markets have candy coal to put in "naughty" children's stockings, and the witch Befana is consumed in merry bonfires on Epiphany, Jan. 6.
It is true that even more museums post the dreaded "chiuso" (closed) sign: Even more sites are locked up for that inactivity called restoration (in restauro).
But many churches stay open beyond the regular morning hours, to show off their competitively elaborate presepii (creches), those nativity scenes that can reach the scale of biblical epics.
Italy is supposed to be the land that originated the creche, a legacy of St.
Francis of Assisi.
In Rome, the Ara Coeli church on the Campidoglio has a chapel opened only at Christmas, given over entirely to a presepio holding its prized Santissimo Bambino.
And the devotion is not confined to churches.
My wife and I, walking in December by a back canal in Venice, saw an open-air presepio in a gondola tied up at a boating club.
Some of the most famous and artistic presepii have been accumulated by private collectors.


Guilty Plea for Hagler
Former middleweight champion MARVIN HAGLER pleaded guilty to an assault charge and was sentenced in Boston Municipal Court to one year of probation and 100 hours of community service.
He will perform his service for the Boys Clubs in Boston and in Italy, where he has a home.
Hagler, 39 years old, also faces a civil suit in the case in which he was accused of punching LISA PILAGONIA in September 1990 outside his room in the Bostonian Hotel.
Pilagonia, 34 years old, said Hagler struck her several times with his fist. (AP)


In Montana, Howe's Arrest Becomes a Town Topic
Residents of this small resort town in the northwest corner of Montana are still puzzled over the news that one of their newly adopted neighbors, Yankee pitcher Steve Howe, is in trouble again.
Television stations and newspapers across the state gave Howe's arrest on drug charges top billing this week.
The pitcher, who has a home in Whitefish, was arraigned Friday in the neighboring city of Kalispell on a Federal misdemeanor charge of possession of cocaine.


FROM VICE TO NICE
The New West Theater's production of "Lettice and Lovage," the Culture Dog bookstore, breathtaking views of desert rock formations just minutes from downtown -- there is much to do and see in Las Vegas beyond "The Strip," as I discovered during a recent visit with my daughter who is a Las Vegas social worker.
And that is not an oxymoron.
ELAINE LYTEL
DeWitt, N.Y.


Pena Has Soul
To the Sports Editor:
One of the highlights of the 1991 baseball season occurred after Yankee pitcher Wade Taylor drilled Boston catcher Tony Pena in the shoulder with a fastball.
Instead of charging the mound and precipitating a brawl, Pena underhanded the ball back to Taylor and ran to first base.
On the first pitch to the next batter, Pena stole second and later scored.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Agreed to terms with Frank Viola, pitcher, on a three-year contract.
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Failed to tender 1992 contracts to Doug Jones and Eric King, pitchers, and Chris James, outfielder.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Agreed to terms with Dan Gladden, outfielder, on a two-year contract.
Failed to tender 1992 contracts to Jeff Kaiser, pitcher; Andy Allanson, catcher, and Johnny Paredes, infielder.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Agreed to terms with Jim Gantner, second baseman.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Failed to tender a 1992 contract to Allan Anderson, pitcher.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Failed to tender 1992 contracts to Rob Murphy and Scott Bankhead, pitchers.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Failed to tender a 1992 contract to Jeff Kunkel, shortstop.
Agreed to terms with Todd Burns, pitcher, on a minor league contract.
National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Failed to tender a 1992 contract to Mark Grant, pitcher.
HOUSTON ASTROS -- Agreed to terms with Gerald Young, outfielder, on a one-year contract.
NEW YORK METS -- Agreed to terms with Willie Randolph, second baseman, on a one-year contract.
PHILADELPHIA PHILLIES -- Failed to tender a 1992 contract to Joe Boever, pitcher.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Failed to tender a 1992 contract to Phil Stephenson, infielder.
Japan Pacific League  NIPPON HAM FIGHTERS -- Signed Mike Marshall, first baseman-outfielder, to a two-year contract.
Basketball National Basketball Association  NBA -- Fined Washington forward Harvey Grant $7,500 and suspended him for one game and fined San Antonio center David Robinson $5,000, for fighting in a game on Dec. 18.
Fined Donald Royal, Morlon Wiley, Grag Sutton, Tom Copa, Vinnie Johnson, Terry Cummings and Antoine Carr of San Antonio and A.J.
English, Ledell Eackles, Larry Stewart, Greg Foster, Pervis Ellison and Ralph Sampson of Washington $500 each for leaving their benches during the incident.
Global Basketball Association  ALBANY SHARP SHOOTERS -- Fired Mauro Panaggio coach.
Football National Football League  CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Placed Lynn James, wide receiver, on injured reserve.
Hockey National Hockey League  CHICAGO BLACKHAWKS -- Recalled Mike Stapleton, center, and Cam Russell, defenseman, from Indianapolis of the International Hockey League.
Sent Ryan McGill, defenseman, to Indianapolis.
Named Jim Pappin, director of professional scouting.
NEW YORK RANGERS -- Announced Jeff Beukeboom, defenseman, for four games for hitting an opponent with his stick, the suspension will take effect Dec. 27.
PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Sent Dominic Roussel, goalie, to Hershey of the American Hockey League.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Recalled Rick Tabaracci, goalie, and Kent Paynter, defenseman, from Moncton of the American Hockey League.


Baker Doubtful Commonwealth Will Last Long
After a week of visiting the crumbling Soviet Union, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d left believing that the republics' new commonwealth has little chance of long-term survival, and that Washington will soon be dealing with a dozen independent states with different policies and varied prospects for success.
By that view, the former Soviet republics are now so enamored of the idea of independence that they cannot work together for long in a meaningful commonwealth, with joint economic and military policies, until they feel the real costs of coming apart.


U.S. Shouldn't Concede Asian Market to Japan
To the Editor:
Accolades for "Power of the Yen Winning Asia" (Business Day, Dec. 5).
American business faces an uphill struggle in East Asia and the Pacific, but it is not a struggle we should forfeit.
It is important to remember how much the Asia-Pacific market means to the United States.


With Cuomo Out, His New Hampshire Backers Are Ardently Wooed
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's decision not to run for President set off a political scramble of another sort today in this first-in-the nation primary state: which campaign would lay claim to the influential Democrats in New Hampshire who were backing the Governor?
Presidential campaigns began wooing Cuomo loyalists even before the Governor declared his intentions late Friday afternoon.


Palm Beach Package Offer
The Breakers resort in Palm Beach, Fla., is offering what it says is its first winter package ever.
The offer will be in effect between Jan. 5 and April 18, 1992.


Just Said No
As is his way, Gov.
Mario Cuomo of New York stretched out the agonizing and the suspense as long as possible.
His aides kept two chartered planes standing by in Albany and had picked out a site near the statehouse in Concord, N.H., for a first campaign speech.
But on Friday, just as the 5 P.M. deadline for entering the New Hampshire Presidential primary was about to expire, he emerged from seclusion and announced that he wasn't going to run after all.
It just wouldn't be fair, he said, with his own state in such an economic mess.
He was needed at home.


The Triumph Returns -- in Name
FOR a while, it looked like Triumph motorcycles, once king of the rebel's road, would live on only in celluloid.
From the late 70's through the early 80's, the Triumph Company seemed a terminal case, kept barely alive by a workers' cooperative that was determined to keep making bikes even though Japanese companies had pretty well won their customers.
By 1983 even the workers gave up, and John Bloor, a British millionaire, bought Triumph from its liquidators.
Now the Triumph is coming back.
Mr.
Bloor, who apparently saw more value in the Triumph name than in the design, spent seven years engineering a secretive recovery for the company.
He built automated facilities, re-staffed and commissioned new motorcycle designs.
Last December he unveiled the result at the Motor Cycle Show in Birmingham, England: four new motorcycles, ranging in size from 750 cc to 1200 cc, made in an ultra-automated plant with capacity to produce about 15,000 bikes a year.


The Gang That Wouldn't Talk Straight
THEY sure didn't look like Bugsy Siegel.
They didn't even look like John Gotti.
But the 28 reputed associates of the Colombo crime family who slouched into a Brooklyn courthouse last week, their faces jammed into the collars of lumberjack shirts or leather jackets, weren't there to preen like peacocks.
And, it turned out, they weren't there to sing like canaries, either.
Authorities say the Colombos are in the middle of a civil war, and 41 of them were subpoenaed to appear before a grand jury so prosecutors could invite them to discuss anything they knew about five recent murders.
Only 28 showed up.
Most refused to answer any questions and were told to return on Jan. 6.
The head of organized crime control in District Attorney Charles J. Hynes's office said some had agreed to appear before the grand jury, but lawyers for those who came to the courthouse denied that.
They called the carefully orchestrated parade before the television cameras "sort of like a Christmas party" for the accused mobsters and dismissed it as a publicity stunt by Mr.
Hynes.
Hints that some of those summoned had agreed to talk might have been calculated to raise tensions between the two factions authorities say the Colombos have split into: one loyal to the boss, Carmine Persico, 58, who is serving a 100-year sentence, and the other loyal to Victor J. Orena, 57, whom Mr.
Persico appointed interim boss in 1989, and then grew disenchanted with.
But whether or not the inquiry produces any answers, the subpoenas and the publicity may have helped stem the bloodshed.
Although several Colombo associates were arrested with guns and walkie-talkies early in the week, there had been no shootings since Dec. 8, when an 18-year-old worker in a bagel shop was gunned down.
The police said he was apparently an innocent victim of the war, shot because the shop's two owners are part of the Persico faction.
That killing, and the three pedestrians run down on Nov. 29 by the fleeing target of a drive-by shooting, helped unleash the flood of subpoenas.


Get Subordinates In On the Act
To the Editor:
"When the Signal Is Move It or Lose It" (Forum, Nov. 17) implies that senior management's setting of aggressive goals leads to subordinates' use of unethical practices to accomplish those goals.
Another way to meet aggressive targets is to have subordinates redesign and streamline outdated business processes.
It is senior management's obligation to establish aggressive goals to force the radical "re-engineering" of business processes.
When done in an environment fostering quality and ethical behavior, it leads to improved productivity and customer and employee satisfaction.
MARILYN T. SMITH Boston, Nov. 25


Deirdre O'Hanlon, a Designer, Wed
Deirdre Marian O'Hanlon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. O'Hanlon of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday in Bedford Village, N.Y., to Paul Luke Cimino, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James E. Cimino of Valhalla, N.Y.
Msgr.
Donald Pryor performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Patrick's Church.
Mrs.
Cimino, 24 years old, is an interior designer with Milcare Inc. in Horsham, Pa.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology and the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Her father is a vice president and a deputy general counsel at New York Life in New York.
Her mother, Nancy O'Hanlon, is a registered nurse.


Morgan Hotel Acquiesces To Namesake
J.
P.
Morgan was born in Hartford in 1837and once lived in an elegant building on Asylum Avenue.
So it seemed quite natural to use his name for a new swank hotel in that very building.
Natural? Yes. Legal? That's another question.


Sports of The Times; Simms, O'Brien Eras Ending
FOR the Giants, mercifully, a disastrous season is over.
For the Jets, mathematically, a playoff season is still attainable.
And in the confusion, their quarterbacks are together again.
Only five years ago, the favorite question for New York pro football fans was: Who's better, Simms or O'Brien?
Then the Giants defeated the Denver Broncos, 39-20, in Super Bowl XXI as Simms completed 22 of 25 passes for 268 yards and three touchdowns after O'Brien couldn't generate much offense as the Jets lost their last five games that season.
The question had been answered.
It hasn't been asked since.


On the Rink at the Brink of Winter


Making a Difference; Next Stop: Down Under
IN the five months since he was lent by A.T.&amp; T. to the New American Schools Development Corporation, W. Frank Blount has grown used to the pleasures of working in a small organization.
The 22-person school group, the Bush Administration's private-sector effort to revamp the nation's schools, "is a small band of monomaniacs with a mission," Mr.
Blount said last week.
"It's amazing how quickly things get done."
His short, happy, small-is-beautiful experience is about to end with an antipodal vengeance: Mr.
Blount is retiring from A.T.&amp; T., where he headed the communications products division, to run the new Australian and Overseas Telecommunications Corporation, the telephone-service entity created out of a merger of two state-owned companies.


Chocolate Concoctions to End the Meal
CHOCOLATE has strange properties.
It is said by some scientists to excite a chemical in the brain that produces a reaction similar to that brought on by a passionate love affair.
Others say chocolate gets to work on the mind the way strenuous exercise does: it relieves depression and makes one feel great.
Whatever its qualities, in my view, there is no better way to end a meal than with a dessert made from chocolate.
I like chocolate desserts that are rather plain, without a lot of rich pastry cream, frosting or marzipan, but gooey, dark and not too sweet.
When I was growing up my favorite was hot chocolate souffle.
My initial efforts to make it received a mixed reception -- it took me a couple of tries to figure out what was meant by folding in egg whites.
My first souffles rose nicely but came out piebald.


Mutual Funds; Gift Packaging for the Younger Set
JOSHUA GREENFIELD, a 16-year-old student at the Roxbury Latin School in Boston, did not know much about mutual funds until he took a summer job with the Mutual Fund Investors Association, a money management group and newsletter publisher that specializes in Fidelity funds.
But he was a quick learner.
The company set up a "Beat the Boss" program in July, and as of this month Joshua's paper portfolio of $100,000 invested in five funds had risen nearly 5 percent, beating not only the boss but also the 12 other participating employees and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500, too.


Taylor Baldwin To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
David B. McKane of Westport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Taylor Baldwin to Thomas Keith Purdy, the son of Harold T. Purdy of Pompano Beach, Fla., and Jacqueline J. Purdy of New Iberia, La.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Baldwin, 25 years old, is the international production coordinator of knitwear for Ellen Tracy Inc., the women's clothing designer in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College.
Her adoptive father is the chairman of McKane Robbins &amp; Company, a private investment firm in New York and Westport.
She is a daughter also of the late Stephen L. Baldwin.
Her mother, Wilson L. McKane, is a vice president of Sedgewick James of Connecticut Inc., an insurance brokerage in Darien.


From the Frigid North Is Carved a Native Terrain
THE idea for Nunavut, a land where Canada's Eskimos could rule themselves, had been around for a long time before it was accepted by Ottawa last week.
Still, the announcement that a fifth of the country will be carved from the Northwest Territories and entrusted to 17,500 Eskimos caused many Canadians to pull out maps for a look at the great white vastness that has been at the heart of much of their romance about themselves.
A sample of what Nunavut, meaning "our land" in the Eskimos' Inuktituk language, will entail: The Land -- An American serviceman stationed in the Arctic in World War II described the region as "nothin' but miles and miles of miles and miles," a region that most Canadians know little of.
The "true north" of which they sing in 'O Canada' is officially designated as beginning at the 60th degree of latitude, 1,500 miles beyond the summer cottages that are the furthest north that most Canadians venture.
Another 1,500 miles lie between there and Alert, the last settlement before the North Pole.
Under Ottawa's proposal, most of this will become Nunavut.


When Those Desserts Become Spoilers
RESTAURANTS have personalities, and Sherry's Place in Babylon is a rugged individualist.
This one-of-a-kind spot defies easy labeling.
One diner at our table tried to peg it as a sprouts-and-seeds place.
In fact, both are found in the house salad.
Other health-food signposts are the brown rice, which comes with all entrees; the full-page sushi menu, and the nonalcoholic beers and wines, which are the strongest brews offered.
To avoid confusion, a second Sherry's Place, also in Babylon, is indeed a health-food store.


Topics of The Times; December Sun
Out in the woods, the December sun gets through the leafless trees to shine on the forest floor.
It lights up the modest winter covering of soft ground pine, striped wintergreen and glossy pipsissewa.
In the city on a steep-sided cross street, the sun hardly gets to the sidewalk, except when it bounces off windows and breaks up the pavement with watery splotches.
In the country, the sun's flat rays pick out the grain of the tree bark -- the dark seams on tulip trees, the fine furrows of white ash, the beech tree's elegant gray coating, the untidy layers of shag bark hickory.
In the city, the sun plays like a spotlight on details of buildings -- grotesque little sculptures on old West Side apartments, stone filigrees of leaves and flowers half-hidden under eaves.
Sideswiping the facades of cast iron buildings in Soho, it shapes the columns with their own shadows.


Nina Essman Is Engaged
March wedding plans have been announced for Nina Essman, a daughter of Leonard and Zora Essman of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and Jon Tyler Freeman, a son of Sheldon and Linda Freeman of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Ms.
Essman, 27 years old, is a third-year law student at Yeshiva University.
She graduated from Colorado College.
Her father retired as an internist and oncologist.
Her mother teaches Russian language and literature at Sarah Lawrence College in Bronxville, N.Y.


A Little Bitty Violation
Louisiana State Coach CURLEY HALLMAN committed an "inadvertent violation of N.C.A.A. rules regarding contact with prospects," the assistant athletic director, HERB VINCENT, said, and school athletic officials have reported the infraction to the Southeastern Conference.
Translation: On Dec. 10, Hallman was on the Pearl River Community College campus in Poplarville, Miss., the current football home of LATEEF TRAVIS, a 6-foot-4-inch, 234-pound junior college all-American linebacker from Pensacola, Fla.
Problem was, the N.C.A.A. signing period for junior college players didn't begin until Dec. 11, and coaches were forbidden to make contact with players during the preceding 48 hours.


Chilly Days Bring Cold Comfort on Slopes
WHEN up to four inches of snow fell on most of the state on a recent Friday, hundreds of skiers turned out at Connecticut ski areas the next day, eager to take advantage of the first snowfall of the season.
The snow was just frosting on the cake, though, since all five ski areas already had good bases of man-madesnow.
"But the snowfall made skiers think skiing," said Dave Harlow, the general manager at the Powder Ridge ski area in Middlefield, near Middletown.
He was referring to what ski operators refer to as "the snow in the backyard syndrome": most skiers, and particularly novices, are only inclined to go skiing if they see snow on their own lawns.


Lifted Ban
The last time a Wagner concert was scheduled on what is now Israeli soil was November 1938.
But then came Kristallnacht in Germany and the idea of the Palestine Philharmonic playing music by the anti-Semitic composer Hitler revered seemed so sickening a notion that his music was all but banned.
Last week, the Israel Philharmonic voted to break the taboo.
On Dec. 27, Daniel Barenboim, an Israeli citizen who argues that Wagner is too important a composer to exclude from any orchestra's repertory, will conduct a program that is expected to include parts of "Tristan und Isolde" and "The Flying Dutchman." The special performance will not be part of the orchestra's subscription series.
"Those who feel that they don't want to come into contact with this music simply don't have to come to this concert," he said.
"The minute you accept that, it has become for me a principle of democracy: that there is no reason why anybody should stop other people in a democratic society from an artistic expression."


Cynthia Shreve To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene S. Shreve of West Bay Shore, L.I., have announced June wedding plans for their daughter Cynthia Ann Shreve and David Grant Richard, the son of Edward H. Richard of Rancho Santa Fe, Calif.


Jodi L. Smith Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Howard of New York and St.-Jean-Cap-Ferrat, France, have announced the engagement of her daughter, Jodi Lynn Smith, to Jeffrey Thomas Wilson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas E. Wilson of Dunwoody, Ga.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Smith, the daughter of the late Stephen Smith, is 24 years old and graduated from Vanderbilt University.
She is an assistant buyer at Bloomingdale's in New York.
Her stepfather is an inventor and businessman.


Christine Riker Has Wedding
Christine Gail Riker, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Riker of Wantagh, L.I., was married yesterday to Christian Ulfsson Hammarskjold, a son of Helga Hammarskjold of Haverford, Pa., and Ulf Hammarskjold of Willistown, Pa.
The Rev.
Richard Sarley officiated at the United Methodist Church of Valley Forge, Pa.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from Bucknell University and is an installation director for Shared Medical Systems in Malvern, Pa., a software company for hospitals.
Her father retired as the New York manager of the Foxboro Company, an equipment manufacturer in Foxboro, Mass.
Her mother, Frances Riker, is the personnel director of the Seneca-Delco Corporation, a tableware company in Port Washington, L.I.


Finding Help After Leaving a World of Madness
The day after Christmas of 1989, Brian L. began running through the halls of the clinic where he worked, ranting and screaming at the staff, demanding to be hospitalized.
"I just couldn't stand the idea of going home for the holidays -- that year was really bad for me," Brain remembered last week.
"I was misusing my medication. At the hospital, I knew people were always singing and celebrating the holidays. I saw it as a way for me not to be at home."


New Law Tightens Students' Work Hours
ADENIKE AKINTOBI, a 16-year-old senior at Hemptead High School, had been working five days a week at the Ludlum Enrichment after-school program, often for more than four hours a day.
But since a new State Child Labor Law went into effect, her hours have been cut and her days reduced to four.
"Now I have more free time, but less money to contribute to my family phone bill and to put away for college," Miss Akintobi said.
"I had hoped to save for a car, but now I won't be able to get one."


2 IN UNION CHARGED WITH TIES TO MOB
Two officers of a Teamsters local representing 5,000 construction workers in the metropolitan area have been charged by a court-appointed union investigator with having ties to organized crime and face expulsion from the union if they are convicted in administrative hearings.
Charles M. Carberry, an independent officer with broad powers to root out corruption in the teamsters, said yesterday that he had filed the charges against Robert Sasso, the president of Local 282 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, and Michael Carbone, its secretary-treasurer.


Catholic Foster Homes Let Youths Receive Birth Control Counseling
New York City and Catholic foster-care agencies have reached an agreement that allows the city to tell teen-agers in Catholic-run group homes about birth control and abortion services without the active participation of the agencies.
The city will send the approximately 1,800 foster children who are ages 12 and older letters detailing their right to family planning counseling through one of three centers financed by the city.
The city will arrange transportation to the centers for those teen-agers who send in reply cards indicating that they wish to receive the counseling.


Try 'Plastic Lumber' On Expressway
In "Expressway Widening Faces Hurdles"  [ Nov. 17 ] , you point out that it is not clear that widening the Long Island Expressway will be a benefit over the long term.
Added capacity will be consumed prior to completion, as development expands to the East.
The proposed H.O.V. lanes, in the long run, will not reduce the total volume of traffic or reduce the attendant air pollution.
They will encourage more people to drive.
Neither weaning the American public from the automobile nor shifting the responsibility of reducing use of the automobile to the individual has proven successful.
Improving and expanding mass transportation would be a much better alternative than widening the L.I.E. for moving people on Long Island.
However, assuming that there will be no stopping the paving of the Island, the construction of the L.I.E. provides some opportunities to test and beneficially use a numerous variety of stabilized waste products.
And, in some cases the reused materials may be better than the virgin materials that are now being used or are planned for use.


Jill Lisa Rosen To Wed in July
Dr. and Mrs.
Alan A. Rosen of Syosset, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Jill Lisa Rosen, to Stuart Marc Pulvirent, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Pulvirent of Old Bethpage, L.I.
A July wedding is planned.
Ms.
Rosen, 29 years old, is a psychiatric social worker at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father is a dentist in New York.
Her mother teaches third grade at Public School 2 in Jackson Heights, Queens.


New Theory on the Christmas Star
A RUTGERS astronomer thinks he may have stumbled onto the scientific explanation of the Christmas star.
In an article appearing in next month's issue of Sky &amp; Telescope magazine, the astronomer, Dr.
Michael Molnar, manager of the physics instructional labs at Rutgers, argues that the star that led the Magi to Bethlehem was actually the moon eclipsing the planet Jupiter.
Since the issue reached the newsstands two weeks ago, Dr.
Molnar's theory has provoked angry letters from some Christians and attracted attention from as far away as the British Broadcasting Corporation in London.


Anna D. Kellam Weds R. T. Huff
Anna Douglass Kellam, a student at New York University, and Rodney Thatcher Huff, an assistant media planner at N. W. Ayer Inc., a New York advertising agency, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Harry Crandall officiated at Hungars Episcopal Church in Bridgetown, Va., assisted by the Rev.
Leo Cervantes, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Huff, 22 years old, is a daughter of Lucinda W. Kellam of Franktown, Va., and Lucius J. Kellam 3d of Belle Haven, Va.
Her father retired as president of Kellam Energy Inc., an oil and gas company in Belle Haven.


A Nonagenarian in Paris: A Conversation With Julian Green
"WELCOME to the South," Julian Green said, receiving a visitor to his apartment in the heart of Paris.
A Confederate flag hung at the end of a narrow corridor.
First-person accounts and other Civil War documents filled bookcases.
Furniture from Georgia brought here by his father at the turn of the century has pride of place in the dimly lighted sitting room.
"This is the American South in France," he added, with a smile that acknowledged his poetic license.
Born in Paris 91 years ago, Mr.
Green is recognized today as one of France's foremost writers.
He has lived here most of his life; in 1972 he became the first American to be elected to the 40-member Academie Francaise, and he is one of the few living writers to see his works collected in Gallimard's prestigious Pleiade library.
All but two of his 18 novels, 5 plays, 14 volumes of diaries, 4 books of autobiography, 6 collections of essays and 2 history books were written in French.
"I am not prolific," he likes to say.
"I am just very old."


Sandi Lenora Haynes Is Married
Sandi Lenora Haynes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sandy Haynes of Columbia, S.C., was married yesterday to the Rev.
Cleotha Robertson, a son of Rachel Smith of Charlotte, N.C., and the late James Robertson.
The Rev.
Harry S. Wright performed the ceremony assisted by the Rev.
Henry G. Scott at the Cornerstone Baptist Church in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Robertson, 26 years old, is the associate director of development for the Dance Theater of Harlem.
She graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. in arts management from the State University of New York at Binghamton.
Her father is a regional vice president in the Columbia office of the Primerica Corporation, a financial services company based in New York.
Her mother is a teacher at the Gibbes Middle School in Columbia, the capital of South Carolina.


'Bugsy' Muscles In on Hollywood Glamour
Driving along a sunny, palm-lined Hollywood street that might as well have "movie set" bannered across it, Bugsy Siegel asks his pal George Raft, "How would someone go about getting a screen test?" -- as if being a gangster, a family man, a womanizer, a murderer, a snazzy dresser and a guy preoccupied with his tan weren't enough.
Everyone wants to be a star.
In Warren Beatty's brilliantly seductive and funny performance, Ben Siegel is vain and violent, with a certain crackpot charm; they didn't call him Bugsy for nothing.
And, as he was in real life, Bugsy is hopelessly enamored of the movies.


GRADY'S GIFT
Thank you for Howell Raines's article.
Such a story of healing is what we all need in this politically bleak time.
It was a rare gift to read this on a gray, cold December morning.
MARY GENE DEVLIN
Deerfield, Mass.


Boston Garden Proves Gloomy Again for Jazz
The Boston Garden is no garden spot for the Utah Jazz.
On Friday night, the Jazz lost their 21st straight game there, falling to the Celtics, 112-101.
Utah has never won a game at the Garden.
"I haven't won in this building, but the Celtics have had some good teams," said Utah guard John Stockton.
"We'll keep trying, but sometimes it's like knocking your head against the wall."
Boston, which leads the Atlantic Division, has won 12 of its last 14 games.
Utah, the Midwest leader, lost for only the second time in 10 games.


Peering Deeper Into the Mystique Of Rembrandt
He has been portrayed as the quintessential earnest burher and a selfish scoundrel, as a lonely visionary and the founder of a popular school of painting.
What is known for certain about Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn does not make for an especially flattering portrait: When he ended an affair with his son's nanny, she sued him for breach of promise; in turn, he saw that she was committed to a women's house of correction.
His relationships with his housemaids, coupled with the economic mismanagement and selfish extravagance that precipitated his financial demise, helped shatter a public reputation he had carefully crafted.
Once the prosperous head of a busy studio, he was buried with no money to his name in an unknown rented grave.


Text of Declaration: 'Mutual Recognition' and 'an Equal Basis'
Following is the text of a declaration signed yesterday in Alma-Ata, Kazakhstan, by the heads of the 11 republics forming the Commonwealth of Independent States, as transmitted by the Tass press agency:
THE INDEPENDENT STATES -- the Azerbaijani Republic, the Republic of Armenia, the Republic of Byelorussia, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Republic of Kirghizia, the Republic of Moldavia, the Russian Federation, the Republic of Tadzhikistan, Turkmenia, the Republic of Uzbekistan and Ukraine,


The Top Woman in Nassau Government
IT is 7:15 in the morning, and Deputy County Executive Santa C. Rozzi is at her desk.
She is the only person working on the fourth floor of the Nassau County Executive Building in Mineola.
Even the secretaries will not be in for a while.
As Mrs.
Rozzi deals with the stack of documents on her desk, the telephone repeatedly interrupts her.
She takes all calls and fields a wide variety of questions.


This Week: Inside, Outside
Welcome to the first day of winter.
If the ground is frozen where you are, get out there and mulch those perennial beds -- now.
If it's 60 degrees outside, don't.


TAKING SIDES AGAINST OURSELVES
Bray candidly addresses themes that are often suppressed, and, like the Hill-Thomas confrontation itself, her article highlights the complexity and diversity of viewpoints in the African-American community.
It also made the important contribution of focusing on some of the special challenges black women face.
MURIEL MORISEY SPENCE Assistant Professor of Law, Temple University
Philadelphia


If You're Thinking of Living in: The Flatiron District
BETWEEN the Civil War and World War I, the elegant stores, restaurants and hotels that multiplied between 14th and 23d Streets, from Broadway to Sixth Avenue, made the area the city's most glamorous shopping district.
On and near Broadway between 15th and 23d Street were, among others, Lord &amp; Taylor and Gorham silversmiths.
Sixth Avenue (now Avenue of the Americas) was home to B. Altman, the Hugh O'Neill Store and -- the biggest, grandest of them all -- the huge Siegel-Cooper department store in an ornate six-story building.


Children's Books
PISH, POSH, SAID HIERONYMUS BOSCH
By Nancy Willard.
Illustrated by the Dillons.
Unpaged.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $18.95. (All ages)


Looking Inward


RECORD BRIEFS
'Gershwin Performs Gershwin'
George Gershwin, Abbie Mitchell, Edward Matthews, Ruby Elzy, others.
Musicmasters 5062-2-RC; CD and cassette.
These are special recordings no Gershwin enthusiast should miss.
Included are two 1934 installments of the "Music by Gershwin" program on NBC radio, a guest appearance on Rudy Vallee's "Fleischmann Hour" in 1932 and rehearsal recordings, made for Gershwin's own study purposes, of the Second Rhapsody (1931) and sections of "Porgy and Bess" (1935) -- nearly 70 minutes all told.


Why So Many More Americans Die in Fires
IN some ways, the United States has made spectacular progress.
Fires no longer consume a swath of 18,000 buildings as they did in the Great Chicago Fire of 1871, or kill half of a town of 2,400 people, as they did the same night in Peshtigo, Wis.
Other than the Beverly Hills Supper Club fire in Kentucky in 1977, it has been four decades since more than 100 Americans died in a fire.


Peering Into a World Under Glass
THE tropical rain forest, as expected, was misty and choked with overgrown vegetation, obscuring the view.
The 30 of us, each excited at the prospect of being the first to sight a particularly elusive creature, peered through the breaks in the lush greenery with the vigilance of ardent bird watchers.
Then, suddenly, one of our group yelled: "There's one! I just saw one!"
The rest of us rushed over.
There, indeed, was one of the creatures who had first snared our attention several months ago -- a Biospherian.
Soon, the Biospherian, a man, was joined by two others, a woman and another man.
The woman saw us and waved.


A Favorite Arkin Role: Writer and Grandfather
ONE of the joys of being a grandparent is being able to dote on cherished grandchildren.
Whether it is bestowing a coveted toy, cuddling up in an easy chair to tell a story of long-ago childhood memories or baking holiday treats together, these experiences help forge bonds that children carry with them into adulthood.
Grandparents are singularly suited to offer their grandchildren memorable gifts.
For Molly Arkin, who will be 5 years old in January, her grandfather gave her something very special indeed: her own book.


Familiar Result for the Leafs
As they find themselves being buried deeper and deeper in the cellar of the Norris Division, the Toronto Maple Leafs can no longer derive any satisfaction from playing well in a losing effort.
The Maple Leafs played solidly against the Washington Capitals, but still lost, 4-3, on Friday night.
The Maple Leafs are 0-5-1 in their last six games and have won only twice this month.
Sabres 4, Oilers 4
BUFFALO (AP) -- Tony Tanti scored three goals for Buffalo, which is 0-8-4 since its last victory.
Tanti's hat trick was his first for the Sabres.
He scored once in the first period and twice in the third.


Professor vs. Ramsey
An Auburn professor said that the former football player ERIC RAMSEY threatened to blow the whistle on the athletic department to keep from being disciplined for cheating.
The Montgomery (Ala.) Advertiser reported the educator's comments yesterday, on the eve of Ramsey's appearance on "60 Minutes," where he was to play tape recordings he made secretly during meetings with coaches and boosters.
Ramsey has said that during those meetings, he received cash and gifts in violation of N.C.A.A. regulations.
ROBERT W. SCHAEFFER, a psychology professor, said students in his class turned in Ramsey for cheating on a test in 1989.
But Schaeffer said the vice president for academic affairs dropped the charge against Ramsey after the player mentioned alleged wrongdoing in the football program.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL 3-16  11-STATE COMMONWEALTH FORMED
Eleven republics of the dying Soviet Union formally constituted themselves as the Commonwealth of Independent States, dedicated to reversing their current slide toward economic and political chaos.  1  BAKER WARY ON COMMONWEALTH
Secretary of State Baker was said to believe that the new commonwealth had little chance of long-term survival and to expect a dozen independent states with different policies and different prospects for success.  1  News Analysis: The commonwealth is a product of crude realism.  13  PROTESTS IN PHNOM PENH
Cambodia's fragile peace process came to a halt when the Government told leaders of the Khmer Rouge to stay out of the country as major protest demonstrations swept through the capital.  3  ISRAEL FREES KIDNAPPED LEBANESE
The Israeli military freed three Lebanese civilians nearly 36 hours after kidnapping them in south Lebanon.
The military said it had freed them after determining that they were not connected to terrorism.  3  GOVERNING PARTY WINS IN TAIWAN
The governing Nationalist Party won a major victory in Taiwan's first full election in more than four decades, as voters appeared to rebuff opposition calls for independence from China.  7  Events have softened the memory of martial law in Poland.  8  President Bush envisions reshaping intelligence agencies.  9  NATIONAL 18-33  THE UNQUICK FIX
Economic analysis: It has long been an article of faith among economists and Government officials that when the economy goes bad, the Federal Reserve can solve the problem by lowering interest rates, as the Fed did again Friday.
In this recession, that solution has not yet worked, for a number of reasons.  1  AGONIZING CHOICE ON HEALTH CARE
As health costs climb, there is serious talk about rationing of high-priced care, of avoiding treatment that is unlikely to succeed.
And it is in the nation's intensive-care units that all the financial, technological and ethical dilemmas converge.  1  House Democrats will hold "town meetings" on health care.  25  THE POST-CUOMO RACE
Both political parties are sorting out the might-have-been's, trying to discern the new Presidential terrain now that Governor Cuomo has decided not to run.  33  Ten dramatic weeks: how Cuomo reached his decision.  32  With that decision behind him, what of the Governor's future?  32  Governor Clinton is off and running, on his record.  30  Washington Talk: The '96 campaign?
It's already under way.  18  FOR URBAN COWBOYS
Montana is experiencing a new real-estate phenomenon: the carving of big, open ranches into "ranchettes" of as little as 20 acres -- often too small to graze a single head of cattle but big enough to meet the cowboy fantasy of a city dweller.  1  MILLIONAIRES WANTED
The Government has put "millionaire visas" on the market, offering United States citizenship to foreigners willing to invest at least $1 million in an American business.
So far, there have been few takers.  18  HAZE ALONG THE BORDER
El Paso's air pollution is among the worst in the nation, and American officials are increasingly reluctant to place all the blame on the Mexican side of the border.  18  The Government decided not to seek an indictment of Mayor Bradley.  18  REGIONAL 34-40 KAHANE AQUITTAL
An Egyptian immigrant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, was acquitted of charges that he was the gunman who assassinated Rabbi Meir Kahane last year at a pro-Zionist meeting in a midtown Manhattan hotel.  36  MARRIED TO THE MOB?


Bob Ross, the Frugal Gourmet of Painting
To those who have never been hospitalized or under prolonged house arrest, the name Bob Ross may be unfamiliar.
But almost anyone who has spent a great deal of time flicking television channels knows the bearded, frizzy-haired 48-year-old artist who gives instructions in a soothing, sonorous voice that is the aural equivalent of Demerol."I think today we'll put a happy little cloud in the sky," he will say, very gently, while dabbing at an easel.
"And here we have a very nice little sky."
Bob Ross's television show, "The Joy of Painting," is a no-frills "paint-along" lesson based on Mr.
Ross's theory that any novice, no matter how inept, can paint a complete landscape in 26 minutes by exactly following his time-saving techniques.
For many nonpainting viewers, Mr.
Ross's hypnotic delivery and inspirational message provide balm to agitated nerves and, sometimes, respite from insomnia, side effects that have given Mr.
Ross cultlike status.
They have also made "The Joy of Painting," which began in 1983 and is now carried on 277 stations, the top-rated show in the rarefied arena of art programs on public television.
In the New York metropolitan area, it can be seen on Channel 21 Tuesday through Friday at 2:30 P.M. (followed by "Quilt in a Day") and Saturday afternoons at 2.
Channel 13 will resume broadcasting "The Joy of Painting" in the spring.


Corrections
A caption for the rendering of a Danbury, Conn., project accompanying an article on Nov. 3 about reworking downtown centers and a caption for a drawing accompanying a Posting column entry on Dec. 1 about a shopping center in Armonk, N.Y., both omitted credit lines for the artist.
He is Robert Becker.
The Times learned of the errors only recently, in a letter from Mr.
Becker.


Packers Crunch Vikings
Green Bay Packers Coach Lindy Infante gave his Minnesota Vikings' counterpart a most unusual retirement present -- a thrashing that matched the most lopsided home loss of Jerry Burns's career.
Vince Workman scored twice today as the Packers finished what might also be Infante's last season with a 27-7 victory.


Foreign Affairs; Tomorrow's Germany
One piece of tomorrow stepped out of the shadows last week: The new united Germany will follow an independent and assertive foreign policy, one that in time will claim for Germany political influence equal to its vast economic strength -- and one that eventually will lead to Germany's displacing the U.S. as the paramount power in Europe.
But that future is not now. And that future need not make the world tremble.


Cuomo's Contribution
IN one of those genuine quirks of human history and fate, Mario Cuomo's greatest opportunity to contribute may have arisen from his decision not to run.
As difficult as it is for those in the heat, dust and rare grandeur of the political arena to imagine, there is something more important than merely
being
President.
It is not the only focus of leadership.
It is not the only platform from which one can serve.
It is not the only fulcrum from which to change the world.


Mary H. Adams Is to Be Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
David B. Findlay Jr. of New Canaan, Conn., have announced the engagement of her daughter Mary Holbrook Adams to Anthony Edward Goldsmith, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward P. Goldsmith of Los Angeles.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Adams, 30 years old, is also a daughter of the late Peter R. Adams.
She graduated from Kenyon College and is a graduate student in psychology at Pepperdine University.
Her late father was a stockbroker.
Her mother, Mimi Findlay, owns a New York antiques business bearing her name.
Her stepfather is the president of an art gallery in New York bearing his name.


On Installing Dowels In New or Old Pieces
DOWELS, wood pegs that act like nails or screws but are held in place by glue, are used to fasten furniture, even antiques.
Expertly installed dowels usually create stronger longer-lasting joints than metal fasteners.
But no matter how well installed, they may break if loosened by age or abuse of the furniture.
Repairing dowel joints is not too difficult for those with moderate woodworking experience and the right tools.
The chief requirements are patience and careful workmanship.
Fine and antique furniture should be repaired by a professional restorer.


Fantasies of Gender Violence
To the Editor:
I was astonished to see Maureen Dowd, in her review of "Under Fire" (Nov. 17), try to blacken the men's work with its many complications by associating it with Ollie North.
This depraved Geronimo is a long way from the inward-looking men that I know in the work.
She goes out of her way to attack Deborah Tannen as well.
This is the third time that The Times has put forward inappropriate scripts of gender warfare in recent weeks.
The media writers carry fantasies of gender violence in their heads, and so they can't see what is actually happening.
The men's work does not fit the structure inside a marine's head, or inside Maureen's head, and that makes her very irritated.
ROBERT BLY Minneapolis


Streetscapes: The Municipal Lodging House; A 1909 Home for the Homeless
IF Mayor David N. Dinkins has been perturbed by the opposition to his plan for 100-bed shelters for the homeless, he would surely take a suggestion for a facility 10 times that size as a bad joke.
Yet that is exactly what New York City put up in 1909 at 432 East 25th Street.
This shelter stood for 40 years but the chilling irony is that the 1909 Municipal Lodging House remains the only city building built in Manhattan for single homeless men and women.


NATIONALISTS WIN TAIWAN ELECTIONS
The governing Nationalist Party won a major victory today in Taiwan's first full election in more than four decades, as voters appeared to rebuff opposition calls for a declaration of independence from China.
Communist leaders in Beijing, who had been intensely concerned about the election and had warned that they would attack if Taiwan declared its independence, are expected to be as relieved as their adversaries in the Nationalist Party, or Kuomintang.


Scaffold Covers Capital Sites
For the next three to five years, souvenir photos of the Lincoln and Jefferson Memorials in Washington are likely to show some scaffolding.
The reason: the National Park Service's Office of Historic American Buildings began a study of the structures this month.
During the study, a movable scaffold 8 feet wide and 200 feet high will make its way around the memorials.
Sometime next year there will be scaffolding around and above the Lincoln Memorial's entrance, a spokesman said.


A Great Era Of Recording Just Ahead?
By now, the transformation is unmistakable: the driving force in contemporary musical life is not the concert but the recording.
It is primarily through recordings that performers make careers and through recordings that most listeners hear most music.
Just over a decade ago, this situation would have been more dismaying.
There then seemed no coherent musical vision in the releases of recording companies.
Their main interest was in technological novelties -- leading to such failed formats as eight-track tape and quadraphonic sound.
Splicing performances was the rule, not the exception.
Companies vied to enshrine and market warhorses.
And as in the publishing industry, smaller independent companies were swallowed by corporations in which, presumably, individual taste would count for less.
The CD's arrival, so universally hailed, was an economic boon but also involved major sonic and musical compromises, generally unacknowledged and only now being addressed in recording techniques and the design of players.


The Picture of Martha
"And this was taken when she was born," says the young woman who asks to be known as Martha, laying a snapshot atop an impressive array of her eldest daughter's school awards.
It shows a wrinkly infant cradled in her mother's arms, a typical photo except that Martha's face has been scissored out.
"I was so depressed then. I didn't have any self-esteem."
The days when Martha so hated her life that she couldn't bear to look at herself are over now, in part because of programs supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


It's Not Too Little, But It's Too Late
If the Giants had played like this all season, they would be headed for the playoffs again.
Instead, they finished a disappointing 8-8 season with an impressive 24-20 upset victory over the Houston Oilers.
In a game with much significance for the playoff-bound Oilers and little except pride on the line for the Giants, the Giants rolled to a 24-6 lead early in the third quarter.
Then Warren Moon steered the Oilers' explosive run-and-shoot offense to two fourth-quarter touchdowns, and the Giants' defense had to hang on.
It did.


Fed Action Kills the Dollar
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
127.53
129.10
135.55
per Dollar
W.German Mark
1.5365
1.5900
1.5289
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1563
1.1430
1.1600
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.8580
1.8155
1.8860
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$358.50
$359.00
$381.25
Republic National Bank Currency: Friday NY Close


Israel Releases 3 Lebanese Seized by Commandos
Israel freed three Lebanese civilians in south Lebanon today, nearly 36 hours after its commandos seized them as terrorist suspects.
The three were handed over to the International Committee of the Red Cross in Israel's security zone in south Lebanon.
"When it was found out that they were not directly connected to terrorist activities they were released," a military official in Jerusalem said.


Japan Irked as Bush Visit Turns Into a Trade Quest
Japanese leaders are reacting with anger and dismay to President Bush's decision to travel here next month with an entourage of executives from the American automobile and other industries to increase pressure on Tokyo to open up its markets to American exports.
Senior Japanese officials say they do not see any possibility of significant concessions on automobile imports, and fear is rising in Japan that the visit could end up deepening mistrust and recriminations between Americans and the Japanese instead of easing tensions as it is supposed to do.


Helping Those Who Help


Camera
There is a very good chance that the 35-millimeter film ready to go into your camera for the holidays will give you substandard pictures.
It may have come from the flourishing "gray market" in film.
This market is run by middlemen who buy good film -- often by major manufacturers like Fuji or Kodak -- in foreign countries, and ship it to the United States under unsupervised conditions.
When foreign exchange rates are in their favor, they sell it to American distributors, who in turn pass it on to local dealers or to mail-order film companies.


Lorraine Slavin, A Lawyer, Wed
Lorraine Slavin, a daughter of Frances M. Slavin of Greenwich, Conn., and the late George J. Slavin, was married yesterday to George McGrath Dessauer, the son of Virginia M. Dessauer of Eastchester, N.Y., and the late George A. Dessauer.
The Rev.
Stephen DeLuca officiated at St.
Agnes Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is an associate at the law firm of Ivey, Barnum &amp; O'Mara in Greenwich.
She graduated from Marymount College and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She has also received master's degrees in deaf education from Hunter College and in special education from Manhattanville College.


The Case for a Conspiracy
OCTOBER SURPRISE
America's Hostages in Iran and the Election of Ronald Reagan.
By Gary Sick.
Illustrated. 277 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $23.


California Team Joins the Rockies
The Visalia Oaks minor league baseball team has announced it will become a farm team for the expansion Colorado Rockies after the 1992 season.


We Need National Standards for Those Who Give Child Care
To the Editor:
The chilling account of the au pair from Switzerland charged with murder and arson in the death of the baby she was hired to care for (news article, Dec. 4) highlights again the need to examine our views on child care.


Harlem Hospital Passes Review And Regains Full Accreditation
Eight months after being put on probation for poor record keeping and safety violations, the Harlem Hospital Center has regained full accreditation from a national agency, a spokesman for the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation said yesterday.
The hospital, at Lenox Avenue and 135th Street, was put on probation in the spring pending a plan to correct the violations and a review by the agency, the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health-Care Organizations.
A poor review would have cost Harlem its accreditation, which would have crippled its ability to obtain Medicare and Medicaid payments, the bulk of its revenue.
The hospital, one of 11 municipal hospitals, faces financial difficulties and has laid off more than 150 workers this year.


New York Union Chooses Furloughs Over Layoffs
The largest municipal labor union in New York City has agreed to accept unpaid furloughs of a day a week for 900 highway and bridge workers to avert nearly 600 layoffs this winter, the Dinkins administration and union officials said yesterday.
The agreement, announced in a statement by Mayor David N. Dinkins and Stanley Hill, the executive director of District Council 37, reflects a reversal of the union's long-held opposition to furloughs of municipal workers and could affect negotiations with other city agencies looking to trim their budgets.


Technology; Adobe Tackles the Paper Glut With a Software for All Systems
SINCE the introduction of the personal computer in the 1970's, there have been numerous predictions about the impending arrival of the paperless office.
None of them have come true.
Now Adobe Inc., a Silicon Valley company that designs printer software, has proposed a strategy that could have a profound effect on the way computer-based documents are distributed and used.
Essentially, it provides a single format to distribute documents electronically over a network or on a disk so they can be viewed and searched with a computer.


Sunday Menu; Comforting Orzo Bedecked With the Florets of Late Fall
This simple vegetable dish takes advantage of the best the late fall has to offer, particularly at farmers' markets.


The Executive Computer; Can I.B.M. Learn From a Unit It Freed?
WITH all the tumult at I.B.M. headquarters in Armonk, N.Y., -- earnings way down, stock prices slipping, 20,000 more jobs to be eliminated -- good cheer may be a hard to come by.
But there is reason for optimism, if one looks far south, to Lexington, Ky.
In what may turn out to be a model for the quasi-independent business units that are at the core of I.B.M.'s plans to decentralize, a company that broke free from I.B.M. last year has moved swiftly and aggressively to become a force in the laser printer business.


Raising Children Right Isn't Always Enough
RICHARD L. MURPHY, New York's Commissioner of Youth Services, visited Thomas Jefferson High School in the East New York section of Brooklyn last spring to see its youth program.
Organizers listed out loud the things they needed money for: homework tutoring, an after-school session, a burial fund.


Topics of The Times; December Sun
Out in the woods, the December sun gets through the leafless trees to shine on the forest floor.
It lights up the modest winter covering of soft ground pine, striped wintergreen and glossy pipsissewa.
In the city on a steep-sided cross street, the sun hardly gets to the sidewalk, except when it bounces off windows and breaks up the pavement with watery splotches.
In the country, the sun's flat rays pick out the grain of the tree bark -- the dark seams on tulip trees, the fine furrows of white ash, the beech tree's elegant gray coating, the untidy layers of shag bark hickory.
In the city, the sun plays like a spotlight on details of buildings -- grotesque little sculptures on old West Side apartments, stone filigrees of leaves and flowers half-hidden under eaves.
Sideswiping the facades of cast iron buildings in Soho, it shapes the columns with their own shadows.


STAVING OFF THE SILENCERS
This is a good time to celebrate the First Amendment, writes Anthony Lewis in his article "Staving Off the Silencers" (Dec. 1).
One wonders if he considered the current occupants of the Supreme Court.
How would they have ruled on the Sedition Act?
SCOTT ISLER
Brooklyn


Answering The Mail
Q.
My house is more than 30 years old and has sand-finish walls on the inside.
The walls have been painted many times, but still have a rough surface and are difficult to wash.
I suppose they can be sanded smooth, but I do not think I could do that.
Is there any other way to smooth the walls?
A.
Other than sanding with a commercial belt sander, there are two other possibilities.
One is to hire a paperhanger to cover the walls with a special heavy-duty lining that is sold for use on rough or textured walls.
That would leave a smooth surface that will take paint or wallpaper.
The other possibility is to hire a contractor to install new drywall or paneling.


From the Frigid North Is Carved a Native Terrain
THE idea for Nunavut, a land where Canada's Eskimos could rule themselves, had been around for a long time before it was accepted by Ottawa last week.
Still, the announcement that a fifth of the country will be carved from the Northwest Territories and entrusted to 17,500 Eskimos caused many Canadians to pull out maps for a look at the great white vastness that has been at the heart of much of their romance about themselves.
A sample of what Nunavut, meaning "our land" in the Eskimos' Inuktituk language, will entail: The Land -- An American serviceman stationed in the Arctic in World War II described the region as "nothin' but miles and miles of miles and miles," a region that most Canadians know little of.
The "true north" of which they sing in 'O Canada' is officially designated as beginning at the 60th degree of latitude, 1,500 miles beyond the summer cottages that are the furthest north that most Canadians venture.
Another 1,500 miles lie between there and Alert, the last settlement before the North Pole.
Under Ottawa's proposal, most of this will become Nunavut.


CAMPUS LIFE: Harvard; Magazine Issue On Homosexuality Leads to Rallies
A recent issue of a conservative campus magazine that was entirely devoted to the subject of homosexuality has stirred strong debate at Harvard University.
The magazine, Peninsula, in its issue distributed Nov. 12, argued that homosexuality is "bad" for individuals.
Members of the Bisexual, Gay, and Lesbian Students Association held a series of gatherings and rallies in the days immediately after publication, and an exchange of letters and opinion articles has raged in other campus publications.


For Israel The Zionism Vote Has a Dark Lining
THE United Nations last week repealed its 1975 resolution defining Zionism as "a form of racism and racial discrimination," but the Israelis on hand for the General Assembly vote were hardly euphoric.
Israel's Foreign Minister, David Levy, managed a smile as delegates rushed to shake his hand.
But another Israeli official sourly told a well-wisher, "Some people are going to regret this day in a year's time."
Mr.
Levy said the repeal had removed "a terrible stain" on the United Nations' record, and American Jewish groups welcomed it as the righting of a wrong done to Israel in the course of the cold war, when the Soviet Union and the United Nations' third-world majority used the organization as a platform for attacking democracy, capitalism and Western policy in general.


Thomas Is Questionable for a Duel With Sanders for the Rushing Title
Before last weekend, the game between the Lions and the Bills in Buffalo this afternoon seemed as if it would have all the makings of a heavyweight championship fight, with Detroit running back Barry Sanders and Buffalo running back Thurman Thomas, two former college teammates at Oklahoma State, slugging it out for the National Football League rushing title.
Sanders leads the league with 1,440 yards on 316 carries and Thomas is second with 1,407 yards on 288 carries.
Dallas running back Emmitt Smith is stalking both with 1,403 yards on 333 carries.
But now, Thomas is listed as questionable for the game with an ankle injury, and Marv Levy, the Buffalo coach, said Friday that he may not play his star back, nor quarterback Jim Kelly or wide receiver James Lofton, against Detroit, so that they might be in better shape for the playoffs.


Making a Difference; Keeping Banks at Bay
ON Matthew P. Fink's office credenza sits a framed photograph of President Roosevelt signing the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933, the law that restricts commercial banks from entering the securities business, and more precisely, from Mr.
Fink's point of view, from peddling their own mutual funds.
The photo has had particular relevance lately for Mr.
Fink, who recently became president of the powerful Investment Company Institute, the only trade group in Washington that represents mutual funds.


Forget Dr. No
The disintegration of the Soviet Union has raised fears that hundreds or even thousands of nuclear scientists who earn only a few dollars a month may be tempted to sell their talents to the highest bidders.
Their presumed availability to renegade nations or terrorists causes almost as much concern as the problem of controlling the 27,000 nuclear weapons on Soviet soil.
It's enough to conjure up the nightmares that James Bond faced in Dr.
No or Ernst Stavro Blofeld, with their scores of hired hands preparing weapons of mass destruction to blackmail an unsuspecting world.
But it's important to separate fact from fiction.


Talking: Tax Appeals; Deciding If and How To Protest
AS property taxes soar and incomes fall behind rising prices, more and more homeowners are challenging their property assessments.
"The sentiment is growing that enough is enough," said Dr.
Eulysses Leid, who recently protested an $11,000 annual tax bill on his three-bedroom raised ranch home in New Rochelle, N.Y., winning a $3,500 reduction.


Who Buys What at Costco
WHAT do warehouse customers buy?
Although businesses are the most important customers -- they constitute about 64 percent of sales nationwide -- it is not stationery, computer paper or ballpoint pens that are the biggest sellers.
Instead, it is groceries and related goods like paper products -- the staples of the typical supermarket -- that dominate the warehouses' sales.


Left Unmoved
It will be a few weeks until Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City is sentenced on the fraud and income tax evasion charges he was convicted of last week.
But if he is resigned to his fate -- in theory, up to 71 years -- he does not seem to feel he is fated to resign.
New Jersey law might let him stay in the $63,000-a-year job while he appeals, but City Council members are hoping he will step aside so they don't have to sue to remove him.
Jersey City, they say, is in a bad way.
It has operated without a budget since September, and has lost 115 police officers and 110 firefighters and suffered serious breaks in its drinking water system.
"We don't want another scorched earth policy," said one Councilman, recalling the time Mr.
McCann lost a bid for re-election in 1985, and his successor found the office files shredded, the carpet ripped and the door locks plugged with glue.
It was during that 1985-1989 interregnum that Mr.
McCann defrauded a Florida bank of the $260,000 he was supposed to use bidding on a marina in Liberty State Park.


Handley Needs A Break Today
To the Sports Editor:
I don't know whose ideas of justice are worse, Judge Roy Bean's or the average Giants fan's.
Of Coach Ray Handley: Some Giants fans want him fired, others want to send him to law school (at their own expense, no less).
I've got the best idea: How about giving him a break?
JIM ENGLISH Bayside, Queens


Patricia Hoeg Marries Richard W. Kenneally
Patricia Mary Hoeg, an associate at the Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher law firm in New York, was married yesterday to Richard William Kenneally, an M.B.A. candidate at New York University.
The Rev.
Michael Palazzo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Francis of Assisi Church in West Nyack, N.Y.


Ms. Brumback To Wed in July
July wedding plans have been announced for Helen Clippert Brumback, a candidate for a master's degree in education at the Bank Street College of Education in New York, and Anthony Charles Leonard Jr., the manager of construction services for Professional Service Industries in Dallas.
Ms.
Brumback, 22 years old, graduated from Vanderbilt University, as did her fiance.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John S. Brumback Jr. of Orlando, Fla., where her father is a citrus grower.


Cuomo's Contribution
IN one of those genuine quirks of human history and fate, Mario Cuomo's greatest opportunity to contribute may have arisen from his decision not to run.
As difficult as it is for those in the heat, dust and rare grandeur of the political arena to imagine, there is something more important than merely
being
President.
It is not the only focus of leadership.
It is not the only platform from which one can serve.
It is not the only fulcrum from which to change the world.


Children's Books; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
AMERICAN TALL TALES.
By Mary Pope Osborne.
Illustrated by Michael McCurdy.
Knopf. $18. (Ages 6 and up) It's no exaggeration to say that these nine stories about larger-than-life American characters, from Davy Crockett to Paul Bunyan, are amusingly told and deftly illustrated in tinted woodcuts.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My house is more than 30 years old and has sand-finish walls on the inside.
The walls have been painted many times, but still have a rough surface and are difficult to wash.
I suppose they can be sanded smooth, but I do not think I could do that.
Is there any other way to smooth the walls?
A.
Other than sanding with a commercial belt sander, there are two other possibilities.
One is to hire a paperhanger to cover the walls with a special heavy-duty lining that is sold for use on rough or textured walls.
That would leave a smooth surface that will take paint or wallpaper.
The other possibility is to hire a contractor to install new drywall or paneling.


Pat Conroy's Tale: Of Time and 'Tides'
Pat Conroy smiled his big, please-believe-I-am-happy smile as he wedged his Santa Claus physique into the Chanel lineup at Le Cirque.
"This is great," he said, widening his blue eyes to let the awe shine through.
He puffed his chest like a jock at an awards banquet and tried to button his blue blazer.
The way Pat Conroy saw lunch, it was "Li'l Abner goes to Le Cirque." "The Prince of Tides," a film based on his most recent autobiographical novel and for which he co-wrote the screenplay with Becky Johnston, was to be shown at a private screening that night in New York City.
And for the moment, Li'l Abner was wearing rose-colored glasses.


A Side Effect Of Rates Cuts
It has been an article of faith among economists and government officials for decades that when the economy goes bad, the Federal Reserve can fix the problem by lowering interest rates.
Lower rates make it cheaper for consumers to take on expensive purchases like cars and appliances and for companies to invest in plants and equipment.
In this slump, that solution has not worked, at least, not yet.
But on Friday the Federal Reserve signaled its determination to keep trying, with a vengeance.
It slashed the discount rate a full point, the steepest cut in 10 years, to a 27-year low of 3 1/2 percent.
Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, said the economic recovery seemed to have stalled earlier this year, after regaining about half the recession's losses.


It's a Mean One; There's No Place To Hide From The Economic Blues
FROM the beginning of the Bush Presidency, the tune from Washington on the economy was upbeat.
At first, the soaring 1980's were said to be ending in a soft landing.
When the recession hit last year, it was promised to be short and mild.
By late last spring, the policymakers were assuring the country that the corner had been turned and new prosperity was at hand.
Last week, the music changed.


Ms. Kass Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen L. Kass of New Rochelle, N.Y., have announced April wedding plans for their daughter, Suzanne Kass, and Gregory Keith Harris, a son of Jack Harris of Stamford, Conn., and Mollie Strugats of Little Neck, Queens.


Previews, That Broadway Malady
You know a broadway musical has become a citywide joke when an 8-year-old boy is dishing it in the men's room at intermission.
At the performance I attended of "Nick and Nora" -- one of the designated press performances near the end of the much-delayed production's ninth week of previews -- I overheard this exchange between a father and his young son:
Father: "They made a mistake being so similar to 'City of Angels.' "


How an Old Government Reactor Managed to Outlive the Cold War
THE last surviving piece of equipment for making nuclear fuel for the American arsenal, the 37-year-old K-Reactor, was designed to survive a one-megaton blast from a Soviet bomb at a range of two miles.
But today environmentalists are more worried about a different kind of blast; they note that the outmoded reactor would not survive a far smaller internal explosion without dumping at least part of its radioactive entrails into the piney wetlands of western South Carolina.
Last week the Secretary of Energy, James D. Watkins, said what had long been obvious: since the other big competitor in the nuclear arms race is giving up, much of the American bomb-production system is no longer needed.
But as he spoke the K-Reactor, on the Savannah River Site, near Aiken, S.C., was awakening from a three-and-a-half-year slumber to resume the production of tritium for bombs.
Mr.
Watkins said it would run as a backup until an alternate source was found.
While the Energy Department was busy converting its mission from making weapons to dismantling and decontaminating its troubled bomb factories, Mr.
Watkins reiterated that a new reactor may be in the wings.


Portraits Capture the Memories of Jewish Immigrant Families
HISTORIANS may ponder how memory alters the truth.
For artists like Marilyn Cohen, memory is truth.
Remembrance is her raw material and time is her medium -- reworked with a playful hand in her collage portraits of families.
Two 4-year-old boys pose with their violins, but one boy in the painting is the father as a child and the other is his son.
The son wears the soldier's medals he won later as a man -- before he died in a German prison camp at the end of World War II.


National Economy Is Reflected At Getty Square
AT the Getty Square branch of the Manhattan Savings Bank here, Eddy Vallely sat with imperial grace at the grand piano in the lobby, playing Christmas carols for depositors the way he has every holiday season for more than 13 years.
Surrounded by poinsettias, the 82-year-old retiree smiled at shoppers who took a few moments to peer through the plate glass window and wave hello.
Two blocks away at the McCrory's store, Margie Kazimir, who had driven down from White Plains, was buying a last-minute present for her husband.


March Wedding for Miss Wildfeuer
March wedding plans for Susan Muriel Wildfeuer and Sim Reuven Shapiro, a son of Drs.
Saul and Miriam Klein Shapiro of Tampa, Fla., and White Plains, have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Wildfeuer of Denver.
Miss Wildfeuer, 22 years old, is an occupational therapy intern at Braintree Rehabilitation Center in Braintree, Mass.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is president of Denver Boneless Beef.


Hornets Keep Eye On Trade Market
The Charlotte Hornets, mired in last place in the Central Division with a 7-19 record, say the chances of any trades are remote, although the team's owner emphasizes the never-say-never approach.
"We are not actively shopping any player, let me stress that," the team owner, George Shinn, told The Winston-Salem Journal.


Barbra Streisand: Don't Get Me Wrong
Barbra Streisand is so passionate about her new film, "The Prince of Tides," that she has overcome her longstanding distrust of journalists to make herself the center of a mammoth publicity blitz.
In recent months, Ms.
Streisand, who co-produced, directed and stars in the film, has been seen all over television and magazines complaining about the hostility of women journalists and recounting her unhappy childhood, which she relates to the film's story of a man coming to terms with trauma and child abuse.
A recent episode in what has become a continuing squabble between Ms.
Streisand and the press happened a month ago, when the 49-year-old star went face to face with Mike Wallace in a "60 Minutes" segment that portrayed her as an unloving daughter and a control freak who tried to direct the interview.
Ms.
Streisand says she was "completely shocked and taken off guard" by the segment.
She was even more incensed by what happened on the following week's program.
After reading viewer mail defending Ms.
Streisand, Mr.
Wallace added, "But we also heard from Barbra, and she said she loved it."


Ann Karoly Marries
Ann Claire Karoly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Karoly of New York, and Dennis John Hickey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Hickey of Buffalo, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Guy Vinci, a Roman Catholic priest, at Old St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
The bride, 35 years old, graduated from Lehigh University and has an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is the director of business development in New York for the Sordoni Skanska Construction Company.
Mr.
Hickey, 39, attended Niagara University and the State University of New York at Buffalo and is the vice president of H &amp; H Building Consultants in New York.


... Don't Penalize the Use of Labor
To the Editor:
Companies should follow the recommendation in "More Layoffs? Hold The Applause," but should also put more emphasis on developing strategies emphasizing the use of appropriate technologies.
It is one thing to develop new technologies for dealing with difficult problems but quite another to overdo the use of capital-based technology to replace human beings.
It has been predicted that within not-too-many years, 3 percent of the work force will be able to produce all the goods required.
What will the others do?
Is it not appropriate, now, to reconsider practices that reward the use of capital and penalize the use of human labor, such as heavy taxes on wages as represented in Social Security taxes and other burdens for employers on direct labor?
ERCOLE ROSA Bronxville, N.Y., Dec. 2


STAVING OFF THE SILENCERS
As the author of a forthcoming biography of John Marshall, I believe that Anthony Lewis incorrectly places Marshall, the great Chief Justice of the United States, among the supporters of the Sedition Act of 1798.
The fact is, Marshall opposed the act and campaigned openly against it in his run for Congress later that year.
In an exchange of letters that appeared in the Virginia Herald (Fredericksburg) on Oct. 2, 1798, Marshall was asked by a Freeholder for his views on the measure.
Marshall replied that "I am not an advocate for the alien and sedition bills: had I been in Congress when they passed, I should . . . certainly have opposed them." Marshall said the legislation was "calculated to create unnecessary discontent and jealousies when our very existence as a nation may depend on our union." He said that if given the opportunity he would "obey the voice of my constituents" and vote for their repeal.
"I shall, indisputably, oppose their revival."


It's a Rain Forest Out There
WHAT'S HAPPENED to the
jungle
?
It's disappearing.
This once-popular word was first used in 1776 in Nathaniel B. Halhed's translation of a code of Hindu laws: "Land Waste for Five Years . . . is called Jungle." It is respectably rooted in the Hindi
jangal
and the Sanskrit
jangala
, "wasteland, desert." After a century of use in this dry sense, the word was applied to uncultivated tropical land, overgrown with grasses and teeming with snakes and creepily wet wildlife; Thomas Macaulay wrote in 1849 of "a vast pool . . . overhung with rank jungle."


Life in the Black Regiments
To the Editor:
It is regrettable that Geoffrey C. Ward should describe "On the Altar of Freedom: A Black Soldier's Civil War Letters From the Front" as "the only sustained contemporaneous account of life in a black regiment I've ever seen" (Nov. 17).


GRADY'S GIFT
Raines tells us in his article that he worried there might be tension between his mother and Grady because of his mother's having been a tough taskmaster.
During the get-together, his mother turned to a visitor and said, "You see, now, that Grady is a strong person." My bet is that his mother knew 40 years ago that 16-year-old Grady was strong -- strong, smart, loving and someone who would bring all of that to bear on her family, along with news of the world outside their ken.
JOAN REYNOLDS
Cape Charles, Va.


CAMPUS LIFE: Dayton; Off-Campus Life To Be Off Limits For Sophomores
Declining enrollment and expensive building renovations have forced the University of Dayton to look for ways to make money.
The Office of Student Development has decided to reel in sophomores, changing the university's housing policy to require them to live on campus.
"To continue to provide the kind of facilities and kind of quality that residents like, we have to change our policy," said William C. Schuerman, dean of students and vice president of student development.


Have You Ever Heard a Boa Go 'Beep'?
Joseph Ottomanelli didn't even know what a beeper was until he saw one worn by a teen-ager who was installing an alarm system at his home.
That's when he got the idea to design beeper covers.
He and his wife, Wendy, own Quality Beeper Covers and Accessories, a division of the All Grey Enterprising Corporation in Brooklyn.
If Mr.
Ottomanelli has his way, the "naked" beeper will become a thing of the past.
But he doesn't make run-of-the-mill beeper cases: his designs are intended to make people look twice.
Among them are cases made of clear vinyl, snakeskin and aluminum.
He also sells decorative chains that can be hooked onto belt loops.
He and his wife began their venture in 1989, making black cases.
Within a year, Mr.
Ottomanelli had received an overwhelming number of calls for colors, he said, and the business took off.
Covers in Many Sizes
"About two-thirds of what we sell now are colors," he said.
The cases come in sizes to fit all beepers, including widely used models like the Motorola Bravo Express, Alpha Bravo, NECIDP 7000 and BPR 2000.
He offers slip-on covers that expose the top of a beeper, as well as fully enclosed designs with an opening for the clip and a clear window for easy access to buttons.
They cost $10 to $20.


Looking Back


RECORD BRIEFS
Giuliani: Guitar Works
David Starobin, guitar. Bridge BCD 9029; CD.
Though best known for his eloquent performances of contemporary music, David Starobin has lately become smitten with an early form of the guitar, the comparatively small, thin-waisted version that flourished in Vienna in the early 19th century.
And through the instrument, he has found a new enthusiasm for 19th-century literature.


Miss Goldsmith To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert S. Goldsmith of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Gillian Suzanne Goldsmith, to Peter David Rittmaster, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
D.
Paul Rittmaster of New York.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Goldsmith, 26 years old, is a recruiter for the management associate program at Citibank in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is the sales manager for Marcus Brothers Textiles Inc. in New York.
Her mother, Juliet Goldsmith, is the director of public information for the Westchester division of the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in White Plains.


Cuttings; Corporate Cottage, Deep in a Forest
When Merck &amp; Company decided to move its corporate headquarters from Rahway, N.J., the pharmaceutical company bought 460 acres of woods and former farm fields in Hunterdon County, a rural area in western New Jersey.
Merck needed space for 1,900 employees, which usually conjures up an image of a huge boxlike office building surrounded by green lawns and asphalt parking lots.
Not this time.


Clinton Record in Leading Arkansas: Successes, but Not Without Criticism
Bill Clinton, whose record over 11 years as Arkansas Governor is a centerpiece of his campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination, likes to cite a recent Newsweek poll in which America's governors rated him the nation's most effective Governor.
It is worth remembering, however, that the poll before the last Presidential election accorded the honor to Michael S. Dukakis.


Chess
There are players who look for easy marks because they don't want to risk losing.
They are not interested in glorious adventures.
But there are others who want to cross swords with the very best, to prove themselves in a hot crucible.
The latter are more likely to become champions.
One of the latter is the United States champion 17-year-old Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn.
In the elite Interpolis International Tournament in Tilburg, the Netherlands, Oct. 17 to Nov. 4 he made a highly respectable even score.
But that gave no hint of how his games went with the world champion, Gary Kasparov of the Soviet Union, and with Kasparov's countryman and challenger for the title, Anatoly Karpov.


Political Talk
Lining Up Endorsements
Even before Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo had taken himself out of the Presidential race, other Democratic candidates were preparing their assaults on New York for the primary here next April.
On Dec. 10 Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas held a fund-raiser at the Waldorf-Astoria in Manhattan that pulled in more than $250,000, said Governor Clinton's director of finance in the Northeast, Paul R. Carey, who is the son of former Gov.
Hugh Carey, under whom Mr.
Cuomo served as Lieutenant Governor.
The elder Mr.
Carey attended the fund-raiser even though he has not officially endorsed anyone in the race, his son said.


CAMPUS LIFE: Yale; Exploring How Literary Gaps Express Trauma
"I have precisely begun with the impossibility of telling this story," wrote Claude Lanzman, the director of "Shoah," a film about the Holocaust.
"I have made this impossibility my point of departure. Blindness was for me the vital condition of creation."
Cathy Caruth, an assistant professor of English at Yale University, uses this quotation to illustrate the premise of a course she teaches called "Literature, Trauma and Culture." The course explores how gaps and ambiguity in literary narratives and film express "truth" about traumatic experiences that concrete, everyday language cannot.


Managing; New in Defense: Teamwork
IT will be another eight years before the Air Force puts its new F-22 fighter plane into service.
But even now, long before the first plane rolls off the production line, the program is being watched closely by military contractors as a test of management techniques being employed for the first time by both the industry and the Pentagon.
The three primary F-22 builders -- the Lockheed Corporation, the General Dynamics Corporation and the Boeing Company -- have largely abandoned the rigid prime contractor-subcontractor arrangements that have been the industry standard.
Instead, they are trying to operate as a flexible team, doling out work and responsibility in whatever way seems most efficient and best takes advantage of each company's strengths, with profits to be shared roughly equally.


The Executive Life; 80's Stress Graduates Can Advance - to Anger
AND now, from the folks who brought you stress-cutting seminars for the 1980's, anger-busting workshops for the 90's.
"Everyone knows that stress causes problems for executives, both on the job and off," said Gilda Carle, a $2,500-a-day organizational development specialist whose clients include I.B.M., General Foods, Mobil Oil and Pitney Bowes.
"It's time to focus on the anger that lies beneath. It's finally O.K. to mention the emotion by name."


Roy Copperud, 76, Journalism Teacher Who Wrote Column
Roy Herman Copperud, a professor of journalism and an authority on the use of the English language, died on Dec. 7 at his home in Altadena, Calif.
He was 76 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his wife, Mary Emily, said.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
NEW GALLERY
A small bronze by Henry Moore, called "Mother and Child," Christo's "Wrapped Modern Art Book," Richard Stankiewicz's "Soldier" and Renoir's "Petite Accoupie" are among the sculptures by 80 artists on view at the new gallery of the Housatonic Community College Museum of Art at 510 Barnum Avenue, Bridgeport.


New Belts for Justice
DAVID JUSTICE is getting a kick up on the new season.
The Atlanta Braves' outfielder is taking karate lessons from JOE CORLEY, a sixth-degree black belt, in hopes that the new discipline will help his coordination and limber his lower back.
A strained back muscle limited him to 109 games with the Braves last season.


Out of the Church, Into the Streets
Traditional gospel is the music of mass choirs, ecstatic solos and pounding, clapping rhythms.
"Real gospel music is an intelligible sermon in song," says Harold Bailey, who led the Harold Bailey singers in the 1960's and 70's.
Throughout its history, this church music has influenced, and been influenced by, the popular music of its time.
Today's acts -- like BeBe and CeCe Winans, Sounds of Blackness, Take Six, Commissioned, Tramaine Hawkins and the Winans brothers -- have added high-priced producers, up-tempo arrangements and pop instrumentations to traditional gospel.
Thus armed they are gaining airplay on so-called contemporary urban radio, home otherwise to acts like Michael Jackson, Luther Vandross, Anita Baker and C &amp; C Music Factory.
As gospel music gains new acceptance, it is once again moving away from its roots.


We Need National Standards for Those Who Give Child Care
To the Editor:
The chilling account of the au pair from Switzerland charged with murder and arson in the death of the baby she was hired to care for (news article, Dec. 4) highlights again the need to examine our views on child care.


It's Sink Or Swim For Jets, Dolphins
As the Jets and the Dolphins head into their game this afternoon at Joe Robbie Stadium, they find themselves as two wild cards searching for a wild-card berth.
The Jets (7-8), losers in their last three games after establishing a 7-5 record, have proved throughout the season that they are completely unpredictable.


Quotation of the Day
"We respect Gorbachev and want him to go gently into retirement in December, as he himself wants. We do not want to carry on the tradition since 1917 of burying our heads of state and having to rebury them later or having to pronounce them criminal." BORIS N. YELTSIN, President of Russia.  [ 1:1. ]


Nicole R. Adler To Wed in April
Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Adler of White Plains, have announced the engagement of their daughter Nicole Renee Adler to Dr.
Mordecai Ari Dicker, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Henry Dicker of Forest Hills, Queens.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Adler, 21 years old, is a senior at Barnard College.
Her father owns Adler Consulting, a transportation planning company in White Plains.
Her mother, Lona T. Adler, is a reading specialist at Public School 48 in the Bronx.


Forget Dr. No
The disintegration of the Soviet Union has raised fears that hundreds or even thousands of nuclear scientists who earn only a few dollars a month may be tempted to sell their talents to the highest bidders.
Their presumed availability to renegade nations or terrorists causes almost as much concern as the problem of controlling the 27,000 nuclear weapons on Soviet soil.
It's enough to conjure up the nightmares that James Bond faced in Dr.
No or Ernst Stavro Blofeld, with their scores of hired hands preparing weapons of mass destruction to blackmail an unsuspecting world.
But it's important to separate fact from fiction.


POSTINGS: Chinatown Project; 8 Stories, Mixed
A vacant lot adjacent to the Manhattan Bridge in Chinatown is soon to be the site for an unusual eight-story building housing garment manufacturers on five floors and a Buddhist temple, a supermarket and a day-care center on the others.
"It is certainly an interesting combination," said Benjamin A. Schaffer of Schaffer Associates, the architect of the project, which has a projected cost of $10 million.
"People will be able to have their children cared for and then go pray at lunch time."


Review/Film; Narcotics Officers Seduced by Drugs
"Rush" is the story of a dutiful rookie police officer named Kristen Cates (Jennifer Jason Leigh) who is enlisted for special hardship duty by Jim Raynor (Jason Patric), her older and more experienced partner.
Kristen's new assignment is to be part of an undercover narcotics operation and pretend that she and Jim are eager to buy drugs.
Jim assures her that he can show her the ropes.
It soon becomes apparent that Jim is a shade too eager to throw himself into his work.
Conforming to strict police rules about drug use, he explains, can blow one's cover within the drug demimonde.
So it's important to know such tricks as injecting baby laxative into a vein to simulate hard drug use, a technique Jim avidly demonstrates for his startled protegee.
He also explains his reasons for circumventing departmental rules about what undercover detectives should do with drugs they buy in the line of duty.
It doesn't take a new recruit of Kristen's acuity to realize that Jim has been sampling the merchandise.


Mr. Gephardt's Irresponsible Economics
Representative Richard Gephardt, the House majority leader, and several Democratic colleagues gave the nation a wrongheaded and irresponsible economics lesson on trade with Japan last week.
Mr.
Gephardt, Senator Don Riegle and four Michigan Representatives said trade deficits with Japan help explain why the U.S. is trapped in recession and why nearly one million Americans have lost their jobs.
Mr.
Gephardt's elixir: Shut out Japanese cars unless Japan eliminates the trade deficit over five years.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My house is more than 30 years old and has sand-finish walls on the inside.
The walls have been painted many times, but still have a rough surface and are difficult to wash.
I suppose they can be sanded smooth, but I do not think I could do that.
Is there any other way to smooth the walls?
A.
Other than sanding with a commercial belt sander, there are two other possibilities.
One is to hire a paperhanger to cover the walls with a special heavy-duty lining that is sold for use on rough or textured walls.
That would leave a smooth surface that will take paint or wallpaper.
The other possibility is to hire a contractor to install new drywall or paneling.


laska Liners Creating Smog, Blocking Views
State authorities in Alaska, responding to angry complaints from residents of the state's most scenic coastal areas, have found that cruise ships are pumping dense amounts of smoke and obscuring views.
They have given the cruise line operators until the end of 1992 to sharply reduce the smoke emissions.
Twenty-five cruise ships -- double the number of 10 years ago -- now call at Alaskan ports each year, and the state's Department of Environmental Conservation said all the operators, meeting with officials last month, pledged to meet the new restrictions.
John Stone, manager of the department's Air Quality Management Section in Juneau, said compliance may require the replacement of engines on some ships, alteration of boilers on others, and the result may be higher prices for their passengers.


Raising Children Right Isn't Always Enough
RICHARD L. MURPHY, New York's Commissioner of Youth Services, visited Thomas Jefferson High School in the East New York section of Brooklyn last spring to see its youth program.
Organizers listed out loud the things they needed money for: homework tutoring, an after-school session, a burial fund.


There's a Plan Out There Somewhere With the Yankees' Name on It
An agent approached Yankee executives at the recent baseball meetings in Miami Beach and asked, "Do you have it yet?"
"Have what?" they responded.


Corrections
A caption for the rendering of a Danbury, Conn., project accompanying an article on Nov. 3 about reworking downtown centers and a caption for a drawing accompanying a Posting column entry on Dec. 1 about a shopping center in Armonk, N.Y., both omitted credit lines for the artist.
He is Robert Becker.
The Times learned of the errors only recently, in a letter from Mr.
Becker.


Data Bank/December 22, 1991
Industrial Production Index
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Percent change
-0.4
0.0
0.2
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of Capacity
79.1
79.6
79.8
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,066
1,089
1,033
Merchandise Exports
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
In billions
$36.7
$35.4
$34.3
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$43.5
$42.2
$40.9
3-Month Treasury Bills
Dec. 20
Dec. 13
Dec. 6
Rate in percent
3.72
4.15
4.24
6-Month Treasury Bills
Rate in percent
3.83
4.18
4.23
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Rate in percent
7.57
7.76
7.80


So Often a Survivor, Then a Suicide
It was around 6:50 P.M. on Sunday, Nov. 24, when John Cockrell discovered the body.
Cockrell, a senior defensive back for the University of Cincinnati football team, had returned from dinner and had come up the back stairs of Dabney Hall, an athletic dormitory.
He came through the door, turned down the white-tiled corridor to his room, No. 551, and then suddenly stopped.
"Andre!" he shouted.
"I could see him lying face down, the top half his body in the corridor and the other half still in his room, as if he had been trying to crawl out," Cockrell recalled, referring to his teammate and classmate, Andre Sherrod, who lived in room 552, directly across the hall from him.
"At first I thought he'd had a seizure, but I never knew Andre to be an epileptic. Then I saw he was lying in a pool of blood. I never did see the gun."


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Commack 175,0007
7 Penguin Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 29-year-old ranch; family room, basement, fireplace, deck, pool; taxes $4,000.
East Williston 392,000
400 Latham Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old split level; den, finished basement, fireplace, Florida room, 2-car attached garage; taxes $7,000.
Levittown 129,000
18 Peachtree Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, den; taxes $4,300.
Mineola 213,000
361 Andrews Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 34-year-old brick farm ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, fireplace; taxes $5,200.
Smithtown 165,000
67 Lindron Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 8-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $4,400.
Stony Brook 177,000  10 Elm Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; dining room, finished basement, fireplace, 0.5 acre, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.
OTHER AREAS Fair Lawn, N.J. 170,000
38-09 Jasper Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old updated Cape Cod; basement, eat-in-kitchen, near N.Y. transporation; taxes $3,501.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 1.375 million
400A Mamaroneck Road
4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 4-year-old Norman Tudor; marble entry hall, 2 marble fireplaces, family room, balcony; taxes $21,486.
North Branford, Conn. 152,000  340 Twin Lakes Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; h/w floors, cathedral ceilings, in-law unit in lower level, 0.75 acre; taxes $1,243.


Trying to Play by the Rules
KATHY BIRK, the manager of Dean Witter's branch here, is known among colleagues and competitors for her dedication to playing by the rules.
It's a passion that didn't come casually.
When she took her first job as a stockbroker for Prudential Securities in 1980, she felt most comfortable selling ultra-low-risk investments.
Her favorite annuity, National Investors, seemed so safe that she even sold it to her parents, who invested the bulk of their savings in it.
One day, abruptly, National Investors went bankrupt, leaving her clients, as well as her parents, in the lurch.
She felt terrible.
Even worse than the losses, she was haunted by her belief that Prudential's head office had deceived her, keeping the stock of National Investors' parent company on its "buy" list up until the day the annuity went into receivership.


Arkansas Slows Down And Defeats Arizona
Robert Shepherd and Lee Mayberry each made key free throws today, and Arkansas slowed the pace enough to shut down previously undefeated Arizona, 65-59.
Shepherd converted both ends of a one-and-one for a 59-56 lead with 2 minutes 14 seconds left.
Mayberry, who led Arkansas (7-2) with 15 points, made two free throws with 38 seconds remaining and two more with 21 seconds left to make it 63-56.


On Installing Dowels In New or Old Pieces
DOWELS, wood pegs that act like nails or screws but are held in place by glue, are used to fasten furniture, even antiques.
Expertly installed dowels usually create stronger longer-lasting joints than metal fasteners.
But no matter how well installed, they may break if loosened by age or abuse of the furniture.
Repairing dowel joints is not too difficult for those with moderate woodworking experience and the right tools.
The chief requirements are patience and careful workmanship.
Fine and antique furniture should be repaired by a professional restorer.


Tara Wyman, Teacher, Weds
Tara Anne Wyman, a daughter of William W. Wyman of New York and Carol Roberts of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Thomas Joseph Quigley Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Quigley of Potomac, Md.
The Rev.
Stephen Treat officiated at the Congregational Church in New Canaan.
Mrs.
Quigley, 27 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is a science teacher at the Newtown (Pa.) Friends School.
Her father is a managing partner in Oliver, Wyman &amp; Company, a management consulting firm in New York.
Her maternal great-grandfather, Nathan Hofheimer, was a founder of General Motors.


Making a Difference; Of Stars and Moonbeams
HER father, Edmund G. (Pat) Brown, was Governor of California from 1959 to 1967.
Her brother, Edmund G. (Jerry) Brown, held the same post from 1975 to 1983 and is now a Democratic Presidential candidate.
But there are those in California political circles who believe that Kathleen Brown could prove to be the family's real star.
Ms.
Brown was elected California's Treasurer last year in her first run for statewide office.
As Treasurer, she oversees the sale of state bonds and manages the state's investment portfolio.
And she holds the job at a time when California faces its worst financial crisis in decades.


New &amp; Noteworthy
A TICKET TO THE BONEYARD, by Lawrence Block. (Avon, $4.99.) The private detective Matthew Scudder, a reformed alcoholic, is driven to the edge by a psychopathic killer out for revenge.
"The murders are as savage as they come, their horrific nature intensified by the clarity of Mr. Block's pristine prose," Marilyn Stasio said here last year.
"Mr. Block has a fine nose for the pungencies of New York's after-dark street life, and he gives his hero wonderful opportunities to swap syllables with the city's most articulate riffraff."
THE HOUSE OF BARRYMORE, by Margot Peters. (Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, $15.) For Ethel Barrymore, it was alcohol; for Lionel, it was drugs.
But John Barrymore, the youngest and by many accounts the most talented actor of the family, was truly hellbent on self-destruction.
Last year our reviewer, Benedict Nightingale, said this "excellent" family biography by Margot Peters, the author of books about Charlotte Bronte and Bernard Shaw, is "judicious and enjoyable" even as it recounts the terrible stories.
"Ms. Peters's horror at the human waste rises bug-eyed from her pages. . . . For better or worse, the Barrymores have found their chronicler."


June Wedding For Miss Kuck
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Kuck of Mamaroneck, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Barbara Wilson Kuck to Stephen Condit Close, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur C. Close of McLean, Va.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Kuck, 24 years old, is a loan officer at Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father retired as an electrical engineering manager for the Singer Corporation in Totowa, N.J.


Left Unmoved
It will be a few weeks until Mayor Gerald McCann of Jersey City is sentenced on the fraud and income tax evasion charges he was convicted of last week.
But if he is resigned to his fate -- in theory, up to 71 years -- he does not seem to feel he is fated to resign.
New Jersey law might let him stay in the $63,000-a-year job while he appeals, but City Council members are hoping he will step aside so they don't have to sue to remove him.
Jersey City, they say, is in a bad way.
It has operated without a budget since September, and has lost 115 police officers and 110 firefighters and suffered serious breaks in its drinking water system.
"We don't want another scorched earth policy," said one Councilman, recalling the time Mr.
McCann lost a bid for re-election in 1985, and his successor found the office files shredded, the carpet ripped and the door locks plugged with glue.
It was during that 1985-1989 interregnum that Mr.
McCann defrauded a Florida bank of the $260,000 he was supposed to use bidding on a marina in Liberty State Park.


'Do-Gooder' Set to Take On an Agency That Needs to Do Good
At age 17, Mary Jo Bane went off to college in Washington on a Betty Crocker scholarship for homemakers of tomorrow and immediately found politics.
She stuffed envelopes for John F. Kennedy's presidential campaign, then joined the Peace Corps after graduation.
She ventured to Liberia to teach high school.
That experience, her first up-close exposure to extreme poverty, convinced her that she "wanted to try to do something to be helpful." She went on to become one of the nation's foremost researchers on poverty, was the first woman to be tenured at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government and was nominated last week by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to be his Commissioner of Social Services.


Susan Santich Plans Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Santich of Manhasset, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Alexandra Santich, to Steven Ira Weinberger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Weinberger of Great Neck, L.I.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Santich, 27 years old, is an assistant vice president of National Westminster Bank USA in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her parents are the president and vice president of the Old Dutch Mustard Company in Great Neck.


Indian Myth Sharpens Reality of Religious Strife
The holy man, his long hair and beard matted and uncombed, a saffron-colored cotton robe draped over his left shoulder, sat regally in a bicycle rickshaw next to a policeman gripping an ancient Lee-Enfield rifle.
The rickshaw driver, his wiry legs taut from his labors, sweat glistening from his chest, came to a halt before an age-eaten edifice where his charges alighted.
Gathering billows of saffron about him, the holy man clambered up a rise of stone steps into the building's courtyard, sank into a weathered wooden armchair and declared, "I am the very man who put the idols inside the Masjid."


Tax Policy Discourages Savings
To the Editor:
While America is hooked on consumption rather than saving ("America, Illiterate in Investing," Forum, Dec. 1), investors are neither illiterate nor irrational.
In fact, the Federal tax deduction allowed for interest paid on as many as two home mortgages has been the most powerful factor limiting America's savings rate.
If that deduction were terminated and the same treatment allowed on stocks, bonds, mutual funds and the like, savings would soar.
DONALD LAKE Riderwood, Md., Dec. 2


U.S. Shouldn't Concede Asian Market to Japan
To the Editor:
Accolades for "Power of the Yen Winning Asia" (Business Day, Dec. 5).
American business faces an uphill struggle in East Asia and the Pacific, but it is not a struggle we should forfeit.
It is important to remember how much the Asia-Pacific market means to the United States.


Claire Uhler and Bart Johnston Wed
Dorothy Claire Uhler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William B. Uhler 2d of Spartanburg, S.C., was married yesterday to Bart Alexander Johnston, a son of Mrs.
George S. Johnston of New York and the late Mr.
Johnston.
The Rev.
Todd Jones officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Spartanburg.
The bride, known as Claire, is 26 years old, as is the bridegroom.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is the president of Spartan Automotive Inc., a Spartanburg automotive supply sales company.


Bridge
There has long been an argument about the extent to which artificial bidding conventions improve partnership performance.
Most top-ranked experts use them in large numbers, and some devote many hours to discussion, which is then crystallized in 50 pages or so of partnership notes.
In opposition are those who, whether from conviction or from distaste for hard work, believe that natural methods, disdaining conventions, are just as effective.
In 1965 Bridge World Magazine organized a challenge match between scientists and traditionalists, but nothing was proved.
The final score was virtually a tie, and the players were not far apart in method.


A Female Agent for Professional Athletes
THERE are not many women who would take on a big football player and tell him what to do.
But for the dozen women among the nearly 600 player representatives listed with the National Football League Players Association, it's part of their job.
Ellen M. Zavian, a 28-year-old lawyer who lives in River Edge, is the only one of the dozen based in New Jersey.
She represents a half-dozen players, most notably Frank Reich, a backup quarterback for the Buffalo Bills, and a former New York Jet, John Booty, a defensive back now with the Philadelphia Eagles.


N.H.L. Accepts Two New Teams
The Tampa Bay Lightning and the Ottawa Senators were granted permanent membership in the National Hockey League on Friday after completing documentation set out by their expansion franchise agreements.
The teams fulfilled their financial requirements last Monday night, committing to escrow $22.5 million each, completing the fee of $50 million per franchise.
The escrow funds were released Friday when the league delivered membership certificates to the new teams.


Rush Hour


U.S. REVIEWS FOCUS OF SECURITY DATA
In an order to policy makers, President Bush says he envisions a reshaping of the nation's intelligence-gathering functions to include a greater focus on shortages of natural resources, global health problems and other issues that have not previously been considered central to insuring national security.
In the order, known as a National Security Directive, the President does not suggest dramatic cutbacks in the intelligence bureaucracy.
Instead he proposes a remolding of its functions to adapt to new, more diffuse requests for data and analysis resulting from the collapse of the Soviet Union, while still meeting the needs of American military security.


Why Not a Monorail On the Expressway?
Instead of widening the Long Island Expressway  [ "Expressway Widening Faces Hurdles," Nov. 17 ] , how about a monorail with stops at certain overpasses -- and passengers' being lowered by elevator -- with parking near the overpasses.
The stops could be expresses that would be designated.
A kind of fourth railroad for the Island.
Much better than a high-occupancy-vehicle lane.
Accidents or stalled cars would create some problem, since there would not be space next to a H.O.V. lane.
HAROLD COHEN Hauppauge


Rethinking a Race Without a Cuomo Candidacy
Both parties were sorting out the might-have-been's today, adjusting their strategies and trying to discern the Presidential terrain beyond Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York.
Republicans made a careful point of not seeming too relieved at Mr.
Cuomo's departure from the race.
But they took the opportunity for a few parting shots.
"Hindsight is 20-20," said Mary Matalin, the new political director for the Bush campaign.
"But it appears that he would have been less formidable than we previously assumed."


In an Age Before Television, A Toymaker Made Magic
IN 1904 A. C. Gilbert arrived in New Haven, to be a medical student at Yale.
He stayed to become the biggest toy manufacturer in America, employing thousands of workers in his factory in Fair Haven and enthralling millions of youngsters with little metal girders, sleek electric trains, odoriferous chemistry kits and more.
Now "A. C. Gilbert and the Tools of Learning," an exhibit at the Eli Whitney Museum in Hamden, focuses on Gilbert's life and work.
Included are Gilbert products like Erector Sets and items made from them (including a six-foot elevator), American Flyer trains, Mysto Magic sets, boxes of bottles and test tubes, tool chests, a wireless and small appliances.
Some items are in glass cases; some are ready for use.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Fair Lawn 170,000
38-09 Jasper Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,501.
Freehold 230,000
11 Royal Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, family room, deck, fireplace; taxes $5,140.
Jackson 125,000
46 M Sunnybrook Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-year-old colonial; 1-acre lot, 1-car garage, 2-level deck, pool; taxes $3,002.
Madison 760,000
253 Woodland Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 55-year-old colonial; 3 fireplaces, pool, Belgian block driveway; taxes $10,683.
Maplewood 221,000
18 Rutgers Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; custom tile baths, basement recreation room with wet bar; taxes $5,334.
Pompton Lakes 152,000
4 Sunset Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 26-year-old contemporary; pool, new heating, walk to bus; taxes $5,400.
OTHER AREAS Scarsdale, N.Y. 1.375 million
400A Mamaroneck Road
4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 4-year-old Norman Tudor; marble entry hall, 2 marble fireplaces, family room, balcony; taxes $21,486.
Stony Brook, L.I. 177,00010
Elm Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; dining room, finished basement, fireplace, 0.5-acre, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.
North Branford, Conn. 152,000  340 Twin Lakes Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; hardwood floors, cathedral ceilings, in-law unit in lower level, 3/4 acre; taxes $1,243.


Sunday Dinner; Choices for the Last-Minute Shopper
For those who have put off Christmas shopping until the last minute, here are three Manhattan restaurants convenient to a number of stores and galleries.
One is in SoHo, one in Little Italy and the third is in the World Financial Center.
Greene Street Restaurant
101 Greene Street, between Spring and Prince Streets; (212) 925-2415 -- This breakthrough loft with its brick walls, shadowy theatrical lighting and 60-foot-high mural has a bandstand in the center where jazz is featured nightly.
At brunch on Sundays, a trio plays chamber music from noon to 3 P.M.


Miss Norfleet To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Blow of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Blow's daughter Daphne Beggs Norfleet to William Courtney Lowe, a son of Mrs.
Stuart deLima of La Canada, Calif., and Robert F. Lowe Jr. of Englewood, N.J.
A June wedding is planned.
A graduate of Rollins College, Miss Norfleet, 25 years old, is a teaching intern at Greenwich Academy.
Her father, the late Norwood Norfleet, was a partner of Reynolds &amp; Company, stockbrokers in New York.


CAMPUS LIFE: Cornell; Seeking to Stop Changes of Plans By Science Majors
More than 1,400 Cornell University seniors are taking part in a four-school study to determine why many students switch out of science and engineering majors.
The study, which began a year ago, seeks to pinpoint whether the students lose interest in science and engineering in college or whether high schools fail to stimulate significant interest in these fields.


Lifted Ban
The last time a Wagner concert was scheduled on what is now Israeli soil was November 1938.
But then came Kristallnacht in Germany and the idea of the Palestine Philharmonic playing music by the anti-Semitic composer Hitler revered seemed so sickening a notion that his music was all but banned.
Last week, the Israel Philharmonic voted to break the taboo.
On Dec. 27, Daniel Barenboim, an Israeli citizen who argues that Wagner is too important a composer to exclude from any orchestra's repertory, will conduct a program that is expected to include parts of "Tristan und Isolde" and "The Flying Dutchman." The special performance will not be part of the orchestra's subscription series.
"Those who feel that they don't want to come into contact with this music simply don't have to come to this concert," he said.
"The minute you accept that, it has become for me a principle of democracy: that there is no reason why anybody should stop other people in a democratic society from an artistic expression."


GRADY'S GIFT
Raines's article captured the way things were in more cities than just Birmingham, Ala.
In suburban Washington, in the early 1950's, a slight but resolute lady came to our house weekly.
Rebecca Coleman brought a wisdom about the world and a practical faith in God that played a significant part in my sister's decision to become a nun and my own to become a priest.
THE REV.
RAYMOND B. KEMP
Washington


Anger Grows in West Over City-Slicker Neighbors
After a lifetime on the wind-scraped eastern front of the Continental Divide, Ed and Eileen Grady have finally given in to the miseries of Montana cattle ranching: endless winters, drought, depressed beef prices and, more recently, an invasion of city slickers.
Hanging a for-sale sign on their 10,000-acre ranch was the hardest thing Eileen Grady says she has ever done.
But what makes her particularly angry is the thought of what might become of the old Grady place, a timbered and grassy piece of high country that rolls up to the edge of the big sky.


Peripatetic Elf in Red Is Crisscrossing County


U.S. Shouldn't Concede Asian Market to Japan; Job Discrimination
To the Editor:
Allegations by Prof.
Yoshi Tsurumi in "A New McCarthyism" (letter, Dec. 2) that I influenced the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to "punish Japanese companies regardless of the merits of the complaints" are off the mark.
His charge that the commission denied him a consultancy because his criticism angered me is absurd.


The Gang That Wouldn't Talk Straight
THEY sure didn't look like Bugsy Siegel.
They didn't even look like John Gotti.
But the 28 reputed associates of the Colombo crime family who slouched into a Brooklyn courthouse last week, their faces jammed into the collars of lumberjack shirts or leather jackets, weren't there to preen like peacocks.
And, it turned out, they weren't there to sing like canaries, either.
Authorities say the Colombos are in the middle of a civil war, and 41 of them were subpoenaed to appear before a grand jury so prosecutors could invite them to discuss anything they knew about five recent murders.
Only 28 showed up.
Most refused to answer any questions and were told to return on Jan. 6.
The head of organized crime control in District Attorney Charles J. Hynes's office said some had agreed to appear before the grand jury, but lawyers for those who came to the courthouse denied that.
They called the carefully orchestrated parade before the television cameras "sort of like a Christmas party" for the accused mobsters and dismissed it as a publicity stunt by Mr.
Hynes.
Hints that some of those summoned had agreed to talk might have been calculated to raise tensions between the two factions authorities say the Colombos have split into: one loyal to the boss, Carmine Persico, 58, who is serving a 100-year sentence, and the other loyal to Victor J. Orena, 57, whom Mr.
Persico appointed interim boss in 1989, and then grew disenchanted with.
But whether or not the inquiry produces any answers, the subpoenas and the publicity may have helped stem the bloodshed.
Although several Colombo associates were arrested with guns and walkie-talkies early in the week, there had been no shootings since Dec. 8, when an 18-year-old worker in a bagel shop was gunned down.
The police said he was apparently an innocent victim of the war, shot because the shop's two owners are part of the Persico faction.
That killing, and the three pedestrians run down on Nov. 29 by the fleeing target of a drive-by shooting, helped unleash the flood of subpoenas.


Tonne Goodman to Wed in February
February wedding plans have been announced for Margaret Tonne Goodman, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edmund N. Goodman of Sands Point, L.I., and Peter Bailey Gimbel, the son of Mary Bailey Lumet of New York and the late Peter Gimbel.
Miss Goodman, who is known as Tonne, is the vice president of advertising at Calvin Klein in New York.
She graduated from the Brearley School.
Her father, who is retired, was an associate professor of clinical surgery at the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
Her mother, Marian P. Goodman, is a landscape watercolorist.


Andrea Elkin Has Wedding
Andrea Robin Elkin, a vice president of Shearson Lehman Brothers' private client group, and Jeffrey Howard Slaff, a stand-up comedian and a technical representative in New York for G. S. Imaging Services, were married last night in Wayne, N.J.
Rabbi Andre Ungar officiated at Preakness Hills Country Club.


Stacey L. Arnold and Neil J. Weiss Are Married
Stacey Lynne Arnold, a brand manager at the New York advertising agency N. W. Ayer Inc., and Neil Jan Weiss, the owner of First Nighter Formals in Lyndhurst, N.J., were married last night at the Water's Edge restaurant in Long Island City, Queens, by Rabbi Wilfred Wolfson.


Local Cable TV Adopts 'Most Wanted' Format
THE police in New Rochelle have been looking for Donald R. Whitfield since Dec. 16, last year.
At 8:30 on that Sunday morning, Mr.
Whitfield approached a Mount Vernon resident, Brad Zupp, on a Metro-North commuter train and demanded money, the police say.
When Mr.
Zupp refused, they charge, Whitfield followed him off the train, dragged him into an alley off North Avenue in New Rochelle, robbed him of $150 and stabbed him in the back with a six-inch kitchen knife.
More than 500,000 county residents can see a re-enactment of this crime on a new cable television show that began airing this month,"Westchester's Most Wanted." The half-hour monthly show is patterned on the Fox Network program "America's Most Wanted," and has already led to one arrest.


After the Rate Cuts, What?
THE Federal Reserve's one-point cut in the discount rate on Friday underscores the seriousness of the current recession, reinforcing that this is not a garden variety recession.
The fear and pessimism among debt-laden consumers and business executives are stronger than is usual at this stage of the business cycle, reflecting deeper doubts about the long-term health of the economy -- doubts that might themselves prolong and deepen the downturn.
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, touched on some of this in his testimony before Congress last week.
And Friday's strong move by the Fed suggests that he is even more worried than he has publicly acknowledged.


Pollution Tests Two Neighbors: El Paso and Juarez
On still winter days a mousy brown haze begins forming in the air above the Rio Grande, and as it grows into a cloud that obscures the sky, this city on the edge of the desert becomes one of the most polluted places in the United States.
Standing on a hill overlooking El Paso and its sister city in Mexico, Ciudad Juarez, a casual observer might come to some quick conclusions about the source of the haze.
Though there are traffic jams and some industrial smokestacks in this city of 515,000 people, the sources of pollution across the river in Mexico are many and obvious.


Perspectives: Andrew Cuomo's Buildings; HELP's Transition to Permanent Housing
FAR advanced in construction on a large square block in the East New York section of Brooklyn is a residential development that brings new thinking to urban housing design for low-income people.
The four-story buildings surround and enclose the site.
All residents will reach their homes through a common entrance.
At the entrance stands a separate, 15,000-square-foot building that will have four day-care rooms, a clinic, a library and space for job-training classes.
The 150 apartments will be occupied half by families from the city's transitional-housing system and half by low- and moderate-income households.


After 5 Prostitutes Are Killed, Police Crack Down on Clients
In the year since Arthur J. Shawcross was convicted of murdering 11 women, most of them prostitutes, the police here have arrested more than 600 men in an effort to discourage prostitution.
But the police are in much the same place they were before Mr.
Shawcross was arrested: investigating whether another serial killer is responsible for the slayings of five more prostitutes, all within the last year.


Foreign Affairs; Tomorrow's Germany
One piece of tomorrow stepped out of the shadows last week: The new united Germany will follow an independent and assertive foreign policy, one that in time will claim for Germany political influence equal to its vast economic strength -- and one that eventually will lead to Germany's displacing the U.S. as the paramount power in Europe.
But that future is not now. And that future need not make the world tremble.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Briarcliff Manor, N.Y. 265,000
58 Poplar Road
4-bedroom, 2-bath, 86-year-old colonial; bay window, eat-in kitchen, front porch, entry hall, living room, dining room; taxes $3,795.
Bronxville, N.Y. 392,500
22 Normandy Terrace  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 63-year-old town house; fireplace, dining room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,934.
Scarsdale, N.Y. 1.375 million
400A Mamaroneck Road
4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 4-year-old Norman Tudor; marble entry hall, 2 marble fireplaces, family room, balcony; taxes $21,486.
North Branford, Conn. 152,000  340 Twin Lakes Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 33-year-old ranch; hardwood floors, cathedral ceilings, in-law unit in lower level, 3/4 acre; taxes $1,243.
Wethersfield, Conn. 238,000
520 Main Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 220-year-old colonial; wideboard floors, whirlpool tub, large country kitchen, 3/4 acre; taxes $3,268.
Westbrook, Conn. 327,500
37 Seascape Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1-year-old contemporary; studio over garage, spacious deck, water views, 1/3 acre; taxes $3,471.
OTHER AREAS Fair Lawn, N.J. 170,000
38-09 Jasper Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,501.
Freehold, N.J. 230,000
11 Royal Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, family room, deck, fireplace; taxes $5,140.
Stony Brook, L.I. 177,000  10 Elm Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; dining room, finished basement, fireplace, 0.5-acre, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.


Selling Bikes After the Wild Ones Have Settled Down
IT'S fun to think of motorcycle history in terms of celebrity cachet.
James Dean and Marlon Brando made motorcycles sexy and sinister.
Malcolm Forbes associated them with well-heeled capitalists.
Ronald Reagan visited a Harley-Davidson plant and presto, motorcycles symbolized America's renewed manufacturing competitiveness.
But behind the scenes, the motorcycle business is a lot less glitzy than the parade of flashy names might indicate.
In fact, it is downright depressed.
The recession, creeping couch potatoism and an explosion of consumer electronics products vying for the dwindling discretionary dollar have created a shrinking market for motorcycles.


Sex? Viewers Are Shocked. Shocked!
The age of X-rated educational television has arrived, with flourishes.
The William Kennedy Smith rape trial and the Senate committee hearings on Anita F. Hill's charges against Judge Clarence Thomas may have owed their popularity to the spicy nature of the encounters.
But viewers who managed to keep their calm, while all around them were being titillated by uncommonly explicit discussions of common doings, could glimpse matters that are usually treated in drier fashion.
There was much to be noted about the interplay of money, class, race and gender in America today.
Alert viewers could see how Kennedy money and power play to a nation of outsiders looking in, through the tube.
They could see class differences being used to influence a society that often deludes itself into thinking it is classless.
They could see expectations of black failure, based on long experience and ingrained assumptions, upset by displays of education and success.
And they could be even more confused than usual by the mixed messages about sexual relations that have for some time been sent forth by television.
And so unlike the packaged goods that fill television, most of these events came through unedited, unpolished, raw.
They made "The MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour" seem like junior high school.


Trying to Play by the Rules
KATHY BIRK, the manager of Dean Witter's branch here, is known among colleagues and competitors for her dedication to playing by the rules.
It's a passion that didn't come casually.
When she took her first job as a stockbroker for Prudential Securities in 1980, she felt most comfortable selling ultra-low-risk investments.
Her favorite annuity, National Investors, seemed so safe that she even sold it to her parents, who invested the bulk of their savings in it.
One day, abruptly, National Investors went bankrupt, leaving her clients, as well as her parents, in the lurch.
She felt terrible.
Even worse than the losses, she was haunted by her belief that Prudential's head office had deceived her, keeping the stock of National Investors' parent company on its "buy" list up until the day the annuity went into receivership.


Biomorphism Rears Its Rounded Head Once More
Biomorphic modern -- the mid-century style of kidney-shaped tables, potato-chip chairs and shmoolike salt-and-pepper shakers -- has been collected for more than a decade.
Now comes the third exhibition on this subject in New York this year, "Biomorphism and Organic Abstraction in 20th-Century Decorative Arts" at the Brooklyn Museum.
Quirky, exuberant and rarely symmetrical, the rounded, abstract style called biomorphism meant modern to millions of people just before, during and after World War II.
Among the 60 objects on display in Brooklyn are many familiar icons from the movement: the molded plywood double-curved chair of Charles and Ray Eames and Isamu Noguchi's tour de force of abstraction -- a table with an amoebalike glass top poised on a base of two angular wooden slabs.
Frederich J. Kiesler is represented with his curvilinear chair, a blob of wood that rocks.
And from Carlo Mollino comes a table with a glass top in the shape of a woman's torso that rests on a curved-plywood base pierced like a slice of Swiss cheese.


Wall Street; Trying to Clear Up Cable TV Confusion
IT was a wild fortnight for BET Holdings, the parent of Black Entertainment Television Network, whose shares tumbled nearly 43 percent from their Oct. 30 peak.
Analysts were slightly disappointed by BET's earnings, reported last Monday.
But they were thoroughly rattled by the company's somewhat vague explanation of why recent A.C.
Neilsen Company subscriber tallies seemed to conflict with the company's numbers.
So BET held a briefing last Wednesday to allow a Price Waterhouse representative to explain that the Neilsen numbers, which put the network's audience at 31.2 million people, are estimates used to figure advertising rates.
For calculating fees owed by cable systems carry its programming, BET uses a slightly lower figure, 29 million people.


INSIDE
Kahane Defendant Acquitted
An Egyptian immigrant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, was acquitted of murdering Rabbi Meir Kahane last year, but was convicted of lesser charges.
Page 36.
Cambodian Peace Is Shaky
Cambodia's fragile peace process came to a halt when demonstrations led the Government to tell Khmer Rouge leaders to stay away.
Page 3.
Life After Cuomo
Both parties are adjusting their strategies now that the Presidential landscape no longer includes Mario Cuomo.
Page 33.
News Summary, Page 2 Obituaries, Page 38 Weather, Page 39 Radio, Late TV, Page 56


Q and A
Horse Races in England
Q.
For Dick Francis fans planning a trip to England in early July, where could we attend a horse race?
We are especially interested in steeplechase. -- Beverly B. Norris, Washington


Borromini's Rome
ROME, in the first half of the 17th century, was an architect's dream: a succession of popes proved eager to improve the city by adding to it, and so did private donors and religious institutions.
As a result, palaces and churches went up in great abundance, giving Rome the look it has largely retained to this day, and, as any visitor can testify, there is not one ugly building in the lot.
Even so, some buildings are better than others, and Francesco Borromini's churches are among the very best.
That is, in part, because they are so different from anything else that was built at the time: Borromini firmly rejected the ruling conventions and, being a genius, invented a whole new way to deal with space to the horror of contemporary critics.
Gianlorenzo Bernini, his great rival, was the master of the Baroque at its most spectacular, and relied on sumptuous illusion.
Borromini, eschewing all pretense, based his art on geometry and absolute honesty in the handling of form, volume and light.
As a result, his buildings, although they unmistakably belong to their century, often have a startlingly modern look.


County May Give Up State's $4 Million Grant for Jay Property
WITH little prospect of an immediate condemnation of the Jay property in Rye, the state is expected to take back the $4 million it had pledged to help the county acquire the site.
The state, whose open-space funds have been severely curtailed after its proposed environmental bond act was rejected last year, has been pressing the county for a decision on acquiring the 23-acre site.


Leetch Making Points For Fatter Contract
He is playing at his peak, making sweeping, dashing arguments that are hard to ignore.
Brian Leetch is negotiating for a new, fatter contract every time he sets up another Ranger goal or storms in from the point for another heavy slap shot.
Leetch, the graceful Ranger defenseman who has turned delightfully aggressive this past month, entered tonight's game in Pittsburgh on a streak of 11 successive games with at least one point.
He had 44 points for the season, on 9 goals and 35 assists -- 2 points ahead of Paul Coffey of the Penguins, in the scoring race for defensemen.


Results Plus
SKIING Kronberger Wins French Downhill
Two-time World Cup champion Petra Kronberger of Austria skied to victory in a downhill yesterday in Serre Chevalier, France, for her first victory on the World Cup circuit this season.
Kronberger, the 1990 and 1991 overall World Cup titlist, was timed in 1 minute 25.97 seconds, edging Heidi Zurbriggen of Switzerland by .14 hundredths of a second in the second women's downhill of the season.
Miriam Vogt of Germany was third in 1:26.23, with Kerrin Lee-Gartner of Canada fourth in 1:26.45 and Veronika Wallinger of Austrian fifth in 1:26.58.
The victory moved Kronberger to the top of the World Cup standing with 351 points, ahead of slalom specialist Vreni Schneider of Switzerland, who did not compete in the downhill.
Schneider fell to third place over all with 280 points.
Katja Seizinger of Germany moved into second with 281 points after her seventh-place finish yesterday.
Kronberger, who also was the World Cup downhill champion last year, took the lead early amid heavy snowfall, skiing eighth in a field of 63.
"The visibility was bad, but it was the same for all of us," Kronberger said.
"I had to ski by memory, by touch, and keep to the tracks the skiers had left, or I would have lost several hundredths of a second." Zurbriggen, who tops the women's downhill standing with 140 points to 131 for Kronberger and Chantal Bournissen of Switzerland, said her change in brand of ski boots this season had given her more flexibility.
"I can feel the ground better, and I can anticipate the bumps," she said.
"My coaches always told me I couldn't ski well on soft snow. I've just proven them wrong." (AP) YACHTING Isler Takes 470
J.
J.
Isler, the top-ranked woman on the United States sailing team, won the women's 470 world championship yesterday in Brisbane, Australia.
Isler, who is from San Diego, and her crew, Pam Healy of San Francisco, competed against 36 teams from 15 countries.
The regatta included six races; the 470 is a 15-foot Olympic class dinghy.
Isler and Healy plan to compete in the Olympic Games next summer in Barcelona, Spain.
COLLEGE FOOTBALL Youngstown State Wins
Tamron Smith scored on a 5-yard run with 5:42 remaining yesterday afternoon in Statesboro, Ga., capping a comeback that gave Youngstown State a 25-17 victory over Marshall for the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I-AA championship.
Marshall led by 17-6 entering the final period, but Youngstown rallied for three touchdowns to win the title.
The Penguins scored on a 33-yard pass from Ray Isaac to Herb Williams, a 3-yard run by Ryan Wood with 7 minutes 9 seconds remaining and Smith's clinching run, which capped a 3e-play, 14-yard drive.
Youngstown led, 3-0, at halftime, but Marshall scored 17 points in the third quarter on two touchdown passes by Michael Payton and a 42-yard field goal by Dewey Klein.
Isaac completed 9 of 15 passes for 198 yards and one touchdown, while Payton completed 30 of 43 passes for 363 yards. (AP) Alabama St. 36, N. Carolina A. &amp; T. 13: For North Carolina A. &amp; T., it was a case of not being able to keep up with the Joneses.
Alabama State quarterback Ricky Jones threw a touchdown pass and scored three times, twice on passes from running back Carviss Jones, as the Hornets beat the Aggies yesterday in the Heritage Bowl at Joe Robbie Stadium in Miami.
Ricky Jones led his team in rushing, receiving and passing.
He gained 152 yards on 14 carries, including 83 on a third-quarter touchdown run, had two receptions for 112 yards and threw for 214 yards.
A crowd of just 7,724 spectators, far fewer than the expected 30,000, turned out to watch Alabama State (11-0-1) cap off an undefeated season by beating North Carolina A. &amp; T, (9-3) in this bowl game for historically black schools. (AP)


The Picture of Martha
"And this was taken when she was born," says the young woman who asks to be known as Martha, laying a snapshot atop an impressive array of her eldest daughter's school awards.
It shows a wrinkly infant cradled in her mother's arms, a typical photo except that Martha's face has been scissored out.
"I was so depressed then. I didn't have any self-esteem."
The days when Martha so hated her life that she couldn't bear to look at herself are over now, in part because of programs supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.


Langer and Azinger Lead
In windswept conditions more typical of a British Open site than the Caribbean, Bernhard Langer and Paul Azinger used all their improvisational skills today to share the lead going into the final round of the $2.55 million Johnnie Walker World Championship.
Both players managed to maintain tenuous control of their shots in 40-mile-an-hour gusts to finish 54 holes at one-over-par 214.
Langer, the first-round leader, was the only player in the 26-man field to break par today, with a one-under-par 70 that included two holed-out chip shots.
Azinger, the second-round leader, birdied the 16th and holed a 40-foot putt for an eagle 3 on the 532-yard par-5 17th hole to finish with a 73.


TAKING SIDES AGAINST OURSELVES
The overwhelming support for Clarence Thomas over Anita Hill by whites and blacks, as measured by poll results, shows that the opinion of Rosemary Bray and the tiny minority within a minority of pro-feminist elitists she represents doesn't amount to a blip.
While Bray says that black men and women were divided about the Clarence Hill debate, polls show that the opinions of the majority of black men and women were similar: they believed that Hill lied.
Moreover, Bray's charge that Thomas blamed his problems on Hill is plain feminist propaganda.
Thomas blamed his problems on "the process" and, in fact, spoke highly of Hill.
ISHMAEL REED
Oakland, Calif.


Making a Difference; Breaking Away, With a $2 Billion Piece of Carbide
BEFORE too long, H. William Lichtenberger will be busy playing the name game.
Until last week, Mr.
Lichtenberger was president and chief operating officer of the Union Carbide Corporation.
But then Carbide announced that it would be spinning off its industrial gases division in the next few months and that Mr.
Lichtenberger would be the new company's first chairman and chief executive.
The business will get its own shareholders -- and will soon need its own name.


Disney World Ticket Dodge
Officially, the only source for tickets to Disney World in Florida is Disney.
But in the parking lots of restaurants and convenience stores around Orlando, if you look like a tourist you are likely to be approached by a causally dressed man offering "leftover" tickets that he says he cannot use and would like to sell for cash.
They are four- or five-day passes with a day or two not yet used.
And as you leave Orlando, loading suitcases into your car for the drive home, you may be approached by someone who asks if you have unused tickets.
A typical line offered by the buyer is that he has relatives coming to visit and needs the tickets.
"It's not really scalping," said Frederick J. Lauten, assistant state attorney in Orlando, because, as defined by Florida law, scalping means reselling for more than a dollar over the official price.
These middlemen sell the leftover part of the tickets for the same price as Disney does, or perhaps less.
A one-day ticket costs $33; a four-day ticket is $111 and a five-day pass is $145.
Disney stopped selling three-day passes in May 1989.
Anyone spending a week in Orlando who wants to see Sea World, Universal, Cape Kennedy and some other attractions may end up with unused Disney tickets.


Commercial Property: Unusual Spaces; An Oak Board Room, Anyone?
TWENTY-SIX Broadway was once to oil what 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue is to politics.
Most obvious clues, like a bust of John D. Rockefeller in the lobby, are gone.
But there is still a noble vestige of the days when the building was the heart of the Standard Oil Company: the 21st-floor board room, a generously resplendent realm of oak and limestone and alabaster, whose Tudor-arched windows command a majestic vista of New York Harbor and lower Manhattan.


Honoring Six 'Unsung Heroes' of New York City
The great machine of New York City functions, at times implausibly, because of the work of some 200,000 city employees, the majority of them unrecognized and unappreciated.
The Fund for the City of New York honored six of them on Thursday for the sort of quiet, creative, dedicated work that few people associate with civil service.
Each received the fund's 19th annual Sloan Public Service Awards in ceremonies at their workplaces, followed by a reception at the Roosevelt Hotel in Manhattan.


House Democrats Set Forums on Health Care
Nearly 200 House Democrats will join in the next stage of their party's political offensive on health care by holding simultaneous "town meetings" around the country on the issue on Jan. 14.
Representative Vic Fazio of California, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, said he hoped the meetings would "focus the attention of a nation on the crisis we all face in providing accessible and affordable health care for all our citizens."


Group Shows at Krasdale's Two Galleries
THE difference between the two Krasdale Foods Gallery shows is implied by their titles, "Art of the Personal" and "The Children Among Us." It is also emphasized by the settings: one at Hunts Point, where life in the market sometimes looks like Dante's Inferno; the other in relatively upscale White Plains.
Evidently, the aspirations of Sigmund Balka, director of both galleries in cooperation with the Lehman College Art Gallery, and general counsel to Krasdale, are expanding along with the company's.
Like most Hunt's Point productions, "Art of the Personal" is a manageable group -- seven painters and one sculptor -- and is displayed in the lobbies, corridors and conference rooms on the second floor.
The art has room to breathe, but there is business as usual, and on the occasion of my visit a Conceptualist diagram of a sales plan was stealing thunder from the paintings around it.


GRADY'S GIFT
The very compelling cover portrait of Gradystein Hutchinson immediately caught my interest.
I couldn't wait to read about her.
I was disappointed, however, by Raines's account of their time together.
Although I believe he meant well, I found the article patronizing.
BARBARA ESHOO
Manchester, N.H.


Tickle the Tarsals In Straps, Sequins, Bangles and Beads
Evening shoes seem like such an extravagance.
All anyone really needs is a pair of gold or black silk pumps, right?
But evening shoes can also be fun and sexy and glamorous, a way of adding a special touch to a simple dress or giving new life to an old one.
And because they are not worn every day, they rarely wear out.
How extravagant are shoes that can be worn for four or five or even six years?
Maybe this is the season to splurge.
The temptations are many.
There are sling pumps adorned with earring-like clusters of pearls at the throat, mules with jeweled buckles the size of brooches, ankle-straps with rhinestone closures, heels paved with colored stones or sequins, instep straps that mimic diamond bracelets, and shoes that are little more than a succession of intricately placed straps.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 22, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Plume, $15.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
2
5
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician's successful cloning of dinosaurs for use in a theme park leads to a global emergency.
3
4
COLD FIRE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A despondent reporter finds hope and romance while she tracks the course of a good Samaritan.
4 *
1
STAR TREK VI: The Undiscovered Country, by J. M. Dillard. (Pocket, $4.99.) Enemies of the Federation capture Captain Kirk and Dr.
McCoy.
5
33
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
6
8
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) The experiences of a couple on a trek across Europe during the ice age.
7
4
PRISONER OF MY DESIRE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 12th-century English belle seeks to capture the heart of a lord.
8
2
THE FOURTH K, by Mario Puzo. (Bantam, $5.99.) The tumultuous career of President Francis Xavier Kennedy, cousin of John and Robert Kennedy and inheritor of their charisma.
9
26
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
10
3
PERCHANCE TO DREAM, by Howard Weinstein. (Pocket, $4.99.) A "Star Trek" novel.
11
9
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The coming of age of Irish women.
12
17
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four tales of late-night horror.
13 *
4
THE RUBY KNIGHT, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $5.99.) The second volume in "The Elenium," a fantasy saga.
14
1
CAPE FEAR, by John D. MacDonald. (Fawcett, $5.99.) An insane criminal on a rampage of revenge; originally published in 1958 as "The Executioners."
15
15
MEMORIES OF MIDNIGHT, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) The destiny of an American woman is haunted by a vengeful Greek tycoon.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
23
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
2 *
31
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
3 *
109
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
4
29
THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $7.95.) A self-styled curmudgeon's memoir of a cat that adopted and soon owned him.
5
39
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
6
7
A LIFE ON THE ROAD, by Charles Kuralt. (Ivy, $5.99.) The memoirs of the television newscaster.
7
24
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
8
8
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, touch, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
9
424
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
10
2
IN A CHILD'S NAME, by Peter Maas. (Pocket, $5.99.) The story of a husband who murdered his wife and of the ensuing custody battle over their son.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
19
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
12
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
8
UNNATURAL SELECTIONS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
4
2
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1992. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
5
4
A SOUTHERN BELLE PRIMER, by Maryln Schwartz. (Doubleday, $10.) A guide to propriety and protocol below the Mason-Dixon line; humor.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


To Bethlehem by Way of Mexico
Cheech Marin, left, and Paul Rodriguez star in "La Pastorela," an adaptation of a medieval Hispanic miracle play.
The "Great Performances" production, also featuring Linda Ronstadt, is on Channel 13 Monday at 9 P.M. (Cynthia Wallis/"Great Performances")


Mr. Gephardt's Irresponsible Economics
Representative Richard Gephardt, the House majority leader, and several Democratic colleagues gave the nation a wrongheaded and irresponsible economics lesson on trade with Japan last week.
Mr.
Gephardt, Senator Don Riegle and four Michigan Representatives said trade deficits with Japan help explain why the U.S. is trapped in recession and why nearly one million Americans have lost their jobs.
Mr.
Gephardt's elixir: Shut out Japanese cars unless Japan eliminates the trade deficit over five years.


Noted With Pleasure
Everyday Heroism
Myths of heroic adventure, such as the "Odyssey," are not just celebrations of wit and skill: they also carry a succinct, still pertinent message about living.
This is from "Somewhere I Have Never Travelled: The Second Self and the Hero's Journey in Ancient Epic" by Thomas Van Nortwick (Oxford University).


Review/Dance; The Body, The Spirit And Momix
Momix is a company devoted to gymnastic and visual effects seasoned with modern dance.
On Wednesday night, the company presented "Old Favorites, New Surprises" at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, where it performs through Jan. 5.
The overall effect was comparable to a Christmas show at Radio City Music Hall -- bright, dazzling to look at and sentimental, but mostly empty at the heart.
For all its inherent celebration of human physicality and spirit, dance shouldn't be expected to lift the soul.
But in an evening of hip dance bites, one longed for something beyond prop tricks that extend the body's possibilities and make the pieces too easily memorable to seem fresh on repeated viewing.
In Alan Boeding's "Circle Walker," there is a towering gyroscopic wheel, and the solo is built around the dancer's response to that wheel and the way it moves.
But "Circle Walker" has a grandeur and substance largely missing from the rest of the program.


POSTINGS: Out of the Ashes; Urban Pluck
Like a modern urban phoenix, the Antzis Live Poultry Market will rise from the rubble at 1355 Amsterdam Avenue at 126th Street by spring.
The building blew up in a heater explosion last year, but the family decided to resurrect it.
"There's nothing like a fresh chicken," said Ruth Antzis.
Her husband, Irving, a retired dentist, and his brother Eli, a retired internist, inherited the business from their father, who had bought it in 1905.
A live-poultry market has been on the site since 1886 and in recent years hundreds of thousands of pounds a year not only of chickens, but also of turkeys, ducks, geese, guinea hens and pigeons, were sold there.


Many Poles Now See '81 Martial Law as Justified
As Poland looks backward on the 10-year anniversary of the imposition of martial law by Gen.
Wojciech Jaruzelski, it seems that time, events and democracy have softened the memory of the events that took place on that day, Dec. 13, 1981.
Mention of martial law just a year or two ago triggered reminiscences of family members' arrests or mass dismissals of Solidarity trade union members.
But things have changed.
Last weekend an opinion survey conducted by the official polling agency OBOP found that 53 percent of those Poles surveyed believe today that martial law was "justified."


Jets Take Their Season Into Overtime and Beyond
The Jets heard a lot of talk last week, most of it bad.
It came from fans who didn't think they had played well enough to be in a position to make the National Football League playoffs.
It came from Miami wide receiver Mark Clayton, who guaranteed absolutely that the Dolphins would win the game this afternoon and make the playoffs, leaving the Jets in their wake.
The New York players remained silent during the week, deciding to let their play against the Dolphins speak for them.
This afternoon, before 69,636 fans at Joe Robbie Stadium, the Jets talked back, and more important, they got in the last word, beating the Dolphins, 23-20, on a 30-yard field goal by Raul Allegre with 7 minutes 27 seconds to play in overtime.
In doing so, they claimed the final American Football Conference wild-card playoff spot.


Why We Shouldn't Dump Sludge on Sea Floor; Try Composting
To the Editor:
Re "Scientists Suggest Dumping Sludge on Vast, Barren Deep Sea Floor" (front page, Dec. 2):


Now, Get the Crooked Bankers
While the admission of fraud by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International is a solid step toward justice, there's more to be done.
Official U.S. claims against B.C.C.I. will now be settled by the agreement reached with the bank's liquidators in London, Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands.
But the scoundrels who manipulated B.C.C.I. and enriched themselves are still at large.
B.C.C.I. was a $20 billion colossus operating in some 70 countries.
Founded by a Pakistani with Middle Eastern capital, it posed as a third-world bank, owned by and serving the world's disadvantaged.
This pretense hid the biggest banking scandal in history, involving drugs, money laundering, bribes and even terrorism.


Academia Knocks for Gorbachev, But He Is Unlikely to Answer Call
Mikhail S. Gorbachev is on the verge of losing his title of President, but some American universities have offered him another that has less prestige but more job security: professor.
Even though the acceptance of any of the offers would seem unlikely, one university is so to eager to have Mr.
Gorbachev that it is also offering a professorship to his wife, Raisa.


A New Trend In Auto Theft: Car Hijacking
Gloria Yellin was getting into her car in a parking lot near her office here when she was suddenly grabbed from behind by a man with a gun.
He took her keys, jumped into the car and sped away.
"I was so furious I called him up on my car phone," said Ms.
Yellin, 46 years old, of Dix Hills, L.I.
"I told him I worked very hard for my car and that he had no right to steal it. He just laughed and said, 'Why not.' "


Books of The Times; Golf Is a Game, but That Doesn't Mean It Isn't Real Life
Memoirs of a Caddy By David Noonan 173 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $18.95.
You don't have to understand the first thing about the game of golf to appreciate David Noonan's accomplished first novel, "Memoirs of a Caddy." All you have to understand about golf is that it is a highly ritualized form of play.
Jim Mooney, the novel's 17-year-old narrator, makes light of this when he observes, "One of the appeals of golf is that you can do all the things you would normally do in a bar while engaging in an actual sport -- you can eat, drink, talk and smoke cigarettes."


Abroad at Home; 'Stop the World'
In the early days of the 1992 Presidential campaign one slogan has made its mark.
"Put America First," Gov.
Douglas Wilder called his program when he started campaigning for the Democratic nomination in August.
Pat Buchanan proclaimed "America First!" when he announced his Republican candidacy.


Bills' Streak Stopped, but Sanders Isn't
Barry Sanders spun and twisted and sparkled today against a Bills defense stacked to stop him.
It couldn't, and Sanders's performance, complemented by the resurgence of quarterback Erik Kramer, helped the Detroit Lions snap the Bills' 17-game home winning streak with a 17-14 victory in overtime.
Lions kicker Eddie Murray, who had missed field goals from 39 and 30 yards in the final seconds of regulation in a game played in 38-degree temperature and swirling 20-mile-an-hour winds, made a 21-yarder 4 minutes 23 seconds into overtime.


Text of Accords by Former Soviet Republics Setting Up a Commonwealth
Following are the texts of declarations signed Saturday in Alma-Ata, Kazakhstan, at the formation of the Commonwealth of Independent States, as distributed in translation by the Tass press agency.
The first five declarations were signed by all 11 leaders of the republics joining the commonwealth, and the sixth, on nuclear arms, was signed by the leaders of the four republics that have nuclear arms on their soil.
PROTOCOL TO COMMONWEALTH PACT
The Azerbaijani Republic, the Republic of Armenia, the Republic of Byelorussia, the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Republic of Kirghizia, the Republic of Moldavia, the Russian Federation, the Republic of Tadzhikistan, Turkmenia, the Republic of Uzbekistan and Ukraine, on an equal basis, and as high contracting parties, are forming a Commonwealth of Independent States.


Saul Newton, 85, Psychotherapist And Leader of Commune, Dies
Saul B. Newton, a psychotherapist who ran an unorthodox commune in Manhattan that was assailed by ex-members as an abusive cult died on Saturday at Methodist Hosptial in Brooklyn.
He was 85 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of septicemia after suffering from Alzheimer's disease, a daughter said.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Personal Income . . .
Nov.
Consumer Spending . . .
Oct.
Tuesday  Durable Goods . . .
Nov.
Wednesday  None  Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  None


Roy Copperud, 76, Journalism Teacher Who Wrote Column
Roy Herman Copperud, a professor of journalism and an authority on the use of the English language, died on Dec. 7 at his home in Altadena, Calif.
He was 76 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his wife, Mary Emily, said.


MINORITY BUSINESS SET BACK SHARPLY BY COURTS' RULINGS
After being nurtured for a decade by state and local governments that set aside a portion of their contracts for minority businesses, thousands of such companies have closed or are foundering in the aftermath of court rulings that the racial preferences are unconstitutional.
At least two dozen cities, from Philadelphia to Portland, Ore., have suspended the set-aside programs voluntarily or under court orders.
So have many states, including New York, New Jersey and California.
And similar programs are being challenged in court or are under administrative review in most of the 32 states, 200 cities and countless counties and public authorities that have them.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
Virginia Beach, Va., tentatively priced $70 million worth of hospital revenue bonds through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. to yield 6.70 percent with a 6 3/8 percent coupon for the 2021 maturity.
Common Stock  *
Immulogic Pharmaceutical Co., Cambridge, Mass., has filed for two million shares to be offered through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Ratings  *
Johnston Coca-Cola Bottling Group's $550 million of debt has been removed from credit watch by S.&amp; P., which upgraded the rating on the senior debt to AA-, from BBB-.
Johnston was recently acquired by Coca-Cola Enterprises, whose senior debt is rated AA-. *
Sunbeam Corp.'s 5.5 percent sinking-fund senior unsecured debentures due in 1992 were put on credit watch by S.&amp; P. with positive implications.
The securities are rated BB.
S.&amp; P. said the Sunbeam-Oster Company, the Pittsburgh-based parent of the small-appliance maker, had improved sales and profitability. *
Union County, N.J., Utility Authority's solid waste revenue bonds, totaling $249 million, were rated A- by S.&amp; P. *
First of America Bank Corp.'s senior and subordinated debentures in a $150 million shelf registration were assigned preliminary ratings of A and BBB+, respectively, by S.&amp; P. The banking company is based in Kalamazoo, Mich.


Now It Can Be Told: Tabloid TV Is Booming
The William Kennedy Smith trial was in session for only nine weekdays.
In that time, the television magazine program "A Current Affair" produced 10 reports on the case.
"We wanted to own that story," said John Terenzio, the program's executive producer.
"That story was very important to 'A Current Affair.' "


Magazines With Subtle Messages
At a glance, the handsome first issue of World Tour resembles an oversized, "coffee table" magazine.
It is filled with stunning illustrations and articles on New Age concepts like paradigm shifting and virtual reality.
There are, however, no ads.
It is not until almost three-quarters of the way through the 104-page glossy publication that the reader comes upon three pages of the softest of soft sells.
It is a short article on Dun &amp; Bradstreet Software, a two-year-old company described as "the new industry giant."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A REASONABLE DOUBT FOR KAHANE JURY
The jury that acquitted an Egyptian immigrant of the murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane concluded that there were crucial missing links in the prosecution's case and that it had not proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused man had fired the fatal shots, an alternate juror said.
The doubts arose because the prosecution produced no witness in the trial who saw the defendant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, shoot Mr.
Kahane, founder of the Jewish Defense League, at a crowded meeting at a hotel last year.
B1.
NOSAIR LAWYER REVIEWS TRIAL STRATEGY
At first, William M. Kunstler believed the evidence against Mr.
Nosair appeared so overwhelming that he advised his client to plead insanity.
When the case went to the jury, he was pessimistic.
But as he jubilantly reviewed Mr.
Nosair's acquittal on the charges of murder and attempted murder, he called the split verdict "strange, irrational, inconsistent and repugnant" and said the convictions on lesser charges would be appealed.
B8.
RELIEF AND ANGER OVER VERDICT
Mr.
Nosair's acquittal was met with relief from his supporters, outrage from the followers of the man he was accused of killing and confusion from both camps over the verdict.
"For any faults Rabbi Kahane might have had, he was murdered. And when a person is murdered, you expect justice," a supporter of Rabbi Kahane said.
B8.
KAHANE'S SON PLEDGES VENGEANCE
Rabbi Kahane's son, pledging that his father's killing would be avenged, said in Jerusalem that death was "the only punishment that is befitting" for Mr.
Nosair.
The son, Binyamin Zeev Kahane, and other followers of the slain rabbi denounced the jury verdict as an injustice and evidence of American anti-Semitism.
B8.
FEW ABUSES OF SHELTERS REPORTED
A new report on homeless families in New York City challenges a suggestion by Mayor David N. Dinkins that some families who are not truly homeless are preying on the shelter system in an effort to qualify for placement in permanent apartments.
The report found that most families are doubling up with friends or relatives before seeking help from the shelters.
B3.
BROOKLYN FIRES LEAVE DOZENS HOMELESS
Three fires in Brooklyn over the weekend killed two people, left dozens of families homeless and injured seven nursing home residents, one seriously, fire officials said.
B3.
Dinkins administration hopes accord on furloughs will pressure other unions.
B3 REGION  BILL PROTECTS ABORTION CLINICS
Legislation in New Jersey intended to discourage demonstrations that block entrances to clinics where abortions are performed has provided a new battleground for groups on both sides of the issue.
At the heart of the controversy is the creation of a 100-foot buffer zone around health-care centers that would be off limits to protesters.
B6.
CAR INSURANCE INCREASES APPROVED
Under pressure from a recent court ruling, the State Insurance Commissioner has approved interim rate increases averaging 15 percent for drivers insured under the Market Transition Facility, the successor to the state's troubled insurance pool for high-risk drivers.
"I don't want to approve this increase, and I am dismayed by the need for it," the Commissioner, Samuel F. Fortunato, said.
B6.
ZEN AND THE ART OF COOKIE BAKING
On the first day of the New Year, Yonkers will get something it has never had: an official cookie.
It is called the rainforest crunch cookie and how it became the city's official cookie is the story of a skeptical city, the Jewish-born Buddhist priest who won its respect and the cookie they baked together.
Yonkers Journal.
B6.
DID CUOMO'S DECISION DIMINISH HIM?
"Little Big Man" was Thomas L. Berger's novel about a hero whose stature exceeded his height and whose innocence vanished as he navigated conflicting cultures.
It could also be the characteristically ambiguous title of Mario M. Cuomo's abbreviated Presidential campaign biography.
Metro Matters.
B3.
The Traffic Map B4  Neediest Cases B3


China Move On Trade
Trade talks between China and the United States were set back today when Chinese officials retreated on points they had agreed to in earlier negotiations on protecting intellectual property.
"Negotiations go in ebbs and flows, and this is an ebb," an assistant United States trade representative, Joseph A. Massey, said today.
Mr.
Massey spoke after 10 hours of talks with Chinese officials in Beijing this weekend to try to resolve disagreements in Chinese-American trade issues.


Unbeaten Include Duke and Commoners
After the young season's most hectic weekend, there are still 20 unbeaten Division 1 college basketball teams, including some real surprises.
Some of the unbeaten are top-25 powers: Duke, U.C.L.A., Oklahoma State, Kansas, Connecticut, Michigan State, Oklahoma, Missouri and Louisville.
But the list also contains Clemson, Temple, Boston College, Syracuse, Tulane, Western Michigan, Wisconsin-Green Bay, Eastern Illinois, Washington State, Stanford and Brigham Young.


A Retailing Hub Grows In Virginia's Countryside
Williamsburg and Mount Vernon may have their historic charms, but Virginia's biggest attraction is Potomac Mills, a sprawling cut-rate shopping mall dating to 1985.
The nation's first shopping mall to combine dozens of manufacturers' outlets and discount retailers under one roof, Potomac Mills peddles the oddly sized, the slightly irregular, the out-of-season, the overstocked and the deeply discounted to 12 million shoppers a year.


Fires Kill 2, Hurt Dozens In Brooklyn
Three fires in Brooklyn late Saturday and yesterday killed two people, left dozens of families homeless and injured seven nursing home residents, one seriously, fire officials said.
The most serious fire, a three-alarm blaze that broke out about 10:30 P.M.
Saturday, began at 148 23d Street in Sunset Park and spread rapidly through the cockloft of the three-story row house, damaging six other houses.


Graf Chooses A New Coach
Steffi Graf has a new coach.
Heinz Guenthardt got the job, Graf's father and manager, Peter Graf, said today.


If Hostetler Is Answer in '92, Simms Is Question Mark
Jeff Hostetler will be the Giants' starting quarterback next year.
Phil Simms will be his backup or will be playing for another team or will retire.
No one is sure about Simms's role, and that includes Ray Handley, the Giants' coach.
On Saturday, with Simms almost perfect as a passer (15 for 17), the Giants upset the playoff-bound Houston Oilers here, 24-20.
The Giants thus finished a disappointing season with an 8-8 record and did not qualify for the National Football League playoffs.


6 Children Killed In Little Falls Fire
Six children died early yesterday morning after a fire tore through their two-story home in upstate New York.
A 14-year-old boy who was baby-sitting them was the only one to escape alive.
The boy, who was sleeping when the fire broke out, tried to run upstairs to rescue the children but was forced back by the flames, said Les Congdon, a firefighter-paramedic who helped fight the blaze in Little Falls, N.Y.


Putting the Ailey Dancers Through Their Paces
When Masazumi Chaya, a principal dancer with the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, told Ailey in 1987 that he had decided to retire from the stage, the choreographer's response was casual but firm.
Would he stay on as a rehearsal assistant?
Ailey asked.
"Do this, then stop," he told Mr.
Chaya.
Mr.
Chaya began to teach the other Ailey dancers the ballets he had performed.
He helped to clean up details in other works, taught class and occasionally took the company on tour.
In the process, he became indispensable.
And he hasn't stopped yet.
This year, he was named associate artistic director by Judith Jamison, the former Ailey dancer who has headed the company since Ailey's death in 1989.
Now 44 years old, Mr.
Chaya is widely seen as one of the prime reasons for the level of meticulous, exuberant dancing that is characteristic of the Ailey performers this season at City Center, where the troupe will perform through Sunday.


CHRONICLE
MARTIN GARBUS, a Manhattan lawyer, said he feels like the Thomas Paine of Prague.
And, after helping to draft a new constitution for Czechoslovakia, perhaps well he should.
"The Japanese are good at computers," Mr.
Garbus said the other day, "and Americans are good a writing constitutions."


Quotation of the Day
"I wish he were more democratic -- it wouldn't hurt him." MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV, of Boris N. Yeltsin.  [ A11:1. ]


Bridge
Four of the world's best pairs are getting ready for a challenge match -- Naturalists against Scientists -- in London in late January for a stake of $:50,000.
Two of the pairs have more work to do, because as Naturalists they are committed to using no conventions except Blackwood.
The Naturalist Brazilians, Gabriel Chagas and Marcelo Branco, did their conventionless warm-up in the Roberto Tornay contest played earlier this month over two weekends in Rio de Janeiro.
Chagas fell victim to a brilliant defense by a little-known player, Eduardo Martins.
He wanted revenge, and got it a week later on the diagramed deal.
He sat East, with Branco West and Martins South.


Peering Past Faith to Glimpse the Jesus of History
For millions of Christians at this time of year, Jesus of Nazareth is as tangible as the figure of a baby in a manger, His message as distinct as the notes of a carol, His presence as close as the prayers whispered during Christmas services.
But for many scholars looking not with the eyes of faith but the lenses of historical research, Jesus of Nazareth is an elusive and puzzling figure, one who was probably not born in a stable or even in Bethlehem, whose personal life was a mystery and whose essential message remains subject to vastly different interpretations.


No Headline
Revolutionary slogans are strung across drab office buildings and apartments.
Loudspeakers exhort workers with picks and shovels at construction sites to toil for the glory of President Kim Il Sung.
Statues and pictures of the "Great Leader" beckon everywhere.
North Korea is the land that the 1990's forgot.
Seemingly immune to the historic forces toppling or weakening Communist systems throughout the world, officials here speak of "mistakes" made by other Communist governments that they can avoid.


Washington at Work; Ex-Cold Warrior Sees the Future as 'Up for Grabs'
For most of his professional life, Paul D. Wolfowitz has sounded the alarm against Soviet might and ambition.
So it was a giddy moment for the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy last month when he declared publicly that "the threat from the Soviet Union has gone away."


Icy Relations on Trading Cards
There might be a thaw in East-West relations, but not between trading-card companies.
Upper Deck, which recently produced cards depicting five Soviet hockey players, has asked the California Superior Court to decide if its contract with the players supersedes a contract Topps has with the Soviet ice hockey federation.
STEVE POLUDNIAK, an Upper Deck vice president, said that Topps has threatened legal action. . . .
Last-minute shopping?
How about a snow shovel with a Miami Dolphins logo?
Or a Los Angeles Raiders broom, a Cleveland Browns dog collar or a Tampa Bay Buccaneers barbecue shaped like a helmet?
The most unusual item hawked by these league-approved manufacturers: a bird house, perfect, of course, for a Cardinals fan.


Dance in Review
The Nutcracker' New York Theater Ballet Gould Hall 55 East 59th Street Manhattan
"Nutcrackers" come in many sizes.
On Saturday afternoon, the New York Theater Ballet presented a small-scale adaptation of the holiday classic at Gould Hall.
Just as a little box of candy may be filled with sweet delights, this version, choreographed by Keith Michael, was rich in charm.


Media Giant Dominates Life in Brazil
After Time, Newsweek, U.S.
News &amp; World Report and Der Spiegel, what ranks as the world's fifth-largest selling newsweekly?
If the question were phrased in Portuguese, nearly a million Brazilians would probably respond: Veja.


For Jurors, Evidence in Kahane Case Was Riddled With Gaps
An Egyptian immigrant was acquitted Saturday night of the murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane because the jury concluded that there were crucial missing links in the prosecution's case and that it had not proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused man had fired the fatal shots, a juror and an alternate juror said yesterday.
They said the doubts arose because the prosecution produced no witness in the five-week trial who saw the defendant, El Sayyid A. Nosair, shoot Mr.
Kahane, founder of the militant Jewish Defense League, at a crowded pro-Zionist meeting at a hotel in midtown Manhattan last year.


World Economies


Competing Scholars Share Backgrounds and Views
John P. Meier and John Dominic Crossan are well aware that their books on the historical Jesus are in competition, and that their different scholarly approaches sometimes collide head-on.
But the differences between the two scholars become more interesting in view of what they have in common.
Both are Roman Catholics.
Both were ordained to the priesthood and earned degrees at the Pontifical Biblical Institute in Rome.
Both believe that research on the historical Jesus needs to be independent of theology but cannot substitute for religious faith.


List Is Narrowed By Mercedes-Benz
Mercedes-Benz of North America Inc. has narrowed the list of agencies being considered in the review of its $90 million-plus account, advertising executives say.
The executives, who insisted on anonymity, listed the four agencies as the incumbent, McCaffrey &amp; McCall Inc., New York; Ally &amp; Gargano, New York; the Richards Group, Dallas, and Scali, McCabe, Sloves, New York.


A Salomon Client Is Back
The Massachusetts Treasury decided late Friday to resume some trading with Salomon Brothers, joining a growing list of former clients who are returning after having suspended business in the wake of the Treasury market scandal.
Joseph Malone, the state Treasurer, said the decision to resume business with the Wall Street firm was based on the state's belief that Salomon executives had corrected the firm's internal problems and instituted effective safeguards to prevent illegal bidding.


Debate on Union Layoff Accord
Dinkins administration officials said yesterday that they hope an agreement by the city's largest union to accept furloughs instead of layoffs of city highway workers could increase pressure on its unions to accept similar deals, but a labor leader cautioned that the pact represented a singular, isolated solution.
The union, District Council 37, said on Saturday that it had agreed to accept unpaid furloughs of a day a week for 900 highway and bridge workers.
The agreement, which averts nearly 600 layoffs this winter, reflects a break with the union's long-held opposition to furloughs of municipal workers.


New Season Begins, Courtesy of Old Back
Clearly it was a special moment for his old buddy, and Freeman McNeil, who has had plenty of special moments, wanted to make sure Johnny Hector could savor it.
McNeil gingerly glanced over at his fellow Jet running back, who was surrounded by reporters in the Jets' locker room at Joe Robbie Stadium.


WAITE DENIES ROLE IN IRAN ARMS DEAL
In his first extended interview since his release more than a month ago after five years as a hostage in Lebanon, Terry Waite, the Archbishop of Canterbury's former special envoy, told BBC radio today that he had known nothing about Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's arms deals with Iran.
Mr.
Waite acknowledged that he had met with Colonel North, then a national security aide in the Reagan Administration, fewer than 20 times to discuss freedom for the hostages before he was taken captive himself on his last mission in January 1987.
But he said he had had no part in Colonel North's attempts to secure freedom for hostages by providing weapons to Iran.


Jury Selection Seen As Crucial to Verdict
At first, William M. Kunstler thought the evidence against El Sayyid A. Nosair for the murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane appeared so overwhelming that he advised his client to plead insanity.
When the case went to the jury on Wednesday, he was pessimistic.
Yesterday, as he jubilantly reviewed the trial's ending -- a Manhattan jury's verdict on Saturday acquitting Mr.
Nosair of murder and attempted murder charges but convicting him of lesser charges , Mr.
Kunstler called the split verdict "strange, irrational, inconsistent and repugnant" and said the convictions would be appealed.


U.S. Military Delivers Food to Moscow's Hungry
The United States delivered 75 tons of food left over from the Persian Gulf war to the hungry Moscow region today, part of a relief effort that American and Russian officials said they expected to continue through the winter.
The food, flown in through the snow on two military cargo planes from a supply base in Pisa, Italy, was to go directly to hospitals, orphanages and homes for the elderly.


A Holiday Gift for Strangers
The week after Halloween, Harris Taormina took a two-week vacation and began redecorating his front yard.
Down came the cobwebs, the witches, the ghosts and Frankenstein.
Instead, the would-be graveyard was soon decked out in more than 10,000 lights, twirling dolls and singing angels, reindeer and Santa Clauses, and 350 miniature clay figurines set amid rolling hills and streams -- an imaginary tableau of life in Bethlehem.
Traffic begins to back up for blocks in his residential Queens neighborhood as soon as Mr.
Taormina, a Wall Street stock broker, plugs in his lights every evening about 5:30.
The children are often four deep as they peek in and over the hedge or try for a better view from their parents' arms.
About 60,000 people visit every Christmas, Mr.
Taormina said.
A Holiday Ritual
The pageant of lights and figures at the corner of Pitkin Avenue and 78th Street in Ozone Park has been a ritual for 35 years.
On Christmas Eve, Mr.
Taormina, a diminutive, roly-poly man, dresses as Santa Claus and for a few hours hands out hundreds of stuffed animals and more than 1,000 candy canes to the children before he and one of his daughters place a life-size baby Jesus in the outdoor manger.


Review/Television; Pageant Flips Tradition On Its Ear
The wackiest Christmas pageant of them all turns up tonight at 9, when Channel 13 broadcasts "La Pastorela" ("The Shepherd's Tale"), Luis Valdez's adaptation of a traditional Mexican holiday play, as part of its "Great Performances" series.
In outline, it's standard seasonal fare: a cranky young girl is swept into a fantasy and emerges with renewed devotion and generosity.
But El Teatro Campesino and assorted guest stars -- Linda Ronstadt as San Miguel, the singer Freddy Fender as a shepherd, the comedian Paul Rodriguez as a demon and Cheech Marin (of Cheech and Chong) as an Indian guru, of all things -- have a fine time hamming it up in Mr.
Valdez's script, which carries the shepherds' journey to Bethlehem into realms of slapstick, science fiction and high camp.
The 90-minute program starts out like an earnest piece of social realism, dutifully bilingual: any Spanish word that's not obvious is translated immediately.
As Christmas approaches, the teen-age Gila (Karla Montana), the daughter of migrant garlic pickers, complains about always having to scrape by.
"We'll make it up to you," her mother promises.
"Not if you keep having kids!" Gila whines.


The Revolution: A Case for Optimism
Winter has arrived in Russia, preceded by a flurry of demands that the outside world do something, anything, to help post-Soviet democracy succeed.
Yet the most lurid descriptions of what could lie ahead -- unguarded nuclear weapons, hungry children, demagogues in search of an opening -- may only make help seem futile.
A convincing case for Western aid must include reasons for thinking it would work.
The argument for optimism begins with all the things that should already have gone wrong if the pessimists were right.
Many experts "knew" that no Russian politician could accept Ukrainian independence (and some of them knew that Baltic independence was out of the question, too).
More broadly, the collapse of the Soviet state is supposed to have let loose uncontrollable nationalisms allowing peoples that most Americans have never heard of to start killing each other with abandon.


A Tax Cap, to Cap Costs
When President Bush unveils his health care reform plan next month, listen carefully for two simple words: tax cap.
If you hear them, Mr.
Bush will have taken a politically bold step as part of serious reform.
If you don't, you can be sure his plan is merely fanciful.
A tax cap is a limit on the insurance premium that employers can provide tax-free to employees.
Premiums in excess of the cap would be counted as taxable income to workers.


End of Concert for Clayton, the One-Man Brash Band
Miami wide receiver Mark Clayton had brashly guaranteed a Dolphin victory over the Jets.
But after today's overtime loss to New York, he spoke softly and slowly in a somber locker room.
"I wasn't saying anything against them," he said of the remarks he made last week.
"I was just trying to light a fire under our guys. I thought they would stand behind what I said.


Why We Shouldn't Dump Sludge on Sea Floor; Not Advocates
To the Editor:
Re "Scientists Suggest Dumping Sludge on Vast, Barren Sea Floor" (front page, Dec. 2):


It's Coal for Some, Gifts for Others
The 1991 sports world was full of people who were naughty and those who were nice.
The following list has been checked twice.
Still, it is unofficial.
Lumps of coal or nicely wrapped gifts are not guaranteed.


Review/Theater; A Don Juan Needs Help In Matters of Seduction
Updating and Americanizing the Don Juan story, three collaborators have created a prosaic chamber musical.
The title of the show at the Vineyard Theater is "The Don Juan and the Non Don Juan," and for all the forced effusiveness in evidence on this minuscule stage, the musical is about as animated as that Stone Guest who dines with the Don Juan of legend.
The notion behind James Milton's book is that the activity in an exceedingly insular New York social scene centers around two single men with opposite temperaments: Tom Gervasi, who is the idol of all womanhood, and Al Lehman, the essence of ineptitude in all attempted liaisons.


Washington at Work; Ex-Cold Warrior Sees the Future as 'Up for Grabs'
For most of his professional life, Paul D. Wolfowitz has sounded the alarm against Soviet might and ambition.
So it was a giddy moment for the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy last month when he declared publicly that "the threat from the Soviet Union has gone away."


Experts Doubt Cutbacks Alone Will Save G.M.
When the General Motors Corporation announced last week that it was closing 21 plants and shedding 74,000 workers in the next three years, its chairman, Robert C. Stempel, said the changes would enable the world's largest auto maker to "meet the competitive challenges of the 1990's."
But many experts are not so sure that G.M. can halt its inexorable decline just by getting smaller.


Small Homeless Shelters Become Point of Neighborhood Pride
To the Editor:
I am a practicing lawyer who lives on Manhattan's Upper West Side.
I run one of the shelters Anna Quindlen refers to in "Room at the Inn" (column, Dec. 11).
My shelter is in the temple house of Congregation Rodeph Sholom, where eight men are welcomed five nights a week from the first Monday in October until the last Friday in May.
Two volunteers from some 200 who have signed up join the men each night.
These volunteers come from the widest possible cross-section of the population, including the Manhattan Borough President, a State Supreme Court Justice, a network journalist, lawyers, doctors, teachers and entire families.


Review/Theater; Music-Hall Rowdiness In a Modern 'Cinderella'
Genial rowdiness presides over the Riverside Shakespeare Company's production of "Cinderella" at Playhouse 91, and a very cheerful spirit it is.
This version of the tale, written by Norman Robbins and directed by Laura Fine, is modeled on the British music hall pantomimes, and while it does not collapse into mayhem as often as those rude riots do it does leave one with the satisfying feeling of having ridden a very fast merry-go-round wobbling out of control.
The names indicate the attitude: the heroine is called Cinders, her bad stepmother is Baroness Hardupp (first name, Medusa), the lumpish stepsisters are Asphyxia and Euthanasia, a couple of town louts are Ammer and Tongs and Prince Charming's equerry is Dandini.


Richard Blum Jr., 74; Headed Wine Importer
Richard L. Blum Jr., the retired chairman of Julius Wile Sons &amp; Company, national importers of wines and spirits, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 74 years old and lived in Millbrook, N.Y.
He died of a heart attack, a family member said.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-11 VIOLENT STANDOFF IN YUGOSLAVIA
The six-month civil war in Yugoslavia has killed thousands, wrecked the economy, created half a million refugees and deepened old hatreds.
With no decisive military result so far, it is likely to drag on.
Page A1  YELTSIN IS REASSURINGLY PROSAIC
News Analysis: Unlike President Gorbachev, President Yeltsin is a strategist rooted in the provincial earth.
The meeting pronouncing the Soviet Union dead was merciful for its dearth of grand promises.
A1  American universities have job offers for President Gorbachev.
A11  FIGHTING IN REPUBLIC OF GEORGIA
At least seven people were reported killed in fighting between opposition and government troops in the republic of Georgia.
A10  The United States delivered 75 tons of food to the Moscow region.
A11  NORTH KOREANS ARE UNFAZED
North Korea is the land that the 1990's forgot.
Seemingly immune to the historic forces toppling or weakening other Communist systems, officials there speak of "mistakes" they can avoid.
A1  CURFEW IN CAMBODIAN CAPITAL
Cambodia's Government imposed a nighttime curfew in the capital to prevent a repetition of violent street protests.
A5  POLITICAL SHIFT IN SOUTH AFRICA
News Analysis: South Africa has undergone a political shift from a preoccupation with apartheid to a more complex concern over how blacks and whites can survive in a shared system.
A7  BODY MAY BE U.S.
HOSTAGE'S
Lebanese officials said a body left beside a Beirut street might be that of Lieut.
Col.
William R. Higgins, a slain American hostage.
A3  WAITE DENIES KNOWING OF DEALS
Terry Waite, the Archbishop of Canterbury's former special envoy who was recently freed from captivity in Lebanon, said he had known nothing about Lieut.
Col.
Oliver L. North's arms deals with Iran.
A3  Israel has agreed to resume talks in Washington, an official said.
A6  Quiche Journal: Protestantism is growing in Guatemala.
A4  NATIONAL A12-15 RETHINKING THE OSWALD THEORY
With its grand, encompassing conspiracy theory of a President's assassination, the movie "J.F.K." clearly hit a mark with an audience too young to remember where it was on Nov. 22, 1963.
A1  DID G.M.
GO FAR ENOUGH?
In announcing widespread layoffs and 21 plant closings last week, General Motors dramatically reduced its costs.
But many experts wondered whether a smaller headcount alone would end the company's huge losses.
A1  POLICY SHIFT AT THE S.E.C.
Richard C. Breeden, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, changed courses on several fronts recently, and some fellow commissioners said his motives were political.
D1  SEEKING THE REAL JESUS
Exactly who was Jesus?
In two new books, scholars re-examine the "historical Jesus" and come to radically different conclusions.
A1  Two biblical scholars profiled.
A13  A BLENDING OF INTERESTS
Donations from corporations increasingly play a major role in the budgets of environmental groups, to the consternation of many environmentalists as well as their usual opponents.
A12  CRUSADE ON THE HOLOCAUST
Talking of his efforts to place newspaper ads asserting that Nazis had no policy of exterminating Jews, Bradley Smith called it a crusade for American students' minds.
Many others called it a renewal of anti-Semitism in a particularly dangerous form.
A12  POLICY FOR MINORITIES FOUNDERS
After being nurtured for a decade by state and local governments, thousands of minority-owned companies have closed or are foundering in the wake of the recession and of court rulings that setting aside a portion of contracts for minority businesses is unconstitutional.
A1  THE HAND ON U.S.
STRATEGY
Paul Wolfowitz, a pragmatic conservative who is chief foreign policy adviser to Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney, has become the architect of the Pentagon's -- and President Bush's -- Soviet strategy.
Washington at Work.
A14  Up to 13 Texans died in flooding and rain-related accidents.
A12  Sixty-three names on New Hampshire Presidential ballot.
A15  METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Arts/Entertainment C11-16  Psychoanalyzing the movies.
C11  Israeli Wagner concert on hold.
C11  For Ailey troupe, translating ideas into dance.
C11  Theater: "Raft of the Medusa." C15  "The Don Juan and the Non Don Juan." C16  "Cinderella." C16  Music: Israel (Cachao) Lopez.
C13  Dance: Dance in Review C12  Word and Image: "Memoirs of a Caddy." C14  "La Pastorela," with Ronstadt.
C11 Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17  Editorials A16  A tax cap, to cap costs.
Get the crooked bankers.
Wow! Zap! Ugh!. Canada's Eskimos.
Letters  Anthony Lewis: "Stop the world." A17  Stephen Sestanovich: The revolution -- a case for optimism.
A17  Richard P. Nathan: Welfare thinking turns tough.
A17 Obituaries B12  Dorothy V. Bush, Democrat who called roll at conventions  Saul B. Newton, unorthodox psychotherapist  Ben Davidson, founder of Liberal Party in New York Sports C1-8  Auto Racing: Indy-car merger still possible.
C7  Basketball: Knicks are happy these days.
C2  Saturday night surprises in college basketball.
C2  Silence is the issue for Auburn.
C2  Column: Anderson on Allegre.
C4  Outdoors: Goose hunting.
C7  Features: Sidelines C2  Football: Jets make playoffs in overtime.
C1  If Hostetler is answer, Simms is question mark.
C2  An old back, a new season.
C5  Bills' streak ends in overtime.
C6  Golf: Fast start and big payoff for Couples.
C3  Hockey: Smith keeps close watch on Rangers C2


No Sweat for Couples as He Wins With Pressure On
Demolishing any chance of a dramatic final-round showdown among the game's biggest names, Fred Couples shot out of the tee blocks today with a brilliant burst of golf and stayed in command to win the $2.55 million Johnnie Walker World Championship by four shots.
With some of the best pressure golf of his career, the 32-year-old Couples birdied the first two holes and eagled the fifth on his way to a five-under-par 66, the best round of the week by any of the 26 golfers who battled the wind and rough here at the Tryall Golf Club.
It gave him a 72-hole total of three-under 281 and the $525,000 first prize in the inaugural year of the richest tournament ever held.


Could've, Should've, Would've: Abrupt End to Cuomo Dream
"LITTLE BIG MAN" was Thomas L. Berger's novel about a hero whose stature exceeded his height and whose innocence vanished as he navigated conflicting cultures.
It could also be the characteristically ambiguous title of Mario M. Cuomo's abbreviated Presidential campaign biography.
Mr. Cuomo's version ended abruptly Friday with a question mark:


Despite Verdict, Kahane's Son Says Defendant Deserves Death
Rabbi Meir Kahane's son, pledging that his father's killing would be avenged, said today that death was "the only punishment that is befitting" for the Egyptian immigrant in New York City who was acquitted of the assassination.
The son, Binyamin Zeev Kahane, and other followers of the slain rabbi denounced the jury verdict on Saturday as an injustice and evidence of American anti-Semitism.
Ten followers held a demonstration today outside the United States consulate in Jerusalem to protest the acquittal.


Florida Can Wait: Goose-Hunting Beckons
Chuck Tiranno doesn't like the cold.
He says he wants to move to Florida, a state he has visited often, particularly during the years he competed in the national field trial circuit and campaigned his retrievers.
It occurred to his two companions, who were bundled and shivering in a field blind on a slate gray November morning when snow was falling and the wind was gusting to 25 miles per hour, that Tiranno might not really mean this.
With jacket open and hands bare, Tiranno seemed unaffected by the cold.
There was also the matter of geese.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Can General Motors halt its decline just by getting smaller?
Many expert are not so sure.
Time and again in the last decade, G.M. has closed plants and laid off workers, each time proclaiming that a "leaner and meaner" company was ready to take on the world.
G.M., the experts say, needs more than a trimmer waist; it needs a change of mentality.  [ Page A1. ]


A Big Gamble by GATT's Director
With his take-it-or-leave-it plan for bringing five years of global trade negotiations to a conclusion, Arthur Dunkel, the Director General of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade has taken a high-stakes gamble.
If he wins, he will have laid down the rules by which the world conducts $4.3 trillion in annual trade.


Unbeaten Include Duke and Commoners
After the young season's most hectic weekend, there are still 20 unbeaten Division 1 college basketball teams, including some real surprises.
Some of the unbeaten are top-25 powers: Duke, U.C.L.A., Oklahoma State, Kansas, Connecticut, Michigan State, Oklahoma, Missouri and Louisville.
But the list also contains Clemson, Temple, Boston College, Syracuse, Tulane, Western Michigan, Wisconsin-Green Bay, Eastern Illinois, Washington State, Stanford and Brigham Young.


At Least 7 Killed as Clashes Flare in Georgian Republic
At least seven people were reported killed and dozens wounded today in military skirmishing between opposition and government troops at the Presidential headquarters in Tbilisi, capital of the republic of Georgia.
The fight for control of the government, which included artillery, grenades and automatic-weapons fire, marked a resumption of a sporadic conflict that focuses on President Zviad Gamsakhurdia, the elected leader of the independent republic, who has been accused of stifling the political opposition.


Yeltsin Roots: Firmly in Soil
President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic was reassuringly prosaic this weekend as he succeeded to the leadership mantle of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the President of a Soviet Union that has melted out from under him.
While the watching Western world at first may miss Mr.
Gorbachev's flourishes about historic new beginnings replete with fresh catchwords to match "glasnost" and "perestroika," there is something to be said for Mr.
Yeltsin's bluff push forward sans rhetoric with the new Commonwealth of Independent States.


Red Barber as One Man's Obsession
The obsession to film a documentary on RED BARBER makes perfect sense to ED FREEDMAN.
"Look, if Thomas Edison were alive today, would people be interested in him?" he asked.
"Wouldn't someone be doing a documentary on him?"


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Flyers Top Capitals Brad Jones scored on a rebound at 1 minute 10 seconds of overtime yesterday afternoon to give the Flyers a 4-3 victory over the Washington Capitals in Philadelphia.
The victory gave the Flyers their first three-game winning streak of the season.
Jones picked up a rebound and stuffed the puck between the post and Washington goalie Don Beaupre.(AP)


Remembering Others With Gifts to Neediest
For many people the gift that says "I care" this holiday season is a donation to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
"This year, drawing inspiration from some friends, we decided to make Hanukkah a time for family giving, and choose each evening one cause that would reflect our family's values," wrote the Strauss family of Rockland County, N.Y.
"You were one of the causes we selected, and a check for $50 is enclosed to support your important work."


The Kahane Verdict
An Egyptian immigrant was cleared of the murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane after the jury saw missing links in the evidence presented by the prosecution.
"The police basically did not give us enough," one member of the panel said.
Article, page B1.


Quiche Journal; Flocking to New Shepherds in Catholic Guatemala
Rosa Batz de Son, a pastor's wife, mother of five grown children and leader of the women's organization at her church, still remembers her own parents' conversion to evangelical Protestantism when she was 14 years old.
"Then there was peace in our home," she recalled, her hands folded calmly against the bright, hand-woven cotton skirt favored by indigenous Guatemalans.


Kathy J. Hecht Is Wed on L.I.
Kathy Jane Hecht, the director of tax-incentive programs at the New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development, was married yesterday to Dr.
Leonard Arthur Diamond, a dentist in Kearny, N.J.
Rabbi Donna Berman officiated at Temple Sinai in Roslyn, L.I.


Warhol Heirs Settle Suit With Hospital
New York Hospital has agreed to pay an undisclosed sum to Andy Warhol's estate in a settlement of a wrongful-death suit.
The amount of the settlement was substantial, but no exact figure was disclosed, lawyers involved in the case said.
The settlement is to be finalized today before Justice Ira Gammerman in the State Supreme Court of Manhattan.


Smith Monitors Rangers From Point-Blank Range
Neil Smith, the Rangers' general manager, was roaming the corridor after Saturday night's game, still demanding redemption from all Stanley Cup sinners.
He was very nearly happy.
His Rangers had won their fifth straight game, by 7-5 against the Penguins here at the Civic Arena.
They had climbed 10 games above .500 (22-12-1) for the first time this season.


Policy Shift Is Seen at the S.E.C.
The head of the Securities and Exchange Commission, Richard C. Breeden, has sharply shifted course in several policy areas recently in what senior officials at the agency see as an effort to promote the Bush Administration agenda during an election year.
The moves, some of them opposed by other commissioners, include proposed regulatory breaks for small companies, a delay in new rules governing corporate shareholder battles and new efforts to control what Mr.
Breeden sees as excessive litigation by shareholders.
In each instance, Mr.
Breeden has moved closer to the White House position than where the agency stood earlier this year.


Sports of The Times; Just One of Those 'Destiny Type of Deals'
AS the regulation 60 minutes expired, Raul Allegre's 44-yard field goal lifted the Jets into a 20-20 tie with the Dolphins.
And now, in the eighth minute of overtime, the onetime Giant place-kicker trotted onto the grass of Joe Robbie Stadium with the opportunity for a 30-yard field goal that would propel the Jets into the Super Bowl XXVI playoffs.
When the Dolphins quickly called time out, hoping to rattle him, Allegre hurried back to the Jets' bench for a drink from the orange cooler.


Verdict Is Greeted by Mixture Of Relief, Anger and Confusion
The acquittal of El Sayyid A. Nosair was met yesterday with relief from his supporters, outrage from the followers of the man he was accused of killing and confusion from both camps over the verdict.
The 36-year-old Mr.
Nosair was convicted of four crimes, including possessing the gun that was used to kill Rabbi Meir Kahane on Nov. 5, 1990, and using it to assault a postal worker half a block from the midtown hotel where the rabbi was killed.
But Mr.
Nosair was acquitted of the three most serious charges against him: second-degree murder in the slaying of the rabbi and two counts of attempted murder in the shooting of the postal worker, Carlos Acosta.


Publishing; Booksellers Surprised by Strong Sales
Books are selling well this holiday season, and people in the publishing industry are breathing a wary sigh of relief.
Publishers, booksellers and others who follow the industry had been unsure how the holiday season would go, given the state of the economy.
But now, people in book publishing say that although this has hardly been a boom year, there will be plenty of books under trees this Christmas.


American Express Cuts Off Retailer
In the latest flare-up over the fees it charges businesses that accept its charge card, the American Express Company has cut its ties with Laura Ashley Holdings P.L.C., after the retailer tried to discourage customers from using the card.
American Express learned of Laura Ashley's effort last weekend, when an American Express executive was buying Christmas presents at a Laura Ashley store in the New York area.
When the executive tried to pay for the gifts with an American Express card, the sales clerk tried to persuade her to use another card.


Knicks Making a Run at Having Fun
The Knicks have put themselves in position to enjoy a very Merry Christmas.
With its 106-97 victory over Utah on Saturday night, New York raised its record to a lofty 16-7.


Exxon Slips in Ranking of Oil Companies
Reflecting the growth of state-owned oil companies in the third world, the Venezuelan national oil company has surpassed the Exxon Corporation as the world's third-largest oil enterprise, according to Petroleum Intelligence Weekly.
The newsletter, in an annual ranking published today, found that Aramco, the Saudi Arabian national oil company, remained the world's largest oil concern and that the Royal Dutch/Shell Group remained the second-largest.


CHRONICLE
Judge ROBERT W. SWEET of Federal District Court in Manhattan, on the other hand, said, "I am not James Madison as far as Albania is concerned."
Judge Sweet returned last week from that country, where he spent three weeks meeting with Supreme Court judges and other judges, the attorney general, district attorneys and lawyers.
They discussed, he said, "concepts of the judiciary, judicial independence and separation of powers."


People
*
Martin Franken, chief financial officer at Rowland Worldwide , New York, has been named to the additional post of chief operating officer. *
Rosalinde Rago has been named head of planning and research at Ogilvy &amp; Mather, New York, where she is currently senior vice president.
She replaces Max Blackston, who returns to Research International as worldwide director of advertising and branding research in New York.


Apple Settles Class Actions
Apple Computer Inc. says that it had agreed to settle two class-action lawsuits filed against the company in 1984 and 1991 by stockholders.
Apple continues to deny any wrongdoing in the cases, and the company said Friday that it settled to avoid the expense and risk of further legal proceedings.


A Lottery Winner
The Illinois Lottery has awarded its advertising account, estimated at $21 million in billings, to Bayer Bess Vanderwarker in Chicago.
The decision followed a review that included, in addition to Bayer Bess, three other Chicago agencies: Bozell Inc., the incumbent; Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, and Tatham/RSCG.


South Africa: New Reality; Political Talks Realign Old Racial Cleavages
The beginning of negotiations on a non-racial future for South Africa has underscored the extent of a political shift here -- from a preoccupation with racial exclusion to a more complex concern over how blacks and whites, long divided by apartheid, can survive in a shared system.
The shift has accelerated since the watershed events of February 1990, when President F. W. de Klerk legalized the African National Congress and other anti-apartheid groups, freed Nelson Mandela from prison and promised to end white domination.
The new politics of power sharing were evident at the Convention for a Democratic South Africa, as the negotiating forum is titled, which began Friday and wound up its first session on Saturday.
Mr. de Klerk offered to negotiate a multi-racial interim government in place of the white rule of the last 43 years.
Mr.
Mandela, speaking for the African National Congress, predicted that a new Constitution could be in place by Christmas next year.
In what may have been a harbinger of the future, a white police major and a black former guerrilla jointly supervised the convention's security arrangements.
Other old enemies worked, ate and drank together.
They will continue cooperating in five working groups created to thrash out differences before the convention reconvenes, probably in March.
Friends From Prison
"I see all my old friends from Robben Island and Pretoria Central," said Helen Suzman, a veteran human-rights campaigner who attended the convention as a delegate of the liberal Democratic Party.
Mrs.
Suzman referred to the political prisoners, including Mr.
Mandela, for whose welfare she battled so many years.
They were rubbing shoulders with politicians of the Government that locked them up.
It took an ugly public argument Friday night between President de Klerk and Mr.
Mandela, over the African National Congress's refusal to disband its guerrilla wing, to drive home the reality of political organizations who find themselves now together but dreaming different dreams.
For decades, the battle lines in South Africa were racially drawn between whites defending minority domination and blacks demanding equality.
Today, alliances have been recast, dividing those pledged to negotiate a peaceful solution from those who see even talking as a sellout.
The National Party cannot hope to bridge its schism with the Conservative Party, whose founders broke away in 1982 at the prospect of reform.
White Afrikaners lead both parties and sit together in Parliament.
But right-wingers like those in the paramilitary Afrikaner Resistance Movement threaten civil war if Mr. de Klerk gives blacks the kind of political equality discussed at the convention.
Splits in Anti-Apartheid Camp
And the African National Congress is estranged from two smaller black movements, the Pan-Africanist Congress and the Azanian People's Organization, who fought a common struggle against apartheid and now say the African National Congress betrayed blacks by talking to the Government.
The Azanian People's Organization, a black consciousness group, balked in October at joining a united front against the Government at the negotiating table.
The Pan-Africanists dropped out last month, accusing the African National Congress of colluding with the Government to share power.
The Conservative Party, the Pan-Africanist Congress and other parties that refused to attend the convention gamble that the talks will falter at racially charged impasses.
The hard-liners have gained support from defectors leaving the National Party and the African National Congress because of their willingness to compromise.
The Inkatha Freedom Party, a Zulu-based movement, was viewed as a Government ally, if not collaborator, after receiving secret Government subsidies to compete with the African National Congress.
Yet Inkatha's leader, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, boycotted the political convention, which the Government also paid for, because the Zulu King, Goodwill Zelethini, was not allowed a separate seat.
Inkatha attended but refused to sign a declaration supported by the Government.
To reinforce the paradox, Inkatha has talked with the Conservatives, who speak of Afrikaners and Zulus as proud nations similarly entitled to self-determination.
Suspicion Persists
Though the National Party and the African National Congress have emerged as the principal negotiating partners, mutual trust remains fragile, with each party suspicious that the other nurtures a hidden agenda.
Mr.
Mandela and other congress officials have said that the Nationalists seek to perpetuate white privilege under another guise.
Mr. de Klerk's Government and the National Party accuse the congress of wanting to impose unworkable Marxist panaceas.
The disagreements extend to their definitions of progress.
The congress wants an interim government installed within 18 months and a new constitution drafted by an elected constituent assembly.
The National Party envisions a transitional government lasting at least 10 years, according to the Minister of Constitutional Development, Gerrit Viljoen, and it wants the Constitution negotiated.
Such differences portend hard negotiations.
Yet the journey to a democratic future has begun, dividing South Africans into those embarking on the uncertain trek and those who choose to stay behind.


Albania's Chief Hints He Might Resign Soon
President Ramiz Alia has proposed general elections in March and has hinted that he might step down soon.
The state radio over the weekend quoted Mr.
Alia, in power since 1985, as calling elections for March 1 and urging Parliament to speed up preparations for a new election law.


The Hut Turns Up the Heat In the War of Pizza Chains
IN another skirmish in the pizza wars, Pizza Hut Inc. has scrapped its four-year-old advertising campaign for a more aggressive approach.
In television commercials by BBDO New York, which begin on Thursday, the nation's largest pizza chain will introduce twin themes replete with urgent calls to action.


Body Found in Beirut May Be Colonel's
Lebanese officials said today that a partly decomposed body left along a Beirut street overnight might be the remains of Lieut.
Col.
William R. Higgins, an American hostage who was slain by his captors in 1989.
The Lebanese police said an anonymous telephone caller had directed them to the body and had said that the remains were those of the marine colonel.
The body was taken to the American University Hospital, where the coroner general examined it, but the findings will not be made public until the coroner's report is submitted to the Government on Monday, a senior official at the hospital said.


Premiums for Some Motorists Increased 15% in New Jersey
Under pressure from a recent court ruling, the state insurance commissioner has approved interim rate increases averaging 15 percent for drivers insured under the Market Transition Facility, the successor to the state's troubled insurance pool for high-risk drivers.
"I don't want to approve this increase, and I am dismayed by the need for it," the commissioner, Samuel F. Fortunato, said in a statement on Friday, when he approved the increases.
"The courts have spoken, but I strongly urge motorists to avoid this increase by getting out of the M.T.F."


A Team of Veterans And a Quick Healer
In the 15 winter Olympics since they began in 1924, the United States has won more medals in speed skating than in any other sport.
In all likelihood, the team heading to France for the Albertville Games in February will keep the margin in place.
Among the 12 men and 8 women who qualifed for the team in trials that concluded tonight is a nucleus of 12 skaters who competed in the 1988 Games in Calgary, including two medal winners -- Bonnie Blair and Eric Flaim -- as well as one skater, Mary Docter, who made an Olympic team for the fourth time.


Israel Philharmonic Puts Off Wagner Concert
The durability of Richard Wagner as a symbol of Nazi horrors and unreconstructed anti-Semitism seems to have outmatched the desire of Israel's pre-eminent orchestra to play his music.
A week after its musicians voted to perform a special Wagner concert this Friday, the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra said today that the program would be postponed until it asks its 36,000 subscribers if they agree with ending a decades-old ban on the 19th-century German composer.


Why We Shouldn't Dump Sludge on Sea Floor
To the Editor:
"Scientists Suggest Dumping Sludge on Vast, Barren Sea Floor" (front page, Dec. 2) misses the boat.
Pollution prevention is the only viable means for eliminating hazardous substances from sewage and other wastes.
This solution is being implemented in a growing number of communities in the United States, Scandinavia, Western Europe and elsewhere.
With pollution prevention, there's no need for ill-conceived schemes like deep ocean dumping.


Preparing for Kwanzaa, a Celebration of African Heritage


Small Homeless Shelters Become Point of Neighborhood Pride; None Are Turned Away
To the Editor:
You report Dec. 10 that an administrative law judge for the New York City Human Rights Commission has ruled that the Partnership for the Homeless has discriminated against homeless people with the AIDS virus.


Dorothy V. Bush, 75, Democrat Who Called Roll at Conventions
Dorothy Vredenburgh Bush, the secretary of the Democratic National Committee who called the roll and tallied the votes at 12 national conventions from 1944 to 1988, died on Saturday in a hospital in Naples, Fla.
She was 75 years old.
Mrs.
Bush died of lung cancer, her stepdaughter, Jan Bush Jennings, told The Associated Press.


Leonard Sheriff, 76, Investment Firm Chairman
Leonard S. Sheriff, a pioneer in investing in companies facing merger or takeover bids, died on Thursday in Manhattan.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Sheriff died of complications after kidney surgery, his family said.


Thaw for Canada's Eskimos
The creation of a huge new territory for Canada's Eskimos is a milestone for native peoples' rights.
Historically, the treatment of native claims in Canada has been roughly comparable to their treatment in the U.S., sometimes ahead, sometimes behind, and usually slow and grudging.
But Ottawa's agreement to establish a 750,000-square-mile territory called Nunavut -- "our land" -- is a dramatic first.
Nunavut is not everyone's ideal environment.
Verdant forest in ages past, it is now a vast expanse of tundra, snow and ice, a natural habitat only for the hardy.
The new territory will be carved from the sprawling Northwest Territories, and will stretch from the northern border of Manitoba to Ellesmere Island, north of the magnetic North Pole.


Seeking to Give a New Life To a Dying Soviet Industry
Until recently, the colossal Leninetz military conglomerate focused on building high-quality radar for Soviet fighter planes.
But with the cold war over, Leninetz finds its world turned upside down.
So it is focusing on making refrigerators, razor blades and other consumer goods and is eagerly looking to Western companies for help.


Question Box
Snow Bowl to Rose Bowl
Q.
During the telecast of this year's Ohio State-Michigan football game, which Michigan won, a brief flashback was shown of the game played between the teams during a snowstorm in 1950.
How did that one come out?
A.
Everything came up roses for Michigan then too as the Wolverines won the snowdown showdown, 9-3, in Columbus, Ohio, and slipped into the New Year's Day Rose Bowl game, despite a 5-3-1 record, after Northwestern knocked off Illinois, 14-7, that same day.


Few Issues Expected
For Christmas week, the Treasury plans to hold only its regular weekly auction today of three- and six-month bills.
By late Friday, three-month bills were traded at 3.72 percent and six-month bills at 3.83 -- sharply lower than a week earlier because of the Federal Reserve's one-point cut in the discount rate, to 3 1/2 percent.


Metromedia, New Line in Orion Plan
The Metromedia Company and the New Line Cinema Corporation offered a joint proposal yesterday for the reorganization of the Orion Pictures Corporation, which sought bankruptcy protection from its creditors on Dec. 11.
Under the plan, New Line would merge some of its operations with those of Orion, reducing costs for both companies.


Infante Dismissed As Packers' Coach
Lindy Infante was dismissed today as the coach of the Green Bay Packers.
Infante, whose teams had a 24-40 record in his four years at Green Bay, was under pressure most of the season for his team's poor performance in compiling a 4-12 record.
The Packers beat Minnesota, 27-7, on Saturday in Jerry Burns's last game as the Vikings' coach.


Homeless Found to Go Slowly to Shelters
A new report on homeless families in New York City challenges a recent assertion by Dinkins administration officials that some families who are not truly homeless are preying on the city's shelter system to qualify for placement in permanent apartments.
The report found that most families are doubling up with friends or relatives in extremely overcrowded conditions before seeking help from the shelters.


Cookies, Civic Pride And Zen
ON the first day of the New Year, this city will get something it has not had in all of its 120 years: an official cookie.
It is called the Rainforest Crunch Cookie and how it became the official cookie of Yonkers is the story of a skeptical city, a Jewish-born Buddhist priest who won its respect and the cookie they baked together.


Ware May Join Knights in a Loan Deal
ANDRE WARE, the 1990 Heisman Trophy winner who set several college passing marks at the University of Houston, appears to be headed for Giants Stadium.
No, he's not replacing the Jets' KEN O'BRIEN.
Nor will he be part of the Giants' quarterback controversy.
Instead, Ware is likely to be at the stadium in the spring performing for the New York/New Jersey Knights of the World League of American Football.


Unbeaten Include Duke and Commoners
After the young season's most hectic weekend, there are still 20 unbeaten Division 1 college basketball teams, including some real surprises.
Some of the unbeaten are top-25 powers: Duke, U.C.L.A., Oklahoma State, Kansas, Connecticut, Michigan State, Oklahoma, Missouri and Louisville.
But the list also contains Clemson, Temple, Boston College, Syracuse, Tulane, Western Michigan, Wisconsin-Green Bay, Eastern Illinois, Washington State, Stanford and Brigham Young.


Michelle Roufa, Publicist, Wed
Michelle Erin Roufa, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan D. Roufa of Lancaster, Pa., was married yesterday to Mark Lawrence Kayton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Kayton of Sarasota, Fla.
Rabbi Joseph Ozarowski officiated at the Iris Club in Lancaster.
Ms.
Roufa is 22 years old and is keeping her name.
She is an associate with Susan Yecies Associates, a public relations concern in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University, as did the bridegroom.
Her father is a manufacturing manager at R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons, and her mother, Mary Roufa, is the director of Groff Pre-Need Inc., a funeral planning concern, both in Lancaster.


Review/Pop; A Bassist and His Band: Genteel, but Not Always
The bassist Israel (Cachao) Lopez's show at Alice Tully Hall on Saturday night was fascinating because it exposed the instability of the alliance between European and African esthetics in the New World.
Mr.
Lopez, who grew up in Cuba and has a tremendous influence on the music of the Americas, opened the show with a group of songs, mostly from the first third of the century, called danzones that both in their instrumentation -- the band included eight string players -- and in their melodies and harmony recalled the stateliness of 18th and 19th-century dance music.
The three percussionists in the band were kept subdued.
Not so with the second half, featuring a more modern and freewheeling jam session called a descarga that allowed the percussionists more prominence in proceedings that brought more, and more intense, improvisations to the stage.
The show was also fascinating because it revealed how the popular dance music of the Caribbean has paralleled in its evolution the path of popular African-American music, by becoming more intense and extroverted, allowing drums and drumming to dominate.
The danzones, for example, started out meandering through chords, setting up the gentle melodies for the flutists.
Even the improvised sections maintained a politeness that sounded archaic.
But in the second half, harmony was more or less discarded; the volume was increased, and the instrumentalists, like a Cuban version of the James Brown band, took small and regular interlocking musical parts and turned them into a majestic affirmation of music's ability to be physical.


Cardinal Urges U.S. to Welcome Haitians
John Cardinal O'Connor made an emotional appeal during yesterday morning's Mass at St.
Patrick's Cathedral for the United States to provide a safe haven for thousands of Haitian refugees.
"We can at least not deport the 7,000 Haitians at Guantanamo Bay until there's stability again in Haiti," he said during the service, referring to refugees at the American naval base in Cuba who may be forcibly returned to Haiti.


Georgians Fight for Control of Government


Dance in Review
Lisa Nelson and Cathy Weis Performance Space 122
Just about anything can dance.
Lisa Nelson and Cathy Weis demonstrated that on Thursday night at Performance Space 122.
They made television sets dance in their mixed-media work, "An Abondanza in the Air."


INSIDE
Jets Make Playoffs
New York beat the Dolphins by 23-20 in overtime at Joe Robbie Stadium in Miami to clinch the final berth available in the National Football League playoffs.
SportsMonday, page C1.
Israel Puts Wagner on Hold
The Israel Philharmonic Orchestra postponed plans for a Wagner concert until its subscribers are polled on whether to end a decades-old ban on the German composer.
Page C11.
Body May Be U.S.
Hostage's
A body that may be that of an American hostage, Lieut.
Col.
William R. Higgins, was taken to a Beirut hospital for identification and possible return to the United States.
Page A3.
A Shift in Emphasis at S.E.C.
Richard C. Breeden, chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, has abruptly changed several policies.
His fellow commissioners say he is playing politics.
Page D1.
Oil Discovery in Colombia
Industry executives say the Cusiana oilfield on the eastern coast is the largest to be found since Prudhoe Bay in Alaska in 1968.
Page D1.


Yeltsin Roots: Firmly in Soil
President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic was reassuringly prosaic this weekend as he succeeded to the leadership mantle of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the President of a Soviet Union that has melted out from under him.
While the watching Western world at first may miss Mr.
Gorbachev's flourishes about historic new beginnings replete with fresh catchwords to match "glasnost" and "perestroika," there is something to be said for Mr.
Yeltsin's bluff push forward sans rhetoric with the new Commonwealth of Independent States.


Natural Foes Bankroll Environmental Groups
Of all the projects the National Audubon Society has undertaken in its 100 years, none have played to a larger audience and few have drawn more aggressive attacks from opponents than its nationally televised "World of Audubon" specials.
Last summer, for instance, its documentary "The New Range Wars" accused ranchers and the Government of promoting grazing practices that destroyed millions of acres of land.
But Audubon's ability to broadcast its view of the world came under a new threat last week, when the General Electric Company said it would not renew its contract to underwrite the productions.
The company told Audubon that because of economic pressure from the recession, it would not pay for the productions after its three-year $3 million contract expires next year.


Bill Shields Abortion Clinics From Protests
Legislation intended to discourage demonstrations that block entrances to clinics where abortions are performed has provided a new battleground for groups on both sides of the abortion issue.
The bill, which is wending its way through the lame-duck session of the Assembly, would make New Jersey the first state in the Northeast and one of only four in the country with a law specifically protecting access to centers providing abortions.


Wow! Zap! Ugh!
Inside many Americans over the age of 50 is a youngster who must have been astounded by the news that collectors paid $1.2 million for comic books and comic art at a recent Sotheby's auction.
And in each of these youngsters a pained inner voice surely murmured: "Mom, I told you so."
The 1939 issue of Detective Comics introducing Batman was knocked down for $55,000.
Marvel Comics No. 1, dated November 1939, fetched $28,600.
Whiz Comics No. 2, dated January 1940, in which Captain Marvel made his debut, was snapped up for $9,900.
And all those comic books originally cost a dime.


We Can Help Soviet Farms to Grow Food
To the Editor:
William Safire writes in "Ukraine Marches Out" (column, Nov. 18) that to be productive, all farmers need is "transportation and the incentives of private property and personal gain." Has Mr.
Safire ever visited a Soviet farm?
I weary of journalists who find their easy Western solutions to century-old problems.


Review/Theater; The Way AIDS Harms Not Only the Afflicted
In Theodore Gericault's painting "The Raft of the Medusa" survivors of a shipwreck cling to a raft that is crowded with those who are dead or dying.
The painting is an apt metaphor for those who have been struck by AIDS.
The difference, as expressed in Joe Pintauro's play "Raft of the Medusa," is that the survivors will also succumb.
The play, which opened last night at the Minetta Lane Theater, is a comprehensive examination of the effects of AIDS on a cross section of the urban population and how the less sick become the caretakers of those who are in more imminent jeopardy.


In China, Wind Shifts In a Porridge Bowl
To the Editor:
Your Nov. 20 "Beijing Journal" reports that the writer Wang Meng is fighting back with a libel suit after a hard-line newspaper denounced his 1989 story "Hard Porridge" as a subtle attack on Deng Xiaoping, China's paramount leader.
The story tells of an old man who wants his family to eat a Western breakfast, instead of traditional Chinese porridge.


Explosive Imagery of 'J.F.K.' Igniting Debate in Audiences
In Dallas, they never doubted the conspiracy.
From Harvard Square and Berkeley to the frozen streets of Minneapolis there have always been the buffs, people with models of Dealey Plaza and leatherbound copies of the Warren Commission Report parked in their basements, certain that the full story of who killed President Kennedy has never been -- and maybe never will be -- told.
But for some members of a generation far more likely to connect the words "Single-Bullet Theory" to a mediocre rock band than to the distant death of a President, Oliver Stone's polemical new film "J.F.K." seems to have unleashed a surprising rage about that November day and all the investigations that followed.


Yeltsin as Seen By Ex-Comrade
As leaders of 11 former republics of the Soviet Union gathered to eliminate Mikhail S. Gorbachev's job this weekend, Mr.
Gorbachev gave a somewhat pointed assessment of Boris N. Yeltsin, his former comrade and the man who stands at the center of the commonwealth that is succeeding the old union.


Ben Davidson, 90, a Co-Founder Of the Liberal Party in New York
Ben Davidson, a co-founder of the New York State Liberal Party and executive director when it was an occasionally pivotal force in state and local politics, died on Saturday in the Guardian Rehabilitation Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 90 years old and lived in Beverly Hills, Calif.
He died of complications from myasthenia gravis, his family said.


Buried Themes: Psychoanalyzing Movies
In the wrenching farewell scene of "Casablanca," is Rick really saying goodbye to Mom and Dad instead of to Ilse Lund and Victor Laszlo?
Dr.
Bruce H. Sklarew, a co-chairman of the Forum for the Psychoanalytic Study of Film, argues that he is, and that the ending works because Rick has successfully resolved the Oedipal conflict at the heart of the film.
Dr.
Sklarew has an even more provocative theory, but ever since being booed off the stage by an outraged audience of "Casablanca" fans, he has been reluctant to explain it on the record.


Brutal Impasse: The Yugoslav War A Special Report.; Yugoslav Ethnic Hatreds Raise Fears of a War Without an End
The six-month civil war in Yugoslavia has killed thousands of soldiers and civilians, wrecked Eastern Europe's most promising economy, created half a million refugees and stirred enough hatred to incite generations of future conflict.
But it has not yet produced a decisive military result.
The Serbian-dominated Yugoslav Army and its allies, the Serbian militias and irregulars, are bogged down after seizing control of a third of the separatist republic of Croatia and have recently withdrawn from several forward positions.
Meanwhile, the hurriedly organized Croatian army is beginning to score some minor victories, raising hopes among politicians in Zagreb, the Croatian capital, that the lost lands may some day be regained.


Equity Issues This Week
Only a few equity issues are expected to be offered this week because of the Christmas holiday:
Bell Bancorp, two million shares. Adams Cohen.
Digicon Inc., 6.75 million shares. Paine Webber.
Korea Growth Fund Inc., 5 million shares. First Boston.
Liberty Bancorp, 2.875 million shares. Adams Cohen.
Pharmaceutical Marketing Services Inc., 3.5 million shares. Lehman Brothers.
TCF Financial Corporation, 1.6 million shares. Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood.


Despite Stall, an Indy-CART Merger Is Still Possible
Efforts to bring together the Indianapolis Motor Speedway and Championship Auto Racing Teams (CART), the sanctioning body for the rest of Indy-car racing, have hit some snags but appear to still be alive.
After Tony George, the president of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, presented a merger proposal to the team owners who form CART at its board meeting on Nov. 6, the owners agreed to respond to George through its chairman, A. William Stokkan.


George Lois Leads Lois/GGK Buyback
After a year of trying to buy back the agency that bears his name, George Lois, the executive associated with the slogans "I want my Maypo" and "I want my MTV," can stop saying "I want my agency."
Six years after a troublesome merger, GGK International, Zurich, has agreed to sell its majority holding in its American unit, Lois/GGK, to a management group headed by Mr.
Lois.
Both parties said they were relieved to end a relationship that brought two very contrary attitudes toward advertising under one corporate roof.


Unrest Prompts Curfew in Cambodian Capital
The Government imposed a nighttime curfew in Phnom Penh today to prevent further unrest after violent street protests swept the capital on Saturday night.
At least 3 people were killed and more than 25 injured in the clashes here Saturday evening, culminating a week of demonstrations -- the first in more than 16 years -- that seemed chiefly directed at widespread Government corruption.
The Government, however, charged that the Khmer Rouge guerrilla group had provoked the actions as part of an "armed insurrection with political aims."


Accounts
*
The adult division of Harcourt Brace Jovanovich to Bennett Book Advertising Inc., New York, with billings under $1 million.
The account was previously handled by Della Femina Sherman, New York.


Additional Rate Cuts Are Seen
Many credit market analysts say chances are good that interest rates will fall further.
They say the Federal Reserve, as it demonstrated on Friday when it slashed the discount rate a full point, is clearly eager to finish the task of stimulating the economy.
It has been so long since short-term interest rates were at their current low levels that there is little wonder that credit market participants feel locked in an unfamiliar, unsettling time warp.


Market Place; New York Ponders Bite-Sized Bonds
NEW YORK CITY is moving to adopt a plan for selling some of its bonds in amounts as small as $250, using a novel sales program that would bypass mutual funds and securities brokers and make the city's bonds more available to middle-income investors.
A few dozen local governments around the nation have offered municipal bonds in amounts smaller than the usual $5,000 minimum, with varying success.
But except for the United States Treasury, through its savings bond programs, no issuer as large as New York City has tried to employ mass-marketing techniques.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Advertising column yesterday referred incorrectly to the 1960's soul song "Rescue Me," on which Pizza Hut has based the song for its new advertising campaign.
Although the song heard in the commercials, "Deliver Me," is sung by Aretha Franklin, she did not sing "Rescue Me."


3 Shot and Killed In Brooklyn Grocery
Three men were shot and killed in a grocery store in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn early this morning, the police said.
The victims were in the R and G grocery at 830 Macon Street, near Saratoga Avenue, at about 1 A.M. during an apparent robbery.
One of the victims worked at the grocery, the police said, but they were unable to identify the men further.


Spurs Sign Strickland After 80-Day Holdout
ROD STRICKLAND ended his 80-day absence from the San Antonio Spurs yesterday, and RED McCOMBS, owner of the team, hopes criticism of the franchise is history, too.
McCombs sent a letter to season-ticket holders and sponsors, saying Strickland's signing should silence those who claim that the team is not concerned about winning a National Basketball Association championship.
The point guard is said to have agreed yesterday to a one-year deal worth $1.3 million, although no terms were announced.


After a Crash, Help From Neediest
Linda A. is one of the lucky ones.
She survived the subway crash at Union Square on Aug. 28 that killed five people, including a close friend of hers.
But she survived to be haunted by the vivid memories of "the smoke and the screams," and the image of the mangled body of her friend, Richard Limehouse.
She survived to ask herself, "Why did I live?" and to worry about how she would pay for groceries or her rent because the accident left her with shooting pains in her legs that made her unable to work.


For African Men, a Development Role
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 2 "Ngorongoro Journal" reports on the status of Masai women, who still do a disproportionate part of the work, but who now have advocates for their rights.
I must caution against too much optimism for the status of women in African culture.
In many villages, as a woman's independence rises, so too does the domestic violence against her.


2 Children Killed in Harlem Fire
A 5-year-old girl and her 2-year-old brother were killed in a fire in their apartment in Harlem last night, fire officials said.
The children, Constance and Tilano Lopez, died after their mother, Edna Pizaro, and a neighbor were unable to rescue them from the burning apartment building at 124 East 103d Street, the neighbor, Ramon Castillo, said last night.
Ms.
Pizaro is asthmatic, Mr.
Castillo said, a condition that hampered her efforts to save her children.


On My Mind; Heroes In Moscow
Great events Gorbachev defeated, Yeltsin victor, commonwealth, all that.
But today the only thing that moves me is that I saw and embraced two other Russians, men of the camps.
I had met them before only once.
That was three years ago, to the week, in a political prison camp in the Urals known as Perm 35.
For me, the men and women of the camps are the true heroes of the revolution.
They fought Communism not when it began to crumble but when it seemed everlasting, unconquerable, and the Gorbachevs and Yeltsins fought only to climb its ladder to power.


6 Wounded by Bomb in Hungary Aimed at Soviet Jewish Emigrants
A powerful bomb exploded today in the path of a bus carrying Soviet Jewish emigrants to the Budapest airport for their flight to Israel.
Two Hungarian policemen in a patrol car accompanying the bus were seriously wounded, and remained in critical condition at Budapest's military hospital while 4 of the 28 passengers on the bus sustained light injuries and were treated at the site of the blast.
"This was a professional terrorist action," Hungarian police spokesman Antal Kacziba told a news conference called Monday to discuss the bus attack.
By evening, no one had come forward to take responsibility.


Rate Cuts Push Dow Over 3,000
Stock prices leaped yesterday in what traders saw as a continued reaction to Friday's sharp cut in the discount rate and, hard on its heels, a cut in many banks' prime lending rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average surged past the 3,000 barrier for the first time in more than a month to 3,022.58, up 88.10 points, or 3 percent.
The percentage gain was the best since Aug. 21, when stock prices rebounded after the failed coup in the Soviet Union, with the Dow also rising 88.10, to 3,001.79.


Stake in Roberts Pharmaceutical
The Roberts Pharmaceutical Corporation has agreed to sell a 29 percent stake in its business to the Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical Company of Japan for $95 million, the company said.


When Skates Were Off, She Lost Her Balance
For all the shame, guilt and embarrassment she felt, Mary Docter was reluctant at first to talk about her past.
Then she thought a moment and proceeded anyway.
It's not a happy story, but one she dearly wanted to tell.
It's therapeutic, as any recovering alcoholic and drug abuser will tell you.


Kramer of Lions Aims Beyond His Playoff Debut
Of the 12 starting quarterbacks in this season's National Football League playoffs, which kick off Saturday, some will need no introduction.
Denver's John Elway has been seen in previous post-seasons, rolling right and rolling left and tossing piercing bombs downfield.
Jim Kelly has masterfully orchestrated Buffalo's no-huddle offense.
Houston's Warren Moon has been known to match any score with an array of run-and-shoot aerials.


Warner's Unusual Steps To Calm Furor Over "J.F.K."
IF film executives trying to promote a new movie could have one wish, it would surely be that the movie make the cover of Newsweek and Esquire.
The people at Warner Brothers got that wish, only to discover that it was a mixed blessing.
Everyone is paying attention to "J.F.K.," Oliver Stone's film on the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963 and the conspiracy theories surrounding it, but the film has come under strong criticism from some who say Mr.
Stone's research was irresponsible.


TRANSACTIONS
FOOTBALL National Football League  SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Fired Dan Henning, coach; and Chuck Claussen, Alex Gibbs, Mike Haluchak, Bobby Jackson, Charlie Joiner, Rod Lynn, LeCharls McDaniel, Jim Mora, Larry Pasquale, Jack Reilly and Ed White, assistant coaches.


Long-Term Prices Advance Again
The rally in the fixed-income markets continued yesterday, as prices of Treasury notes and bonds rose and interest rates fell.
Traders said that business was brisk during the morning and that the market's mood was not clouded by a report that personal-consumption spending had risen by seven-tenths of 1 percent in November, a much bigger increase than had been expected.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
New Jersey Turnpike Authority plans to offer $750 million in revenue bonds the week of Jan. 6 through a group led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co., according to Richard Poirier, a general partner at Lazard Freres &amp; Co.


Hsin-Nung Yao, 86, Chinese Playwright Who Angered Mao
Hsin-Nung Yao, a major Chinese writer who was denounced as a traitor by Mao Zedong and whose most popular play was banned as politically incorrect, died on Wednesday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 86 years old.
He died of influenza, his family said.
Best known as a screenwriter and playwright, Mr.
Yao was also a professor, scholar, poet, critic and calligrapher.
He was denounced in 1967 for his play "Sorrows of the Forbidden City." Banned by Mao, it told the Manchu Dynasty tale of the notorious Empress Dowager who ordered the murder of a nephew, Emperor Kuang-hsu, who was exploring Western democratic ideas.


MAXWELL RESIGNS AS NEWS PUBLISHER
Kevin Maxwell resigned yesterday as publisher and chairman of The Daily News, apparently bowing to the pressures created by the evidence of his role in the collapse of his family's media empire.
His resignation, effective Jan. 1, signals the end of the Maxwell family's nine-month involvement in The Daily News.
This began with great fanfare last March when the late Robert Maxwell was hailed as a savior after a five-month strike, but ended amid the scandal left by the failure of the Maxwell businesses under $4.4 billion in debt.


Critic's Notebook; Listening to 'Messiah,' Listening to 'Messiah' And Listening Again
There is a story about the American composer Carl Ruggles, in which a friend found him sitting at the piano playing an oddly voiced chord over and over.
Asked what he was doing, Ruggles said he wanted to see whether the chord could stand the test of time.
I have been performing a similar operation on Handel's "Messiah." Over the last two weeks, I attended six "Messiah" performances by ensembles of all sizes and shapes.
For good measure I also listened to eight recordings and parts of others, and rummaged through various books on the work and editions of the score.
I even looked in briefly on a "Messiah Sing-In" -- or, I should say, on
the
"Messiah Sing-In" in Avery Fisher Hall, the granddaddy of this now prolific sing-it-yourself genre.


Tough Choices Ahead For Phillips President
Wayne W. Allen took over yesterday as the president and chief operating officer of the Phillips Petroleum Company, in the midst of a program to make the world's 28th-largest oil company a little smaller and more profitable.
Mr.
Allen, 55 years old, has spent 30 years at Phillips, which is based in Bartlesville, Okla.
He was most recently senior vice president for exploration and production.
He replaced Glenn A. Cox, who retired.


New Israelis From U.S.S.R. Often New to Judaism, Too
With thousands of immigrants continuing to arrive here each month from the moribund Soviet Union, Israelis have begun to wrestle with the social, religious and political implications of a phenomenon not discussed much in public:
In Israel's 43-year history there has never before been a wave of immigration both so large and so distant from Jewish traditions.


U.S. Seeks Eased Rule For Loans
In an attempt to encourage more lending, the four Federal agencies that regulate banks and savings and loans are preparing new rules that would make it cheaper for institutions to make home-construction loans.
The Office of Thrift Supervision, which supervises the nation's savings associations, was the first of the four agencies to announce today that it would cut in half the amount of money that savings and loans must put aside as a cushion against possible losses from low-risk residential construction loans.


Biologists Advise Doctors to Think Like Darwin
FOR many biologists, Charles Darwin is a hero of near-godlike proportions whose ideas are as powerful and piquant today as they were when they were conceived.
Whether tracking the mating behavior of frogs in the field, or comparing a gene in a fruit fly with a gene in a human, biologists bear in mind the naturalist's grand theory of how and why all creatures evolve.
Now some biologists are proposing that physicians, too, would do well to heed the wisdom of Darwin, and to take the principles of evolution and natural selection into account as they seek to cure their patients.
Biologists argue that clinicians often ignore the fundamental concepts of evolution, as when they treat a fever with aspirin, even though fever is a highly effective method that mammals have evolved for combating invasive bacteria.


Classical Music in Review
Benefit Street Chamber Players  Corpus Christi Church
The Benefit Street Chamber Players are an American early-music group that names itself after a colonial thoroughfare of Providence, R.I.
Its Sunday afternoon Christmas concert drew from the melodious tradition that stretched across most of the 17th century.
The more familiar names were Frescobaldi, Sweelinck, Monteverdi and Buxtehude.
But the program's alternations of instrumental and vocal music also offered pieces by Castello, Francesca Caccini, Rossi, Merula, Giansetti, Rosenmuller, Bernhard, Boddecker and Kerll.


Classical Music in Review
Inkhay  Merkin Concert Hall
Geographic isolation and perhaps pure stubbornness made possible the kind of music played by Inkhay on Saturday night.
The program was mainly instrumental and the subject was the Andean cultures of Ecuador, Bolivia, Peru and Paraguay.
Inkhay is anchored by five instrumentalists switching easily from wind to percussion to plucked instruments.
Its director, Pepe Santana, offered discreet introductions and explanations.
Atahualpa Poalasin played a smallish harp.
A number of dancers added a visual side to the proceedings.


Merck in Tie To Beecham
Raising the stakes in the billion-dollar market for cholesterol-lowering drugs, Merck &amp; Company yesterday announced that SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. would help sell Zocor, a Merck cholesterol treatment, in the United States starting next month.
Zocor, which was recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration, will compete with Mevacor, a similar Merck drug, and Pravachol, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company's cholesterol drug, which the F.D.A. approved last month.


Gartner Paces Rangers to Winning Beat
The Rangers are marching on to the beat of several happy hockey sticks these days.
Last night at Madison Square Garden, it was Mike Gartner's stick that conducted a well-orchestrated 3-0 triumph over the Devils.
With Gartner leading the way with two goals, the Rangers were quicker to the puck throughout and superior on specialty teams against the Devils, who entered the game as the league's top-ranked team in killing penalties.


Fannie Mae Study Finds Phony Bids
The Federal National Mortgage Association said today that phony bidding was common in its huge debt market, but the mortgage financing company declined to impose financial penalties on the 53 banks and Wall Street firms that buy its securities.
Releasing the conclusions of a four-month investigation, the Government-created company known as Fannie Mae said that all the institutions that buy its debt had inflated orders and submitted false information about their customers' demands to win a larger share of the market.


Clues From a Squid
A TINY squid and a bacterium that lets it glow in the dark appear to be an ideal experimental system for studying symbiotic relationships between higher animals and microorganisms, researchers say.
Most higher organisms, including humans, carry bacteria that are helpful, if not essential, to life or good health.
The mix of bacteria making up the flora of the gut, for instance, helps people digest and excrete certain foods.
The bacteria also benefit from this mutual, nonparasitic relationship.
They get a nice place to grow and multiply before being spread outside the body.


Review/Theater; Saying Final Farewells To a Mean Ol' Boy
"Dearly Departed," a comedy about a death in a Southern family, leaves one with a double dose of deja vu.
Theatergoers have been down this trail before in plays by Beth Henley and others.
The play by David Bottrell and Jessie Jones earns a few smiles, but it is simply not funny enough to justify its two-hour running time or its place at Second Stage.
In the first scene, Uncle Bud suddenly keels over dead.
What ensues in his wake is a raucous, backbiting gathering of his many relatives to play their last disrespects to the old codger.
The minister practices his flowery eulogy, then asks the widow (Mary Fogarty) what kind of man her husband was.
With calm self-assurance deriving from decades of marital misery, she says, "Mean and surly." Those are the words she wants engraved on Bud's tombstone, although her son opts for an ameliorative "Rest in peace."


Ever So Cautiously, Skirts Creep Down
In testing longer skirts for the spring season, designers managed to avoid a possible disaster.
Their approach was low-keyed, and calf-length skirts made up no more than 10 percent of most collections.
Twenty years ago, when the mini abruptly gave ground to the midi or calf-length skirt, the uproar was ferocious.
Women refused to give up the freedom that above-the-knee skirts provided.
They said the longer skirts were dowdy and old-looking.
They insisted that designers were dictating to them and they refused to go along.


Earth's Temperature Has Dropped a Little After a Warm Spell
THE earth's climate appears to be entering a new phase.
After a record warming in 1990, the average temperature of the globe has dropped slightly in 1991, thanks to a moderating trend that began in the early fall.
Climatologists say the trend could be the start of a cooler period that they expect will result as sunlight is blocked by haze thrown into the atmosphere by the eruption last June of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines.


Under Electronic House Arrest: From Idea to Troubled Contract
The idea seemed simple enough.
By keeping 500 nonviolent inmates under electronic house arrest instead of in jail, New York City would reduce jail overcrowding and save about $15 million a year in prison maintenance.
But the plan, which was to begin next month, is entangled in investigations and helped to bring about the resignation of Correction Commissioner Allyn R. Sielaff yesterday.


Cray Loses Only Order For Product
The Cray Computer Corporation suffered a potentially crippling blow today as the initial customer for its first supercomputer system abruptly canceled its order.
Cray had said last week that it was behind schedule on the new machine.
Cray Computer, which is the company spun off from Cray Research Inc. by the concern's founder and chief scientist, Seymour Cray, said that the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory had advised the company that it would cancel the contract for a Cray-3, and instead buy a supercomputer from Cray Research.


Bush's Campaign Advisers Split With White House on Economy
President Bush's new team of campaign aides and his White House budget advisers are split over how the President should handle the politically sensitive economic issue as he prepares to enter the 1992 campaign year, officials said.
Managing the friction between the two sets of advisers has become an early and important test for Samuel K. Skinner, the new White House chief of staff, as he moves to exert a control over policy like that wielded by his predecessor, John H. Sununu.


A Physical for Viola
FRANK VIOLA yesterday underwent the first of two physical examinations required for him to complete his three-year, $13.9 million deal with the Boston Red Sox.
The team's physician, Dr.
ARTHUR PAPPAS, examined Viola, 31, at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester.
Immediately afterward, Viola left for Richmond, where he was scheduled for a second exam.


Q&amp;A
Sharks' Senses
Q.
Does a shark really smell blood from a long way away in the water?


Fire at Philadelphia Station Shuts Down Northeast Rail Route


Making Better Corn
Breeding crops for increased productivity, resistance to pests and diseases and improved nutritional value has long been the backbone of the agricultural progress that has sustained expanding populations worldwide.
Since most people depend largely on vegetables to supply the protein they need for growth and tissue maintenance, recent efforts have focused on enhancing the protein value of staple crops.
Corn, for example, has been bred for high levels of the essential amino acid lysine, a building block of protein that is normally deficient in corn.


Hawthorne Journal; Two Views of Protest at Korean Shop
Twelve-year-old Keisha Williams ran down the sidewalk near a Korean grocery store holding out a printed paper that read, "Please help me, I didn't do anything wrong." But the man she approached, munching on a piece of beef jerky, turned away from her and kept walking.
Keisha's paper, the newest weapon in a campaign by a local black group to boycott Korean grocery stores in the Los Angeles area, accused the store's owner of attacking her.


Rival Factions In Georgia Raise Level of Clashes
Rocket and artillery fire were reported through the day today in the Georgian capital, Tbilisi, as opposition forces stepped up their campaign to drive President Zviad Gamsakhurdia from his fortified headquarters in the republic's Parliament.
Casualty figures ranged widely.
The Russian television news program "Vesti" reported 23 dead and 168 wounded, while Tass reported between 30 and 50 dead and more than 200 wounded as the battle went into its second day.


Airlines, Let's Face It, Have Gone Into Tailspin; Free Market Zealots
To the Editor:
I was disappointed by your Dec. 9 editorial proclaiming airline deregulation a success.
Deregulation has produced in the United States:


Knicks Overcome 2d-Half Trouble
The Knicks suffered a second-half letdown tonight, but they didn't let the victory slip away.
New York's opponent was the Minnesota Timberwolves, the team with the National Basketball Association's worst record (4-19 before the game).
That gave the Knicks a built-in excuse to take this game lightly, especially after they built a 20-point lead with 5 minutes left in the third quarter.


Business and Health; Paying the Tab For Retirees
A FEW companies have announced that they will take big deductions against profits to comply with a new accounting rule for medical benefits promised to future retirees.
Starting in January 1993, all large employers must estimate and report their obligations to future retirees in an effort to charge all costs of current personnel against revenues.
Going a step further, a handful of employers have decided to set aside cash, although this is not required.


INSIDE
Questions on Math Tests
Critics are questioning test results that show American students lagging behind foreigners in math and science.
Science Times, page C1. 24 Hours With the Homeless
Chased from the Port Authority Bus Terminal, the homeless have not gone away.
Instead, the floating community bypasses the rules.
Page B1.
Master of His Fate
As early as his teen-age years, Samuel Skinner, the President's new chief of staff, stood out as one who took his future in his own hands.
Page A13.
New Frontier on Alcohol
Businesses serving liquor at company functions are becoming a target of efforts to establish liability for alcohol-related accidents.
Page A10.
Ex-NASA Chief Dies
James C. Fletcher, who led the space agency in critical periods in the 1970's and 80's, died.
Page B6.


Stocks Rise Sharply On Interest Rate Cut
Stock prices surged yesterday in a continued reaction to Friday's sharp cut in a key interest rate by the Federal Reserve, followed by a cut in many banks' prime lending rates.
The Dow Jones industrial average surged past the 3,000 barrier for the first time in more than a month, to end at 3,022.58, up 88.10 points, or 3 percent, in heavy trading.


Head of Nassau's Police to Retire Jan. 30
Nassau County's Commissioner of Police, Samuel J. Rozzi, said today that he would retire on Jan. 30.
The Commissioner, Mr.
Rozzi, 65 years old, has been Nassau's senior police executive since 1978.
While saying it was his "hope that there will be more opportunity for police to be hired by the county," he maintained that the budget cuts, which have led to an immediate hiring freeze by his department, were not a factor in his decision to leave.


Hope Emerges as Key to Success in Life
PSYCHOLOGISTS are finding that hope plays a surprisingly potent role in giving people a measurable advantage in realms as diverse as academic achievement, bearing up in onerous jobs and coping with tragic illness.
And, by contrast, the loss of hope is turning out to be a stronger sign that a person may commit suicide than other factors long thought to be more likely risks.
"Hope has proven a powerful predictor of outcome in every study we've done so far," said Dr.
Charles R. Snyder, a psychologist at the University of Kansas who has devised a scale to assess how much hope a person has.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASKETBALL UConn Wins in a Rout Connecticut scored the first 15 points of the game, and Scott Burrell and Chris Smith had 19 points each as the Huskies beat Fairfield, 89-59, last night in Storrs, Conn.
Fairfield (1-4) couldn't handle the early defensive pressure by UConn (6-0).
Bernie Cieplicki hit a 3-pointer 5 minutes 4 seconds into the game to end the shutout. (AP) Seton Hall 72, Fairleigh Dickinson 46: Terry Dehere returned from a wrist injury to score 7 of his 14 points in a game-breaking run late in the first half as Seton Hall (6-1) won its fourth straight game by cruising past Fairleigh Dickinson in South Orange, N.J.
The final nine minutes of the first half belonged to the Pirates as they held Fairleigh Dickinson (3-6) to 2-for-11 shooting and forced three turnovers in the 17-4 run. (AP) Kentucky 73, Ohio U. 63: Jamal Mashburn scored 23 points and started a decisive second-half run as Kentucky rallied for a victory over Ohio University, in Cincinnati.
Ohio (6-2) led Kentucky (7-2) by 4 points when Mashburn made a layup and two free throws to start the 9-2 streak.
Richie Farmer's 3-pointer put Kentucky ahead to stay, 56-53, with 7:30 left. (AP) Arkansas 74, Tulsa 64: With center Oliver Miller playing sparingly because of a virus, Arkansas (8-2) could never establish an inside game and struggled in Tulsa.
The Golden Hurricane (1-4) led by 38-24 with 4:13 left in the first half before Arkansas scored the last 10 points of the first half and the first six of the second half to take a 40-38 lead. (AP) N.H.L.
Leafs End Slide Daniel Marois, Alexander Godynyuk and Mike Bullard scored as the Toronto Maple Leafs ended a seven-game streak without a victory with a 3-1 victory over the Winnipeg Jets last night in Toronto.
The victory ended Toronto's 0-6-1 drought, while Winnipeg lost for the fifth time in six games.
Toronto right wing Mike Foligno fractured his lower right leg in a first-period collision with Winnipeg's Luciano Borsato. (AP) Whalers 4, Sabres 3: In Hartford, John Cullen had a goal and two assists and Rob Brown scored twice as Hartford rallied to beat Buffalo and end a four-game losing streak.
Cullen, who assisted on Pat Verbeek's game-tying goal at 1:10 of the third period, put the Whalers ahead to stay at 2:25 when his backhander from the right post slipped through the skates of goaltender Clint Malarchuk. (AP) COLLEGE FOOTBALL Ivy Wins in Japan The way 143-pound running back Motohiro Kawashima sees it, the Japnese college all-stars are getting closer to their Ivy League counterparts.
The Japanese trailed by 7-0 at halftime in yesterday's fourth Epson Ivy Bowl before losing, 24-0, before 45,000 fans at the Tokyo Dome.
"Maybe in two or three years, when we get better tactics and more coordinated teamwork, we will definitely have a chance to win," Kawashima said.
The Ivy League won the first three games by 73-3, 49-17 and 47-10.
Cornell's John McNiff was named the game's most valuable player after rushing for 77 yards on 14 carries. (AP)


Siberia Venture For Pennzoil
The Pennzoil Company said yesterday that it had completed an agreement with a Russian enterprise to develop an oilfield in western Siberia with an estimated 40 million to 45 million barrels of recoverable reserves, plus 30 billion to 35 billion cubic feet of natural gas and gas liquids.
Work will begin early next year in the West Mogotlorsk field, according to the company, and will involve the drilling of about 50 wells.
The project will use Russian drilling rigs and American technology, according to Robert Harper, a spokesman for Pennzoil, which is in Houston.


Coaching Carousel Takes Networks Along for the Ride
Bill Parcells and Jim Valvano will perhaps, maybe, possibly leave after their first year of television and return to coaching, and observing them is a little like waiting for Mario Cuomo to make up his mind.
You just want them, or their potential employers, to get on with it and stop boring us.
Parcells, now with NBC, always gets an odd, devilish glint in his eyes when asked about being offered jobs in Tampa Bay and Green Bay.
He always denies that he's leaving.
He denied a CBS report that he met the Buccaneers' owner, Hugh Culverhouse, at a private New Jersey airport.
Ron Wolf, the Packers' general manager, says Parcells is on his list of candidates but that so far, he has only asked the former Giants coach about his health and recent angioplasty procedure.
Is former Director of Central IntelligenceWilliam Casey orchestrating this intrigue from the grave?


CHRONICLE
On Saturday afternoon CAROL VANESS, the Metropolitan Opera soprano, plunged into the persona of a "very crazed woman who goes insane and sees things like snakes," and that evening she was "a major heroine who turns into a tree.
"It's enough to make you feel a little schizophrenic," the singer said yesterday from Upland, Calif., where she was resting.


Mark Eichenberger, 38, Mariner And Adventurer, Is Swept Into Sea
Mark Eichenberger, a polar mariner and sportsman who rowed a small boat from South America to Antarctica three years ago, was washed from the deck of a ship on Saturday and is presumed to have drowned.
Mr.
Eichenberger, 38 years old, was employed as first mate on the Erebus, a French-owned ice-breaking supply vessel.
A spokesman of the National Science Foundation, which chartered the Erebus to carry supplies, scientists and support personnel to and from Palmer Station, Antarctica, said Mr.
Eichenberger was washed overboard in a storm.


Airlines, Let's Face It, Have Gone Into Tailspin
To the Editor:
"Flights of Non-fancy" (editorial, Dec. 9), on airline deregulation, is myopic.
We economists check the patient -- the airline industry -- almost continuously, and declare him trim and active.
We conclude he must be in good health.
But take a step backward and look at the larger picture.


Bush Spikes Holiday Speech With Politics
In a new sign of his concern about his re-election campaign, President Bush today issued a politically redrafted Christmas message that sounded more like a campaign speech than the customary holiday greeting from the White House.
"Just last week, I signed a transportation bill that will put hundreds of Americans back in good jobs," said Mr.
Bush, who has been trying to persuade voters that he cares about their problems and is not just interested in foreign affairs.


How Bad Is It? Well, Just Count the Trees.
Regional economists can go cross-eyed studying dry statistics like housing starts, industrial production and the money supply in their relentless search for telling signs on the economy.
But next year they might want to consider a different indicator: the demand for Christmas trees, those most sacred of objects, is noticeably lower this year, signaling a truly Scrooge-like existence for many families.
An informal survey of tree sellers in the New York region found that sales are off 20 to 50 percent compared with last year.
And prices have had to be kept as low as last year's, or in some cases lower, to insure that even that poor sales record is met.


Latest Free-Agent List Is Dominated by Pitchers
Despite the general need for pitching help, 10 pitchers are among the 15 major leaguers who have become free agents because their teams did not tender them contracts by last Friday's deadline.
Scott Terry and Willie Fraser of St.
Louis yesterday became the latest pitchers named who were not offered contracts.
They joined the newly created free-agent list with Allan Anderson of Minnesota, Scott Bankhead and Rob Murphy of Seattle, Eric King and Doug Jones of Cleveland, Joe Boever of Atlanta, Mark Grant of Atlanta and Jeff Kaiser of Detroit.


Mexican Population Gives U.S. a Problem
To the Editor:
The difficulty with illegal immigration from Mexico ("Mexicans Head North Despite Rules on Jobs," front page, Dec. 13) isn't "the impossibility of keeping poor foreign workers from better-paid jobs." Mexico has a birth rate headed for the moon, a fact no one seems to recognize.


Slovenia and Croatia Get Bonn's Nod
Germany flexed its new diplomatic muscle today by recognizing the independence of two breakaway Yugoslav republics, Slovenia and Croatia.
German consulates in the two republics will be upgraded to embassies on Jan. 15, the Foreign Ministry said in a statement.


Firebombs in London Halt Commuter Trains
For the second Monday in a row, small incendiary devices hidden on London commuter trains brought the capital's transportation network to a halt this morning, stranding tens of thousands of rushhour commuters and Christmas shoppers bound for the city.
Although the three bombs did very little damage and resulted in no injuries, London transportation officials ordered the entire 254-mile subway network shut for several hours while they searched trains and stations.


Employers Becoming Targets of Suits In the Fight to Halt Drunken Driving
Brenda Greenbaum and Donna Waldrop are not financiers, corporate raiders or giants of industry.
But the mere mention of their names may send shivers through the corporate suites of companies that give Christmas and New Year's parties or sponsor functions that combine business and liquor.
Mrs.
Greenbaum, a nurse in Boca Raton, Fla., said her 23-year-old son, Raymond Fields, was killed six years ago by a drunken driver returning home from a business and social gathering.
Three months ago, she won an $800,000 judgment against the company that employed the driver.
"I wanted corporate America to get the message that they had to be accountable," she said.
"I still have a lot of unresolved grief, but maybe some of those executives will think about this and realize that it could have been their loved ones who got killed."
As for Donna Waldrop, of Euless, Tex., there is still a bitter edge in her voice when she talks about her husband, Dudley, who was killed nearly four years ago as he was driving home from a night of what she said was business-related drinking.
Last month she and her husband's three children reached an $11 million out-of-court settlement with his employer, a Fort Worth beer distributor.
"If they are going to send them out drinking and expect them to drive, they ought to take the responsibility," Mrs.
Waldrop said.
Mixing Drinking and Business
Even though the two cases do not yet have the weight of legal precedents, together they have gained the attention of many companies.
Some fear that the cases may represent the leading edge of a trend toward holding companies legally liable when drinking and doing business are mixed.
To be sure, the number of alcohol-related automobile deaths has declined in the last 10 years, to 39.7 percent of all accident deaths in 1990, from 46.3 percent in 1982.
But at the same time, courts throughout the country have been broadening the liability of bars, the hosts of private parties where liquor has been served and now, to companies paying for liquor at business functions.
"In the 80's the focus in these cases was on the liquor licensee, the bar or restaurant which sold the liquor to the person who went out and had an accident," said Ronald Beitman, a Massachusetts lawyer and expert on liquor liability.
"The courts said that those establishments had a duty and responsibility in those cases, but the corporations got through the 80's unscathed.  These cases are telling them that in the 90's they are going to be subject to the same sort of scrutiny and that they have a special duty."
Jay A. Winsten, director of the Harvard Alcohol Project at the university's School of Public Health, said: "The message here is that if the company pays for the alcohol, they have a duty and responsibility in the event of an accident. The implication is that every isolated instance of business drinking constitutes corporate drinking, and by putting the company's deep pockets at risk that means it might spur changes."
In interviews, corporate meeting planners said companies have long been aware of the risks inherent in alcohol consumption linked to the job.
Many, they say, have long since changed policies and practices to cut down on drinking at business meetings, and some have canceled seasonal parties and celebrations altogether.
A survey by the Harvard Alcohol Project showed that the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, the Campbell Soup Company and the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company are among many large corporations that have eliminated Christmas or holiday parties because of their concern about employee drinking.
Other companies, among them the International Business Machines Corporation, the State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company and the General Motors Corporation, still hold the parties but substitute cake and coffee or fruit baskets and other food items for alcohol.
Kate Dane, a meeting planner with Cincinnati Bell Information Systems, said the company now limits the liquor available at business functions, both because its employees have a greater health consciousness and because the company is more conscious of costs. 'Whole New Can of Worms'
But Serena Leiser, who was a meeting planner for the Data General Corporation, a software company based in Westborough, Mass., said the Florida and Texas cases "open up a whole new can of worms."
Mr.
Beitman, the Massachusetts lawyer, said he has been getting calls from corporate lawyers seeking his advice on what they should do in light of the Florida and Texas cases.
Even if the Florida decision is overturned on appeal, he said, it has made an indelible impression on corporations and influenced the way they think about these issues.
Forty-three states and the District of Columbia have passed laws or their courts have repeatedly found that negligent commercial servers of alcohol can be held liable in some accidents by their intoxicated patrons, a recent survey by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration found.
Twenty-three states extend this same liability to noncommercial settings and to social hosts.
But in 12 of those 23 states, social hosts can only be held liable if they serve alcohol to minors.
And in at least three states -- Missouri, Washington and Colorado -- the courts have specifically said that social hosts and, by extension, corporate hosts cannot be considered in the same way as those who sell drinks.
The Florida Case
The Florida case dates back to 1985.
Not only did Mrs.
Greenbaum lose her son in the car accident in Fort Lauderdale, she also lost her best friend.
On the night of Sept. 20, John Mills, a heating and refrigeration systems salesman with Carroll Air Systems, of Tampa, was attending an industry seminar at a hotel in Fort Lauderdale and, some witnesses later said, drinking and talking to potential customers.
His boss, James Carroll, was there as well, buying drinks for Mr.
Mills and others.
Mr.
Carroll's expense reports would show that he was reimbursed by the company for those purchases.
Shortly after midnight, Mr.
Mills left the hotel for the 20-minute drive home.
Minutes later, he plowed into the back of Mr.
Fields's car at a speed that the police later estimated at 86 to 97 miles per hour in a 45 m.p.h. zone.
Mr.
Mills survived the accident.
Jeffrey D. Fisher, Mrs.
Greenbaum's lawyer, said he built his case around the idea that the company "fostered and encouraged" Mr.
Mills to do business over drinks at the seminar and "looked the other way in regard to an inherently dangerous business practice."
Florida does not have a law establishing social host liability for guests who overindulge and then have accidents, and that factor made the ruling in the Carroll Air Systems case all the more significant, some experts say.
"The significant relationship in this case was employee/employer and not host and guest or bar and customer," Mr.
Fisher said.
"We proved that what was happening, the entertainment was part of the business and that the employer had a duty to supervise its employees."
Mark Boyd, Carroll Air Systems's lawyer, called the jury decision in the case "outrageous" and said that the connection between Mr.
Mills's attendance at what he called a dinner dance and the conduct of business was "a bit strained."  The Texas Case
In the Texas case, Dudley Waldrop, a brands manager for B. E. Keith Distributors, was involved in a practice called "night calls" in which marketing teams from local distributors and the Anheuser-Busch Companies, Inc., visit bars in an area, buying drinks for patrons in a bid to build brand loyalty.
On the way home on on the night of Jan. 29, 1988, Mr.
Waldrop drove his car into a parked car and was instantly killed.
Although the distributor and the beer company maintained in court papers that Mr.
Waldrop had become drunk in the course of visiting other bars not on that night's schedule and on his own time, the local distributor nevertheless settled the case out of court.
David Greenlee, general counsel for the distributor, would not comment on the settlement or confirm the amount.
He said the company continues to maintain that Mr.
Waldrop "was stone cold sober" when his company duties ended that night and he went off on his own to visit other bars.
Mrs.
Waldrop and other family members have also filed suit against Anheuser-Busch.
No trial date has been set in that suit, and Anheuser-Busch, the nation's largest brewery, would not comment on the case.
Many companies, like Control Data, a computer manufacturer based in Minneapolis, have been aware of their potential liability for some years.
Kevin Johnston, national manager for marketing and incentive programs at Control Data, said the company has policies aimed at preventing problems.
Liquor is not served at company functions on company property, he said.
When the company has meetings outside its property, he said, it hires professional bartenders trained to spot problems, does not offer open bars and uses a system of drink tickets to control drinking.
In addition, Mr.
Johnston said, when the company holds meetings at resorts, all events are held on resort property to cut down on the need to drive.
And, he said, if the need for an event outside the resort does arise, there is always a plan in place to have employees transported by bus or van.
"Every state views the law differently, but we all see what these lawsuits can do," Mr.
Johnston said.
"There is a social responsibility that we as sponsors of these events have to be cognizant of. Wherever there is the opportunity for something to go wrong, you have to be careful."
Julie Rochman, an official at Health Communications, a consulting firm in Washington that specializes in alcohol-related issues, said that such measures as those being used by Control Data are not as widespread as they should be.
Still, her company gets calls from corporations when they are about to have a Christmas party or when they are in the midst of lawsuits over some alcohol-related accident involving their employees.
"They either want a quick fix or they want us to help them get out of trouble," she said.
"The motivation of a lot of companies is more fear than concern. But we are getting a lot more interest since the Florida decision alone, because it is a new wrinkle."
"You know, this isn't a problem only with your 'problem drinkers,' " Ms.
Rochman said.
"It's anybody, including the company vice president who some are afraid to approach and tell he's drinking too much. It just takes people skills."
Mrs. Greenbaum agreed.
"So often we see others drinking and we know they are going to drive and we disassociate ourselves from it," she said.
"But then something happens, people come around for a while afterward, and then they stop. But your grief goes on. People ought to be more aware of this."


By Design; Holiday Luxe, Now or Never
The moment is here to buy the sorts of things that are definitely nonessential, probably perishable, but irrestible.
Anything white or ivory fits into this category, especially if it's made of something luxurious that needs to be handled with care, like snow-white cashmere.
The boutique Cashmere Cashmere still has some T-shirt-style pullover sweaters for $275, as well as cardigans decorated with white grosgrain bows and a grosgrain banding down the front for $650.
Cashmere Cashmere is at 840 Madison Avenue (69th Street) and at 595 Madison Avenue (57th Street).


Portrait of Bush's New Chief of Staff: He's 'a Very Intense Man' on the Move
When the police arrived at a teen-age beer party back in the 1950's, one of the young drinkers pitched a deal.
The young man, Samuel K. Skinner, offered to point out to the police, in exchange for clemency, which taverns sold liquor to minors.
"The officer came to me and said, "Should we take this kid up on it?" recalled William J. Bauer, now chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit but then State's Attorney in suburban DuPage County.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Alltel Mobile Communications Inc., agreed to acquire the stock of Planter's Cellular Co. of Georgia.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed. *
Booker P.L.C. announced revised terms for the agreement to sell its approximately 60 percent share of the issued capital of P. Leiner Nutritional Products Corp., Torrance, Calif., to PLI Investors Inc.


Israeli Judges Hear Demjanjuk Charge Conspiracy
Clearly skeptical judges of Israel's Supreme Court heard the defense charge today that John Demjanjuk was the victim of a conspiracy by United States and Israeli authorities intent on convicting him as the barbarous "Ivan the Terrible" of the Treblinka death camp.
The chief prosecutor rejected the charge as "a mystical allegation."


Topics of The Times; Loving Androids Too Much
The science fiction writer Philip K. Dick, who died in 1982, is a cult figure who was scarcely known outside his genre until two of his works were made into movies.
The first movie, "Blade Runner" (from "Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?" about androids posing as people), is a classic, some say a masterpiece.
The second, Arnold Schwarzenegger's "Total Recall" (from "We Can Remember It for You Wholesale," about buying memories instead of living them) was a good idea poorly executed.
Three of Mr.
Dick's novels have now been reissued by Vintage Press, and biographical material is also beginning to appear.
That's good.
Even his poorer, more scattered works anticipated the role technology plays in our lives.


Old Leader and New Discuss Transition
In what may be his last hours in office, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev held a lengthy transition meeting today with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia and said afterward that in closing out the Soviet Union, "the strictest" nuclear weapons controls were being arranged.
With the red flag of the Soviet Union still flying over the Kremlin beside the flag of ascendant Russia, the two leaders discussed the transition of power for six hours, and Mr.
Gorbachev was later described by aides as prepared to announce his decision on resignation no later than Wednesday.


Topics of The Times; The Diet Police, Foiled
It has been a tough couple of months for the diet police.
First we learned that Frenchmen who gorge on foie gras are a little less than half as likely as the average Frenchman to suffer a heart attack.
Almost simultaneously we were told that drinking wine also seems to lower the risk of heart disease.
Recently we were told of yet another health benefit of that dreaded perforator of stomach linings -- the common aspirin.
It seems that an aspirin or so a day helps prevent colon cancer.
It was long ago established that aspirin's blood-thinning properties also help ward off heart attacks.


The Journeys of Two Young Women End in New York, in Death
Laura Lee Gossmann was an artist and a receptionist who had traveled the world but had come to fear her native New York.
Yolanda Jacob was a Dominican immigrant who worked as a domestic in New Jersey and dreamed of becoming a lawyer and returning to her beloved homeland.
Both women were 23 years old, and both died violently in the last three days.


James Fletcher, 72, NASA Chief Who Urged Shuttle Program, Dies
James C. Fletcher, the former head of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration who sold the space shuttle program to Congress in the 1970's, died Sunday at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington.
He was 72 years old and lived in McLean, Va.
Dr. Fletcher died of lung cancer, his wife, Fay, said.


Dartmouth Hires Coach
JOHN LYONS was hired yesterday to replace BUDDY TEEVENS as head coach at Dartmouth, which won the Ivy League title this season.
The 39-year-old Lyons, a defensive coach at Dartmouth since 1988, played at Pennsylvania, graduating in 1974 with a degree in sociology. (AP)


Which Students Are Worst At Science?
EVERY few years, a new study rolls out announcing once again that American students know less math and science than even students in the poorest countries.
And every time, the reports result in a national orgy of self-flagellation and cries for new rounds of reform in American schools.
The latest comparison, conducted by the Educational Testing Service of Princeton, N.J., and involving 20 countries, will be reported on Feb. 3.
The betting is that the United States will, as always, rank at or near the bottom.


Nets Caught on Run But First at Finish
Toward the end of their game with Atlanta tonight, the Nets appeared to be headed for another big-lead meltdown.
But they revived in the final minutes and managed to win, 105-93, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
New Jersey, which had led by as many as 26 points earlier in the game, saw a 9-point fourth quarter lead dwindle to 94-93 when, with 3 minutes remaining, the Hawks' Kevin Willis tipped in a missed driving shot by Dominique Wilkins.
But Willis's shot turned out to be the last gasp of an 8-0 Atlanta run that came after the Nets led, 94-85, with 6:18 left.
Maurice Cheeks had made the score 94-91 with 4:18 left, after stripping Drazen Petrovic of the ball and driving the length of the floor for a layup.
After Willis's tip-in got Atlanta to within a point, Derrick Coleman had an off-balance shot blocked by Duane Ferrell.
Nets Bold and Wise
But at that point, New Jersey began to play boldly and wisely again, and scored the final 11 points of the game.
Mookie Blaylock drove off a Chris Dudley screen and nailed a 20-foot jump shot.
Rafael Addison faked once, then stepped up and made a 19-foot jumper from the top of the key.
Coleman hit a pair of free throws.
Addison sank a baseline jumper.
Blaylock and Coleman hit two free throws apiece.
And like that, the Nets had produced a victory that pushed their record to 8-18.
Whether or not the victory will improve the Nets players' morale, it appeared to help the morale of Coach Bill Fitch, who was needled by fans concerning rumors last week that he was on his way out.
"Hey, Bill," shouted one fan. "I saw Valvano in the parking lot ."
Jim Valvano, the former North Carolina State coach, was the subject of negotiations with a Nets minority owner, Joe Taub, last week -- negotiations that General Manager Willis Reed termed premature.
Tonight, Fitch was still in charge, and he was pleased to have the victory.
"It was very important to these guys," Fitch said.
"It's important for us to win a few like that. I'm here to tell you I'll be a happy man, even if there are no other presents between now and the 25th."
Coleman, who led the Nets in scoring with 27 points, said the victory would brighten his holiday outlook.
"We held them down the stretch," said Coleman.
"We executed when they made a run at us at the end."
Petrovic (26 points) and Blaylock (20) were the only other Nets in double figures.
Wilkins led Atlanta with 33 points.
The Nets played without their starting center, Sam Bowie, who sat out with a bruised right leg.
Nets Blaze From Start
New Jersey came out blazing at the opening tip.
The Nets took an 11-point lead at 6:49, and kept increasing it.
Petrovic led the way with 13 first-quarter points, hitting all 3 of his 3-point shots and 5 of his 7 field-goal tries.
Coleman had 10 points.
New Jersey made 13 of 22 shots during the quarter.
On defense, the Nets gave Atlanta's leading scorer, Wilkins, a hard time.
The Nets' pressuring defense limited Wilkins to only three shots in the first quarter, none of which went in.
Wilkins ended the quarter with only 1 points, a free throw.
Petrovic continued to flourish in the second quarter: He ended up with 19 first-half points.
But Wilkins started to play better.
He scored 14 points in the second quarter as New Jersey went up by as many as 26 points.
A late surge by the Hawks narrowed New Jersey's lead to 61-44 at halftime.
REBOUNDS
New Jersey plays next on Thursday here, against the Houston Rockets.
On Friday, the Nets will travel to Charlotte to take on the Hornets.


John Vincent Frank, Travel Agency President, 72
John Vincent Frank, the retired president of a New York travel agency, died on Sunday.
He was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Frank died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


Honoring DeGaetani In a Trio of Concerts
A three-concert series honoring the late mezzo-soprano Jan DeGaetani is to take place starting Jan. 23 at 8 P.M. at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater, Broadway at 116th Street.
Miss DeGaetani, who was a champion of avant-garde music, died of leukemia in 1989 at the age of 56.
Performing in the series are to be 46 singers and instrumentalists who were associated with her, including the sopranos Renee Fleming, Dawn Upshaw and Lucy Shelton, the mezzo-sopranos Milagro Vargas and Charlotte Kellenkant and the baritone William Sharp.


Ever So Cautiously, Skirts Creep Down
In testing longer skirts for the spring season, designers managed to avoid a possible disaster.
Their approach was low-keyed, and calf-length skirts made up no more than 10 percent of most collections.
Twenty years ago, when the mini abruptly gave ground to the midi or calf-length skirt, the uproar was ferocious.
Women refused to give up the freedom that above-the-knee skirts provided.
They said the longer skirts were dowdy and old-looking.
They insisted that designers were dictating to them and they refused to go along.


Gartner Paces Rangers to Winning Beat
The Rangers are marching on to the beat of several happy hockey sticks these days.
Last night at Madison Square Garden, it was Mike Gartner's stick that conducted a well-orchestrated 3-0 triumph over the Devils.
With Gartner leading the way with two goals, the Rangers were quicker to the puck throughout and superior on specialty teams against the Devils, who entered the game as the league's top-ranked team in killing penalties.


Incomes Off, Spending Up Last Month
Americans' incomes shrank last month as layoffs mounted, but rising expenses pushed up spending and curtailed savings, the Commerce Department reported today.
Personal incomes fell one-tenth of 1 percent from October, to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $4.88 trillion -- the first monthly drop in incomes since July, when they fell three-tenths of 1 percent.


Islanders Play the Fool And Then Pay Price
The Pittsburgh Penguins, energized by a hat trick plus one from Joe Mullen and an abundance of power-play chances granted by foolhardy Islander penalties, floated off the Nassau Coliseum ice tonight with a 6-3 victory.
Through three periods, whatever the Islanders did, the Penguins did a little better, and with sufficient finesse to steer clear of the penalty box, a technique the Islanders haven't mastered.
The Penguins scored on five of nine power-play opportunities, the Islanders on one of two.


Barkley for the Defense
Philadelphia 76ers forward CHARLES BARKLEY, known for his hard-charging attitude on court, wasn't shy about defending his role in a weekend altercation in Milwaukee that ended with his arrest on a battery charge.
Barkley admitted he threw the punch that broke a Milwaukee man's nose early Sunday morning, but he said he was defending himself.
Barkley was arrested about five hours after the 2:30 A.M. incident and released on $500 bail, the police said.


Accounts
*
The Kahala Hilton, Honolulu, a unit of Ladbroke P.L.C., to Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine Inc., Orlando, Fla., from Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Los Angeles.
The agency also won the Colony Shawnee Miami Beach Resort account, previously at Kelly Swofford, Miami.
Billings for either account were not disclosed.


James J. Dwyer, Parole Administrator, 85
James J. Dwyer, a former New York State parole administrator and a jail, police and fire official in Westchester County, died on Dec. 17 at Martin Memorial Hospital in Stuart, Fla.
He was 85 years old and lived in Stuart.
He died of complications from lung cancer, his family said.


Books of The Times; A Life of Tchaikovsky, But Without His Music
Tchaikovsky The Quest for the Inner Man  By Alexander Poznansky 679 pages.
Schirmer Books. $39.95.
Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky once predicted that one day people would "try to penetrate the intimate world of my feelings and thoughts, everything that all my life I have so carefully hidden from the touch of the crowd."


Classical Music in Review
I Giullari di Piazza  Home for Contemporary Theater and Art
In prospect, "The Shepherds' Cantata," a 17th-century Neapolitan Christmas play presented over the last two weeks by the New York-based Italian theatrical company I Giullari di Piazza, seemed irresistible.
Here was a rustic mix of ancient folkish music and slapstick humor with an overlay of the stylized commedia dell'arte tradition similar to Adriano Banchieri's "Old Man's Folly," so enchantingly presented by the Accademia del Santo Spirito of Turin, Italy, in last summer's New York International Festival of the Arts.


Economical Wetlands Plan Along Hudson Is Timely Again; Piers District
To the Editor:
Interest by New York State in retaining secondary buildings on Ellis Island is commendable (news article, Nov. 23).
Piers along the Hudson River, however, were where immigrants arrived before going to Ellis Island.


CHRONICLE
It's oral history with a twist, the project that has the seventh-grade boys at the St.
David's School interviewing and recording the recollections of New Yorkers, from residents of a nursing home to BROOKE SHIELDS.
"We wanted to show the students that learning takes place beyond the classroom," said TIMOTHY BURNS, headmaster of the private Catholic boys' school at 12 East 89th Street.


W.T.A. Seeking Control From Within the System
Since this is women's tennis, everybody is keeping a civil tongue about it, but behind the scenes a civil war continues to brew on the Kraft Tour.
The underlying issue is independence, specifically as it applies to free agency and free enterprise.
And now that the effort to achieve it through a modified coup has faltered, the Women's Tennis Association is trying to achieve a similar result by working from within the system.


Algerian Militants in Big Election Rally
In a strong show of force on the final day of campaigning for Algeria's first free multiparty parliamentary elections, the Islamic Salvation Front, the largest opposition party, packed a stadium here today with more than 100,000 supporters who chanted slogans demanding an Islamic government.
"We recognize no constitution and no laws but the laws of God and Islam," the crowd in the stadium intoned.
Nevertheless, the most hard-line and fundamentalist faction in the front decided after much wavering to take part in the balloting.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a letter on Dec. 16 by Allen Bromberger misstated that corporations will now have to pay tax on donations to non-profit organizations.
The nonprofit groups will have to pay the tax.


Review/Blues; Johnny Winter, Ignoring His Rock 'n' Roll Roots
Johnny Winter blasted out of Texas in the late 1960's playing supercharged blues-rock, full of raspy vocals, speedy guitar lines and crashing drums.
He reached a huge audience that still shows up for his concerts; fans at the Academy on Thursday night spent much of the show bawling old titles like "Rock 'n' Roll Hoochie-Koo" between songs.
But more recently, he has returned to a kind of blues purism.
At the Academy, the rail-thin, heavily tattooed Mr.
Winter calmly ignored the requests and led his trio in one well-turned 12-bar blues after another, featuring songs from his new album, "Let Me In" (Point blank/Charisma).
Although most of the songs had the same structure, Mr.
Winter kept them diverse: chugging or stop-time, slow or uptempo, using regular or slide guitar, with each song defined by a full-scale arrangement, not just its lyrics.
He left the showing off to his bass player, Jeff Ganz, who used "Born Under a Bad Sign" as an excuse for scat singing as he played.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Arrow Electronics Inc., Melville, L.I., named Keith Peirson managing director of its British-based distribution unit. *
Boeing Co., Seattle, named Lawrence W. Clarkson corporate vice president of its planning and international development division.


Shanghai Journal; To Keep China Working, Day Care Is Pampered
As his father bundles him up in a scarf, Shen Yicheng, a cuddly 2-year-old, wriggles and pouts and clings to a seat next to his fellow students in a clear sign that he isn't ready to leave the nursery just yet.
"He's been coming here for more than a year," the 34-year-old father, Shen Dejun, said as Yicheng chattered with friends.
"If we put him here, he gets a good education. If we leave him at home, he'd get lonely and he might develop a bad personality."


Paths of Learning
KNOWLEDGE ADVENTURE is a delightful and ambitious educational program that flirts with the concepts of multimedia and hypertext.
It is not the flashiest example of either, but the remarkable thing is that it works so well on an average DOS-based personal computer.
Unlike other educational programs that require the user to follow a certain route, to chase the crook on a linear path from point A to point B, and so on, Knowledge Adventure entices the user to explore a seemingly endless maze of information.
Children who are old enough to read can start to take advantage of the program, yet Knowledge Adventure will also appeal to parents.


Some See Trend in the Low-Key Christmas of '91
Staggered, or at least left stumbling, by the recession, more and more Americans this holiday season are toting up their financial well-being and are shunning freewheeling consumption.
That mood, experts say, is causing a significant shift in American gift-giving that it is likely to color spending practices for Christmases to come.
Talks with about 70 shoppers, merchants and store clerks in Seattle and Columbus, Ohio, found Americans with pocketbooks of all sizes expressing boredom, distaste -- even disgust -- with the spending frenzy of Christmases past.


Tintin Searches for a U.S. Audience
Blistering barnacles!
Are Tintin and Snowy finally capturing the imaginations of Americans 60 years after their European debut?
It's about time.
Since 1930, 150 million copies of the oversize Tintin comic books have sold in over 40 languages -- including Welsh, Serbo-Croatian and Esperanto -- and more copies are sold every year.
But in the United States, only a paltry million copies have sold in 15 years.


Hidden Discord Over Right Therapy
A BITTER dispute has erupted among a team of scientists at the University of Pittsburgh over opposite conclusions drawn from a study of middle-ear infection, a common and potentially serious childhood condition.
One side concluded that a widely prescribed antibiotic, amoxacillin, was effective for the condition; the other side said it did not work.
But the dissenting report was not published until last week, nearly five years after the original report calling the treatment effective appeared.


Whose Tree Is It Anyway?
Sorry, America, but you owe the Christmas tree to King George 3d.
It was homesick Hessian mercenaries, fighting alongside the British and pining for the tannenbaum during the Revolutionary War, who first cut fir crowns and set them on their holiday table, decorated with candles.
It did not take long, though, for Americans to adopt the custom, and once again the pioneers were the military.
In 1804, soldiers at Fort Dearborn in what was to become Chicago set trees up at their barracks.
By the 1830's and 1840's, German immigrants had spread the custom throughout Eastern cities, where Christmas trees, loaded with apples, cookies and the gold and silver strands known as 'angel's hair' (not icicles) decorated homes in Philadelphia and New York.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  BUSH TO RECOGNIZE RUSSIA SOON
President Yeltsin asked President Bush to recognize the Russian republic, and Administration officials said recognition would happen by Thursday, after the expected resignation of President Gorbachev.
Page A1  GORBACHEV AND YELTSIN MEET
President Gorbachev held a transition meeting with President Yeltsin and said afterward that as the Soviet Union was being closed out, nuclear arms were under strict control.
A8  Russia will take over the Soviet seat on the U.N.
Security Council.
A8  Fighting continued in the capital of the republic of Georgia.
A8  IMMIGRANTS' CHALLENGE TO ISRAEL
With thousands arriving each month from the moribund Soviet Union, Israel has begun to wrestle with the social, religious and political implications of the immigrants' distance from Jewish traditions.A1  Israel's Supreme Court heard an appeal from John Demjanjuk.
A6  BOMB ATTACK ON JEWISH EMIGRES
A powerful bomb exploded in the path of a bus carrying Soviet Jewish emigrants to the Budapest airport for their flight to Israel.
Six people were injured.
A9  GERMANY RECOGNIZES CROATIA
Germany flexed its new diplomatic muscle by recognizing the independence of two breakaway Yugoslav republics, Slovenia and Croatia.
A3  SLAIN HOSTAGE'S BODY IDENTIFIED
The body of a slain American hostage, Lieut.
Col.
William R. Higgins, was handed over to the United States Embassy in Beirut after identification by pathologists.
A6  ALGERIAN OPPOSITION RALLIES
Algeria's opposition Islamic Salvation Front made a strong show of force on the final day of campaigning in the country's first free multiparty parliamentary elections.
A3  CHINA IS GOOD AT DAY CARE
Shanghai Journal: In China, a married couple sometimes need only walk a few blocks to find good day care, run by the Government.
A4  Polish crisis ends as assembly accepts cabinet.
A6  National A10-15  CONFLICT OVER COUNCIL
At the same time that environmental and consumer groups say the White House Council on Competitiveness is too anti-regulatory, some conservatives say the council has done too little to stem the flood of Federal regulations on business.
A1  DIVISION AMONG BUSH TEAM
In what is an early test for the management skills of the new White House chief of staff, President Bush's budget advisers and campaign aides are split over how Mr.
Bush should handle the economic issue in the coming weeks.
A1  A MAN ON THE MOVE
Samuel Skinner, the President's new chief of staff, has long been known as a man who aggressively puts himself forward, choosing to make his own breaks rather than simply hoping to get noticed.
A13  President Bush spiced his Christmas message with politics.
A12  AMERICANS REIN IN SPENDING
The big holiday trend this year is frugality, as some Americans, staggered by recession, forgo gift-giving altogether.
A1  NEW ASSAULT ON DRINKING
Successful lawsuits by two women may represent the leading edge of a trend toward holding companies legally liable when drinking and doing business are mixed.
A10  BLACK BOYCOTT SPREADS
Black-led boycotts have forced the closing of two Korean-owned shops in the Los Angeles area, and a third boycott is under way.
A10  A SCANDALOUS CHAPTER CLOSES
Years after the Stringfellow Acid Pits produced a Reagan Administration scandal about the dumping of hazardous chemicals, a judge approved dump-related settlements of more than $34 million.
A11  A WET, NOT WHITE, CHRISTMAS
Each spring for the past two years, the Trinity River flooded the Rochester Park neighborhood of Dallas; this year the flood came in late December and took much of Christmas with it.
A11  Metropolitan Digest, B1 MAXWELL RESIGNS AT NEWS
Kevin Maxwell resigned yesterday as publisher and chairman of The Daily News, apparently bowing to pressure created by the evidence of his role in the collapse of his family's media empire.
James Willse, the paper's editor, was named as publisher.
A1.
JAIL SYSTEM HEAD LEAVING
The head of New York City's jail system, Allyn R. Sielaff, resigned last night, hours after City Hall rebuked him for the handling of a $1.9 million contract awarded to a firm that had been represented by a close friend of Mayor David N. Dinkins.
A1.
QUEENS ICON STOLEN
Robbers yesterday burst into a church in Queens and stole an icon that had become the center of a pilgrimage there.
A1.
Business Digest D1  Science Times C1-8  Darwinian approach to medicine: how microbes and the body evolved.
C1  Are United States students really so far behind in math and science?
C1  Hope is a major factor in success, scientists are finding.
C1  The Doctor's World: Dispute over two views of ear infection drug.
C3  What does el Nino mean for the short-term weather outlook?
C4  Personal Computers C2  Arts/Entertainment C9-18  Warner Brothers and "J. F. K." C9  On hearing "Messiah." C9  Tintin in America.
C9  P. D. Q. Bach is returning, to say goodbye again.
C9  Theater: "Dearly Departed." C11  Music: Johnny Winter.
C11  Word and Image: "Tchaikovsky," a biography of the man, not his music.
C17  Fashion Page B7  Sports B8-B13  Basketball: Knicks defeat Timberwolves.
B9  Nets set back Hawks.
B12  Columns: Anderson on the Jets.
B9  Football: Gratifying victory for Coslet.
B11  Giants will make changes.
B11  Hockey: Rangers blank Devils.
B9  Penguins beat Islanders.
B13  Obituaries B6  James Fletcher, NASA chief who urged shuttle program.
Ernst Krenek, composer.
Hsin-Nung Yao, writer.
Minna Citron, artist.
Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19  Editorials A18  Still stiffing the U.N.
A strong vote for One China.
Cost of not treating crack.
Topics: Diet police, foiled.
Letters A18  A. M. Rosenthal: Heroes in Moscow.
A19  Simon Schama: Whose tree is it anyway?
A19


China's Open-Door Stock Policy
Nearly a year after China's two securities exchanges opened with fits and starts, demand for stocks is so strong that people line up on the streets to buy them.
Now, the Government is planning to let foreigners in on the action.
China's two stock exchanges, in Shanghai and in Shenzhen, a special economic zone on the southern border, are working furiously to bring out special shares for foreigners in the next few weeks.


Queens Church Robbed of 'Weeping' Icon
Armed robbers yesterday burst into a neighborhood church in Queens that has become a center of pilgrimage and stole an icon that has drawn thousands of faithful worshipers and curious tourists.
The icon, a gold-and-jewelry encrusted painting of St.
Irene, the patron saint of peace and of the sick for whom the church was built, was worth more than $500,000, church officials said.
But what made it most valuable in the eyes of the worshipers was that last year, on the eve of the Persian Gulf war, the painting was reported to have begun miraculously weeping.


Closing Up Shop on a Time Gone By
YOU might say Al Samaha was born with retailing in his blood.
His father was a traveling candy salesman.
His mother had a women's apparel store here.
Even his birth in 1928 occurred in the store's stockroom, which doubled as the family's apartment.
But an awful lot has changed during the depersonalization of American retailing -- the malling of America, the chain-storing of every commercial corner, the decline of downtowns, the rise of mail order, and the eruption of superstores called marts with vast staffs of ill-informed salesclerks on perpetual break.
Not to mention the natural aging of the owners of those Ma and Pa stores.
And the disinterest of their children in working six days a week.
All of which explains the presence of the man in the black suit.


Motta Plans to Retire
Sacramento Kings Coach DICK MOTTA, the losingest coach in N.B.A. history, said yesterday that he would retire at the end of the season.
Motta made the announcement last night in a radio interview before the Kings' game with the San Antonio Spurs.
After last night's 101-90 loss, the Kings have a 7-18 record.


Weight Ads Aim at Women
Women who pass their television sets on the way to the kitchen to polish off those last Christmas cookies are the target audience for a new campaign from Weight Watchers International Inc.
The campaign, which begins on Thursday, is the first from Earle Palmer Brown in Bethesda, Md., which captured the $30 million account in July from DDB Needham Worldwide.


William Pflugradt, Conductor, 48
William Pflugradt, a conductor, composer and director of the Stonewall Chorale, died on Sunday at the Terence Cardinal Cooke Health Care Center in Manhattan.
He was 48 years old.
He died of AIDS, said his daughter, Brooke Pflugradt of Manhattan.


Christmas Tomorrow
Tomorrow is Christmas.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on Sunday schedule with rush hour service extended Tuesday.
Long Island Rail Road on holiday schedule with some extra service.
Metro-North on holiday schedule with some extra service.
NEW JERSEY GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLSClosed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule, with some extra service.


Corrections
An article on Dec. 16 about cutbacks at major American corporations misstated the timing of a 33,000-job reduction by Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.
The jobs are all being eliminated this year, not over the next two years.


Minna Citron, 95, Artist Whose Work Spanned 2 Schools
Minna Citron, a painter and printmaker best known for her Social Realist images of New York City, died on Saturday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 95 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died after a long illness, said her granddaughter Christiane Citron of Denver.


Body Is Identified as Abducted U.S. Marine Officer
The body of a slain American hostage, Lieut.
Col.
William R. Higgins, was handed over to the United States Embassy here today after pathologists at the American University Hospital established that the corpse was that of the Marine Corps officer, hospital officials said.
They said Colonel Higgins's remains were placed in a wooden coffin and given to the Embassy in preparation for shipping it home.


OPEC Divided on Meeting To Address Weak Oil Prices
Oil prices have plunged deeply since OPEC last met at the end of November, bringing tension within the cartel to a crucial stage.
With prices now down $5 a barrel since then, to around $17 a barrel, Algeria called today for an emergency meeting of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.
Itwarned that if the group did not trim its production by at least two million barrels a day soon, prices could tumble further, to $10 a barrel, under the combined impact of worsening recession in the United States and other industrialized countries and the organization's runaway production.


Trade Plan Criticized, Stalling World Talks
A last-ditch effort to conclude five years of contentious world trade talks successfully hit two serious snags today, as the European Community declared a compromise proposal to be unacceptable, and American industries offered little support.
The European Community's trade ministers strongly criticized a compromise trade agreement proposed on Friday by Arthur Dunkel, the Director General of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.


Ernst Krenek, 91, a Composer Prolific in Many Modern Styles
Ernst Krenek, a composer whose works touched on nearly every avant-garde style of composition in this century, died yesterday in a hospital in Palm Springs, Calif.
He was 91 years old and lived in Palm Springs.
He died of respiratory failure, said his wife, Gladys.


Market Place; Case of Holiday Jitters On Electronics Stores
In the week before Christmas, Wall Street grew afraid that stereos and television sets and videocassette recorders did not cost enough.
That fear, brought on by reports of poor profit margins caused by price-cutting, has sent some formerly hot growth stocks into something approaching free fall, despite a general stock market increase brought on by lower interest rates.


New Campaigns
*
The next face to grace Times Square's collection of giant billboards will be that of the model Linda Evangelista, surrounded by seven grandmotherly looking Italian women.
Only Ms.
Evangelista wears the product being advertised, a Kenar dress.
The stark black-and-white ad, by Laspata/DeCaro Studio, New York, will appear below the Sony Jumbotron screen at One Times Square.
Twenty-five smaller copies of the sign will sell for $1,000 each, with the proceeds going to fighting AIDS.


Giants Looking Ahead So Time Won't Pass Them By
The 1992 Giants will be as different from the 1991 version as, say, the 1991 team was different from the 1990 team, which won Super Bowl XXV.
While most of the players might end up being the same, there will be changes in personnel, personality, coaching staff and philosophy.
And there will be changes in motivation, or else.


Enterprise of Being Homeless
Wood was as scarce in midtown as on the winter prairie, so the group of men in the vacant lot warmed themselves by burning strip after strip of cardboard, the same material they use for their homes.
But in the box where Ronald Donaldson lives, against the wall of the Port Authority Bus Terminal, two candles burned.
Mr.
Donaldson, 41 years old, who says he is a Vietnam veteran, was neither cold nor ready for sleep.
He had invited Michelle, a woman who used to sleep in the terminal, to eat and hear him brag about his box on 40th Street: four mail carts, six pieces of plywood, seven blankets and seven layers of plastic cocooned around two queen-sized mattresses, decorated with a bowling ball and a blue stuffed chimp.


Still Stiffing the U.N.
Few Americans now question the value of the United Nations.
This year alone, it has worked prodigiously to help liberate Kuwait and to free the hostages in Lebanon.
U.N. peacekeepers are helping end wars in Cambodia and El Salvador, and U.N. agencies shelter refugees and provide medication to millions of children.
Yet in this season of giving, the U.N.'s plate is empty, its coffers packed with i.o.u.'s.


Patterns
Silk Diplomacy
That silk blouse or robe under your Christmas tree may double in price next year, if it's there at all.
This would be a result of proposed Government trade sanctions against China that might include a 100 percent duty on imported silk apparel.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
Kevin Maxwell resigned as publisher and chairman of The Daily News, apparently bowing to the pressures created by the evidence of his role in the collapse of his family's media empire.
His resignation signals the end of the Maxwell family's nine-month involvement in the paper.  [ Page A1. ]
The judge overseeing the Drexel bankruptcy asked lawyers suing Michael Milken to negotiate a universal settlement.  [ D2. ]


Economical Wetlands Plan Along Hudson Is Timely Again
To the Editor:
A panel of scientists appointed by the National Research Council recommends that "the United States undertake an ambitious long-term program of ecological restoration" (news article, Dec. 12).
Such a restoration project has been proposed right in New York City, along the Hudson River from 42d Street to Battery Park City.


Texas Flood Ruins Homes and Spirits
Pearl Crawford had only slim hopes for this Christmas to start with. Now she has none.
Ms.
Crawford and her four children are among the 133 families who were flooded out of their homes last week in the Rochester Park neighborhood when the rain-swollen Trinity River spilled its banks.


Corrections
An obituary in some editions on Sunday about Roy Herman Copperud, a journalism professor and an authority on English usage, misstated the date of his death.
As noted yesterday in a reprint for readers who missed the obituary on Sunday, Mr.
Copperud died on Dec. 7, not last Saturday.


At Attica Trial, a Clash Of 20-Year-Old Memories
In the war of 20-year-old memories at the Attica trial here, a Catholic priest today put his word against that of former Attica inmates who are suing over what they say was the state's brutality in putting down their insurrection in 1971.
One week into the defense's case, testimony in the $2.8 billion civil suit now features such clashes of recollection daily, as lawyers for four former state officials work to put their own interpretation on events during those September days two decades ago.


Henning Is Dismissed
The San Diego Chargers dismissed DAN HENNING as coach yesterday, one day after he completed his third straight losing season.
Henning's entire staff was also dismissed, although BOBBY BEATHARD, the Chargers' general manager, said he would encourage the new coach to interview the assistant coaches.


Chess
Suppose you are to meet an opponent in something as important as a qualification match in the series to pick a challenger for the world championship.
What do you do when you meet the same opponent in a tournament five months before?
On one hand, you cannot play without punch; that invites a loss, a fillip to his morale and a corresponding blow to your own.
On the other hand, you do not want to let him find out what weaknesses in his play you have discovered.


Bridge
Study the diagram, and decide whether or not you would wish to play six clubs after an opening lead of a spade.
Even looking at all 52 cards it seems impossible, but out of four declarers faced with the problem in the recent NEC World Championships in Yokohama, Japan, three succeeded.
They were Piotr Gawrys of Poland, Gudmundur Arnarson of Iceland and Jill Meyers of the United States.
This is indicative of the high standard of card play in the tournament.
The bidding shown is by the Polish North-South, whose Polish Club opening, often a weak no-trump bid, made South the declarer.
Unfortunately for him, West had an automatic spade lead.


Quotation of the Day
"They're not buying, and they're happy about it. If it feels good not to spend, why wouldn't they continue this pattern?" -- PHILIP JOHNSON, head of a consumer research company, on Christmas shopping trends.  [ D7:3. ]


Classical Music in Review
'Videoears Musiceyes'  Joseph Celli Experimental Intermedia Foundation
A persistent source of fascination for today's avant-garde (if such it can be called) is music's hardware.
Instruments become ends in themselves; the organizing of sound to convey states of consciousness, moods, emotions or particular sonic design is lowered to a relatively minor subheading on the compositorial agenda.


New Berlitz Chairman Is Independent Director
Joe M. Rodgers was named the chairman of Berlitz International yesterday, replacing David L. Shaffer less than two weeks after he had been selected for the position, as the company's directors tried to distance themselves further from the Maxwell Group P.L.C.
An independent director of Berlitz since June of last year, Mr.
Rodgers is one of several advisers who has been trying since early this month to sort out a dispute over the ownership of the language service company.
The dispute emerged when a Japanese publishing company tried to buy 56 percent of Berlitz from the crumbling Maxwell empire last month.


Federal Regulation Growing Despite Quayle Panel's Role
While environmental and consumer groups have criticized the White House Council on Competitiveness as being anti-regulatory, some conservatives say the office, headed by Vice President Dan Quayle, has proved to have little muscle.
In fact, there has been an unabated growth in Federal regulations during the Bush Administration.
Conservatives note that nearly 4,900 Federal regulations are currently being written -- as against 4,000 being considered at any one time in the Reagan years -- and that a vast majority of them will never be examined by the council, a panel with six high-ranking members and only six full-time aides.


Bridgeport U. Nears Accord With Banks
Students at the financially troubled University of Bridgeport have gone home for the holidays with assurances that classes "will in all probability" resume in January.
But the next semester will almost certainly be the university's last, as its trustees negotiate a merger with Sacred Heart University in the neighboring town of Fairfield.
University of Bridgeport officials said today they were near an agreement with a consortium of banks for a loan that would enable the university to conduct classes through the end of this academic year, while the merger is pursued.


P.D.Q. Bach Says Goodbye but It's a Come-On
Although his Carnegie Hall series is billed as a farewell return appearance, there is little hope that Prof.
Peter Schickele will carry on without further adieu.
"There's nothing like a good cry," the professor said the other day.
"Doing repeated farewell concerts gives one the opportunity of enjoying the pang of parting year after year."


Judge Seeks to Combine All Milken Claims
The Federal judge overseeing the bankruptcy case of Drexel Burham Lambert Inc. announced yesterday that he had asked lawyers suing Michael R. Milken, the former head of Drexel's junk-bond division, to negotiate a universal settlement of the claims around the country against the former financier and other Drexel executives.
If successful, the negotiations, which have been under way for several weeks, would resolve billions of dollars of claims filed against Mr.
Milken and some of his colleagues by Federal savings and loan regulators, by some states and by myriad institutional and small investors.


Electronic Cribbing or Cramming
STUDENTS, present and past, may have mixed emotions about Monarch Notes, Simon &amp; Schuster's little guides to literary works commonly assigned in high school and college.
On the one hand, they may be associated with gaining a deeper understanding of Yeats or Austen.
On the other, they may recall frantic nights of cramming or, uh, borrowing material for a report on a book not actually read.
Now, the full text of all the Monarch Notes, more than 200 of them, has been put on a CD-ROM disk.
The disk is very easy to use.
With a standard DOS computer, you slip it into the CD-ROM drive, change to the drive (usually by typing "D:") and type "MON." A screen appears that offers two choices: notes by literary period or notes by author.


Europeans Act on Russia
The European Community granted de facto recognition to the Russian republic today, saying it was in effect the legal successor of the Soviet Union.
In a statement, the 12 community nations said they "note that the international rights and obligations of the former U.S.S.R." will "continue to be exercised by Russia."


METRO DIGEST
A SCROOGE-LIKE SIGN OF RECESSION
Economists can go cross-eyed studying dry statistics like housing starts, industrial production and the money supply in their obsessive search for telling signs on the economy.
But next year they might want to consider a different indicator: the demand for Christmas trees is noticeably lower this year.
B5.
NEW YORK CITY MAXWELL QUITS THE DAILY NEWS
Kevin Maxwell resigned as publisher and chairman of The Daily News, apparently bowing to the pressures created by the evidence of his role in the collapse of the media empire founded by his father, Robert Maxwell.
His resignation signals the end of the Maxwell family's nine-month involvement in The News.
A1.
CITY JAILS CHIEF RESIGNS
The head of New York City's jail system, Allyn R. Sielaff, resigned hours after his department was rebuked for its handling of a $1.9 million contract awarded to a firm that had been represented in negotiations by a close friend of Mayor David N. Dinkins.
His resignation ends a 20-month tenure that began with high praise for his innovation.
But after a prison riot that state officials said he mishandled, his management policies came under steady criticism.
A1.
GREEK ICON STOLEN IN QUEENS
The "weeping icon" of peace, which drew hundreds of thousands of pilgrims to a Queens church earlier this year, was stolen at gunpoint, the police said.
A1.
REVERBERATIONS FROM KAHANE VERDICT
Several Jewish leaders called for new investigations into the killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane and into the acquittal of an Egyptian immigrant who was the prime suspect.
The Manhattan District Attorney's office, meantime, defended its handling of what had been regarded as an open-and-shut case.
B3.
CLOUDY ISSUES IN TRANSIT CONTRACT
A vote last week on a huge Metropolitan Transportation Authority contract ended a bruising seven-month competition that reflected the nettlesome issues that arise when officials leave government office and work for private companies that do business with their old agency.
B3.
REGION ATTICA CHAPLAIN RECALLS RIOT
In the war of 20-year-old memories at the Attica trial, the former prison chaplain put his word against that of former Attica inmates who are suing over what they say was the state's brutality in putting down their insurrection in 1971.
Msgr.
Eugene V. Marcinkiewicz remembered chilling details of the morning state forces took back the prison and left 10 hostages and 29 inmates dead and scores of others wounded.
B5.
A BRIEF HOLIDAY FOR SCHOOL CLOSING
Students at the financially troubled University of Bridgeport have gone home for the holidays with assurances that classes "will in all probability" resume in January.
But next semester will almost certainly be the university's last, as its trustees negotiate a merger with Sacred Heart University in the neighboring town of Fairfield.
B5.
Closing up shop on a time gone by.
Our Towns.
B5.
Holiday Schedules B2 Neediest Cases B3


Croatia Issues Its Own Currency to Replace Yugoslavia's


East Timor Update
To the Editor:
To update Anthony Lewis's Dec. 6 column on military suppression in East Timor by Indonesia: The reporters who broke the massacre story, Amy Goodman and Allan Nairn, have been formally censured and banned by the Indonesian Foreign Office.


Economical Wetlands Plan Along Hudson Is Timely Again; Piers District
To the Editor:
Interest by New York State in retaining secondary buildings on Ellis Island is commendable (news article, Nov. 23).
Piers along the Hudson River, however, were where immigrants arrived before going to Ellis Island.


CHRONICLE
ALAIR A. TOWNSEND, publisher of Crain's New York Business and a former New York deputy mayor for finance and economic development, has been named chairwoman of the American Woman's Economic Development Corporation.
She will be the first woman to head the board of the organization, which was formed in 1976 to help women achieve success in business, either as entrepreneurs on their own or as managers in corporations.
ROSALIND S. PAASWELL, former acting director of the City of Chicago Department of Economic Development, will be chief executive officer.


Sports of The Times; Guaranteed: Oilers Won't Taunt Jets
NOW that the one great Super Bowl scorer has come to write against their name, it's not whether the Jets deserve to be in the playoffs, it's how they played the game -- the theatrical 23-20 victory in Miami on Sunday that got them there.
But now it's also how they play the next game, in Houston this Sunday, without any psychological prodding from their locker-room bulletin board.


The Cost of Not Treating Crack
Some new statistics now give overwhelming weight to the case for making more drug treatment available to pregnant addicts.
A draft analysis by New York City's Office of Drug Abuse Policy suggests that such treatment can save tens of millions in reducing foster care for babies born to crack addicts.
Nationwide savings could be far greater; the new analysis deserves as much attention in Washington as in New York.
Two New York City programs now offer drug treatment in order to keep families together.
The Human Resources Administration treats about 1,200 new mothers of cocaine-exposed babies each year as a condition of allowing them to take the babies home and keep their other children.
And the Health and Hospitals Corporation provides drug treatment for about 300 pregnant addicts.


Settlements Reached on Toxic Dump in California
Court settlements have closed a bitter chapter in the history of the Stringfellow Acid Pits, where the dumping of 34 million gallons of acids, solvents and pesticides aroused a scandal that toppled some high Reagan Administration environmental officials.
Under a settlement approved Friday by a judge in Riverside County Superior court, the former owner of the dump, James B. Stringfellow Jr., will pay $8 million to residents of Glen Avon, which is adjacent to the dump, who said the dump caused cancer and respiratory problems and harmed their property.


People
*
Mary Haderlein, an account director at J. Walter Thompson, Chicago, has been promoted to senior vice president from vice president. *
Michael Wang, an associate media director, has been promoted to senior vice president, from vice president, at Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Southfield, Mich.


A Strong Vote for One China
The most democratic vote for a legislature ever held in China took place Saturday -- in Taiwan.
With its recent gains in economic development and political liberalization, Taiwan deserves serious attention in Washington.
But as the vote itself makes clear, that attention is best based on the premise of eventual reunification between Taiwan and the mainland.
The election's big winner was the Nationalist Party, or Kuomintang, which has ruled Taiwan since the island was recovered from Japan.
The Kuomintang had little interest in democracy during its half-century of domination by Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek.
But the Generalissimo's son, Chiang Ching-kuo, began a process of liberalization that his successor, President Lee Teng-hui, has accelerated.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50-7.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.00
4.00
6.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.74
3.72
6.54
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.84
3.83
6.63
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.53
8.09
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.52
7.57
8.35
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.69
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.72
6.73
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Jewish Emigres' Bus Bombed
A bomb exploded in the path of a bus taking Soviet Jewish emigrants' to the Budapest airport for a flight to Israel.
Six people were hurt.
Page A9.


Australian Car Ads Seek Gay Buyers
In what is believed to be a pioneering move for automobile marketing, Toyota dealers in Australia are aiming at gay consumers with special advertising featuring male couples.
One print ad shows two men in their 30's, a pair of Dalmatians, a picnic basket and a Toyota Seca Ultima, posed under the headline "The Family Car."


Nassau Cuts All Its Subsidy To Hospital
A wave of tax-cutting fervor in Nassau County has stripped the county's only public hospital of the subsidies it has received since it was founded more than a half century ago, forcing it to trim services and lay off hundreds of employees, officials said today.
While other local governments, including New York City, have tried to cut the cost of providing health care for the poor, hospital officials said the cutbacks at the 615-bed Nassau County Medical Center here were extraordinary, with the county abandoning its financial commitment to the hospital.


Miscellany
*
Jani Aronow and Louise Pollock, formerly at Ketchum Public Relations in New York, have opened their own firm, Aronow &amp; Pollock Communications Inc., specializing in food, nutrition and health accounts.


New Investigations Asked In Wake of Kahane Trial
Several Jewish leaders called yesterday for new investigations into the killing of Rabbi Meir Kahane and into the acquittal of an Egyptian immigrant who was the prime suspect.
The Manhattan District Attorney's office, meantime, defended its handling of what had been regarded as an open-and-shut case.
A State Supreme Court jury in Manhattan on Saturday found El Sayyid A. Nosair not guilty of killing Mr.
Kahane at a pro-Zionist meeting at the Marriott East Side Hotel on Nov. 5, 1990, even though a witness testified that, moments after the shooting, he saw Mr.
Nosair pointing a silver-plated gun at the rabbi.


Hollywood Wonders If Warner Brothers Let 'J.F.K.' Go Too Far
What is the responsibility of a studio that produces a major film depicting a huge governmentwide conspiracy in the killing of President John F. Kennedy?
With the release of Oliver Stone's movie "J. F. K.," the film community is asking about the ethical, artistic and even legal responsibility of the studio, Warner Brothers, which released the $40 million film that asserts Lee Harvey Oswald did not act alone and may not even have fired a shot in the Kennedy assassination.
Instead, the movie, which opened Friday around the nation, implicates, directly and indirectly, the White House, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the United States military, big business, anti-Castro Cubans, the Dallas police force and an assortment of fringe figures in New Orleans.


Now, the Playoffs: Coslet and Jets Get Set For Wild New Yonder
What were the odds that the Jets would go into Miami on the last day of the regular season and then emerge with the last American Football Conference wild-card berth instead of an obituary on their season?
Not good, if you consider Bruce Coslet's past experiences in that city.
"I don't know how many times I've played in Miami, and this goes back to the time when I played tight end," the Jets coach said today.
"But I have never won a game in Miami. You'd have to look it up, but that's a lot of times. I'll never go to Vegas if those are the odds. I don't like to play in Miami."


3 Western Powers Favor Russian Takeover of Soviet U.N. Seat
A sigh of relief went up from the United States, Britain and France today after the decision reached over the weekend in Alma-Ata by the republics of the former Soviet Union to give Russia the permanent Security Council seat of the U.S.S.R. and the special responsibility that goes with it for safeguarding international peace and security.
This was exactly the outcome that these three Western permanent Security Council members wanted, their diplomats say.
It spares them a potentially damaging dispute over the Council's composition and means they will be dealing with a relatively cohesive single Russian Government rather than a loose and still vaguely constituted commonwealth of autonomous republics with inevitably differing interests.
From Diplomat to King?
Yuli M. Voronstov, the Soviet Union's representative, said today he expected to hand over a letter from President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia to the Secretary General tonight or Tuesday saying that Russia is taking over the Soviet Security Council and Assembly seats as the continuation of the old Soviet Union, which ceased to exist when the other republics seceded.
Asked what his own position was, he said that he remains "technically" ambassador for the time being.
"Perhaps they will make me king," he added, laughing.


Visit by an Ex-M.T.A. Chief Raises the Issue of Propriety
Four days before the Metropolitan Transportation Authority was scheduled to vote on a $111 million contract for which his company's subsidiary was competing aggressively, Robert R. Kiley, the former M.T.A. chairman, dropped by the agency's offices on Madison Avenue for what M.T.A. officials describe as a social visit.
Mr.
Kiley was dressed in dungarees and apparently had the day off when he stopped by on Dec. 16, said M.T.A. officials, who insisted that the contract was never discussed.


YELTSIN ASKS BUSH TO GRANT RUSSIANS RECOGNITION BY U.S.
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia asked President Bush in a telephone call today to formally recognize the Russian republic, and Administration officials said recognition would come by Wednesday or Thursday after the expected resignation of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
The move follows the European Community's decision today to recognize the Russian republic as the de facto successor to the Soviet Union, which has now divided into an 11-republic Commonwealth of Independent States, three independent Baltic nations and an independent Georgia.


New York City Prison Chief Quits After Rebuke on Contract Bidding
The head of New York City's jail system, Allyn R. Sielaff, resigned last night, hours after his department was rebuked for its handling of a $1.9 million contract awarded to a company that had been represented in negotiations by a close friend of Mayor David N. Dinkins's.
Mr.
Sielaff's resignation ends a tenure of more than 20 months that began with praise for his innovative approaches to prison management.
But after a prison uprising that state officials said he mishandled, his management policies came under sharp and steady criticism from public and private oversight agencies. 'Possible Improprieties'
Earlier in the day, Dinkins administration officials said they were revoking a $1.9 million contract awarded last month for electronic house-arrest surveillance of released prisoners and the city said it was "investigating possible improprieties" in connection with the bidding process for the contract.


Whose Tree Is It Anyway?
Sorry, America, but you owe the Christmas tree to King George 3d.
It was homesick Hessian mercenaries, fighting alongside the British and pining for the tannenbaum during the Revolutionary War, who first cut fir crowns and set them on their holiday table, decorated with candles.
It did not take long, though, for Americans to adopt the custom, and once again the pioneers were the military.
In 1804, soldiers at Fort Dearborn in what was to become Chicago set trees up at their barracks.
By the 1830's and 1840's, German immigrants had spread the custom throughout Eastern cities, where Christmas trees, loaded with apples, cookies and the gold and silver strands known as 'angel's hair' (not icicles) decorated homes in Philadelphia and New York.


Eye on the Universe A Poet Views It All From the Bronx
Each night as the din from the weary streets rattles through his South Bronx home, Juan Bautista Castro takes pencil in hand and with a few strokes transforms himself into Nano Bauta, writer, historian and poet.
Juan Castro lives in a boxy one-bedroom apartment in Mott Haven, a frayed and dangerous patch on the urban landscape.
Nano Bauta inhabits nothing less than the universe.


C.D. and Bank Fund Yields Post Steeper Drop in Week
The declines in yields on certificates of deposit and bank money market accounts gained momentum in the seven days that ended yesterday, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, a publication that specializes in covering interest rates.
"The downturn will continue," said Robert K. Heady, The Monitor's publisher.
He added that he expected cuts to continue into February, now that the prime lending rate has been cut by a full percentage point, to 6 1/2 percent, by most leading commercial banks.
The prime rate serves as the benchmark rate for loans to many small businesses and consumers.
Widespread Cuts
In the last week, the New York commercial banks cut yields on money market accounts by an average 23 basis points, to 3.88 percent; on three-month certificates by 28 basis points, to 3.76 percent, and on six-month certificates by 32 basis points, to 3.85.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Small Israeli Party Threatens to Quit the Coalition
The leader of a small far-right political party said today that he was resigning his Cabinet post and pulling his party out of the governing coalition to protest Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's stand on proposals to change Israel's electoral system.
The resignation does not of itself threaten to topple the Shamir Government, which after losing the Tsomet Party's two seats in Parliament still holds a slender majority of 64 seats in the 120-member body.


Knick Agenda for Christmas: No Time to Remain Satisfied
After their holiday break, the Knicks will try to build on the momentum they have generated in the past month.
New York resumes play Thursday night, playing host to the San Antonio Spurs at Madison Square Garden.
The Spurs (14-11) should be a formidable opponent.
They defeated the Knicks last month in San Antonio, and that was before they had guards Vinnie Johnson and Rod Strickland.
Johnson signed with the Spurs earlier this month, and Strickland, the ex-Knick, ended a long holdout this week by signing a one-year, $1.3 million contract.


Burmese Troops Reinforced as Civil Unrest Grows
The military Government of Myanmar, alarmed by rebel attacks within 50 miles of the capital and large anti-Government demonstrations by students in two cities, is reinforcing troops in several regions to counter widening civil unrest, according to Administration officials and independent experts on the country, formerly Burma.
Neighboring Bangladesh put its frontier forces on high alert today after Burmese troops attacked a Bangladesh Army base, killing at least one soldier, the Bangladesh Government reported.


Ernest B. Morris, Harness Track Owner, 83
Ernest B. Morris, a member of harness racing's Hall of Fame and the former owner of the Saratoga Raceway harness track in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., died Sunday at a nursing home in Manchester, N.H.
He was 83 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.


Uncovered Short Sales Decline 0.7% on Nasdaq
After six consecutive months of increases, the number of actively traded shares sold short and not yet covered on the Nasdaq fell by 2.2 million, or seven-tenths of 1 percent, to 332.5 million for the month ended Dec. 15, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
Until this month's reversal, the indicator had been climbing steadily, and gained a total of 28.7 percent between mid-May, when it stood at 260 million shares, and mid-November, when it set a record of 334.7 million shares.


BOOK NOTES
Giving Instead of Receiving
Edward Rutherford will not be getting flowers or fancy chocolates this Christmas from his publisher, Crown, having nothing to do with how well his current best seller, "Russka," is doing.


27 Adopted Haitian Children in Indiana Become Citizens


No Headline
Because of holiday production requirements, The Times is printed today in two sections.
The Living Section begins on page 25, Business Day on page 47; Health is on page 39.


Culverhouse Is Seeking 'Big Trophy': Parcells
HUGH CULVERHOUSE, the owner of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, has flown to the New York area and, according to a published report, hopes to persuade BILL PARCELLS to take his team's coaching job.
"He's gone off in the hope of bringing home the big trophy," The Orlando Sentinel quoted an unidentified person familiar with the situation as saying in an allusion to Parcells.


Lions Don't Scratch, Beards Do, And Sheep Want to Be Angels
A CONSTANT of Christmas at the Convent of the Sacred Heart is that the part of Jesus in the Nativity pageant is always played by a 3-year-old in a laundry basket.
And all the stars, including a talking Star of Bethlehem, are under the age of 5, unless you count the chorus of kindergarteners.
Yet, as the nuns will tell you, the possibilities for surprise at this show are infinite.
"We have absolutely no idea about what's going to happen here," said Sister Nancy Salisbury, who is headmistress of Sacred Heart, the oldest independent girls' school in New York.


Business Digest
The Economy  For all the talk of a "white collar" recession, it is blue-collar workers who have been hardest hit by the current economic slump, losing more jobs and enduring far higher rates of unemployment.
Five times as many blue-collar jobs have evaporated, and jobless rates are more than twice as severe.  [ Page 1. ]


We Should Keep the Electoral College
To the Editor:
Tom Wicker reaches the wrong conclusion (column, Dec. 1) in calling for abolition of the Electoral College because it might undemocratically produce the "wrong winner." Only three times in our history has the loser of the popular vote become President, and just once could the Electoral College be blamed.


Bank Takeover Backed
The Federal Reserve Board said it had approved the Banc One Corporation's acquisition of Premier Bancorp Inc. of Baton Rouge, La.
Premier's "operating results for the first three quarters of this year reflect a strengthening of the bank's capital and reserve accounts," the Fed said in its order.


Review/Film; New Hat for Wenders: Daffy and Lighthearted
When it comes to making movies, Wim Wenders is not your average wild and crazy guy.
Antic fun for its own sake is not something for which he is known.
The German-born director's more recent films ("Wings of Desire," "Paris, Texas," "Hammett") have been schematic and dour, with hard surfaces encasing centers as soft as chocolate-covered cherries.
For much of its nearly three-hour running time, "Until the End of the World" is something else, a daffy, eccentric road movie that pursues its own inscrutable lighthearted logic through 15 cities in 8 countries on 4 continents.


View of Christmastime As Key to Entire Year
A Boston College professor is beginning what may be the first university-wide, cross-disciplinary study of Christmas, and the project has attracted 23 professors from his own and other departments as participants.
Paul Schervish, an associate professor of sociology, said he believes that Christmas offers a lens on many of the mixed emotions Americans carry around with them during the rest of the year.
"In that sense, it's a diagnostic tool for analyzing the nature of our culture," he said.


Derailed Train Car Falls Onto Spokane Freeway


Baby Delivered After Mother Survives Crash
A woman was killed and the pregnant driver of another car was critically injured when their two vehicles collided on a busy local street, the police said.
Doctors at Nassau County Medical Center who treated the injured woman delivered her baby by Caesarean section.
Police Detective Kevin McKey said Tania Proussalis, 21 years old, of Farmingdale, lost control of her 1988 Mustang and crossed the double yellow line on Central Avenue at 12:30 P.M.


Solar Power From Space Grows More Feasible
It may sound like "Star Trek" several generations removed, but technology is moving toward a long-harbored dream of gathering the sun's energy in space and beaming it to earth for electric power.
In space, where there are no clouds and few shadows, solar-collecting cells could capture more sunlight than on earth.
And now, as improvements in photovoltaic technology make harnessing solar power increasingly feasible, and as concern mounts about the environmental impact of burning fossil fuels, some scientists and engineers are devoting serious thought to the notion of electricity from outer space.


HAITI PAYS DEARLY FOR MILITARY COUP
Haiti, racked by violence and strangled by an international embargo, is paying dearly for the military coup that turned it away from democracy, in the view of many Haitians and foreigners involved in the country.
Contemplating a landscape that now includes thousands of poor Haitians risking their lives on overcrowded boats to flee repression and hardship, the death of a once-lively press and an economy largely deprived of gasoline and electrical power, even some of those who supported the overthrow of the country's first elected President on Sept. 30 now call for his return.
Reports of Progress
Travelers arriving at the international airport, like drivers who stop at street corners, find themselves quickly surrounded by people with outstretched hands, begging for food or money, in numbers not previously seen there.


Christmas
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Option to close.
PARKING Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on holiday schedule.
Metro-North on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Option to close.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Closed.
TRANSPORTATION Metro-North on holiday schedule.


Maxwell's Financial Underpinnings
Here in the small and discreet principality that was the ultimate stronghold of Robert Maxwell's financial empire, his name is still whispered with a certain deference, and lawyers are quick to defend his interests.
Many of those interests are centered in the Maxwell Foundation, one of at least two Liechtenstein-based entities that acted as holding companies for Mr.
Maxwell's web of more than 400 worldwide businesses.
The other known Liechtenstein unit is Swico Anstalt, or Swico Establishment.


Corrections Corp. Issues Shares
The Corrections Corporation of America has issued 50,000 shares of 8.5 percent cumulative convertible preferred stock to the GE Capital Corporation to raise $5 million at a price of $100 a share.


In Uncertain Times, College Students See a Bleak Future After Graduation
Once they stood as splendid sanctuaries, with Gothic towers and heavy mantles of tradition that conveyed a soothing stability.
But America's college campuses have come to bear the same fault lines as American society, and in uncertain times like these even self-possessed students like Michael Idinopulos, a philosopher-in-training at the University of Chicago, feel shaken.
There is a sense among students that they have no room to make mistakes, said Mr.
Idinopulos, a senior from Cincinnati who intends to study the complex philosophy of mathematics in graduate school, if he gets there.


&gt;Deer Hunting Isn't a Form of Herd Control
To the Editor:
In "Stalkers of the Subdivisions" (Op-Ed, Dec. 14), James Howard Kunstler repeats the myth that, "As an ecological matter, if we want to co-exist with the white-tailed deer, we are obligated to continue culling the herds." This presupposes that deer hunters are "culling the herds" to reduce deer population.


Review/Film; 'Prince of Tides' Sidesteps Book's Pitfalls
Nothing about Barbra Streisand's previous acting or direction is preparation for her expert handling of "The Prince of Tides," which has been pared down from Pat Conroy's sprawling, hyperbolic novel to a film that is gratifyingly lean.
Discretion and reserve are not the first qualities that come to mind about Ms.
Streisand's work, yet they are very much in evidence this time.
So is the frankly emotional style with which she is more often associated, a style perfectly attuned to this film's complex, stirring story.
"The Prince of Tides" marks Ms.
Streisand's triumphantly good job of locating that story's salient elements and making them come alive on the screen.
Everything about Mr.
Conroy's overripe family saga is suffused with excess, from the author's descriptions of his characters ("The words of her poems were a most private and fragrant orchard," he writes of Savannah Wingo, the narrator Tom Wingo's twin sister) to the experiences those characters share.
The three Wingo children, Luke, Savannah and Tom, seem to do everything in unison, often on what are either the very best or very worst days of their lives.
Feisty, brave and endlessly self-dramatizing, they have the knack of being colorful to a fault.


Cable TV Excesses Certainly Need Some Kind of Regulation
To the Editor:
In "Cable TV Bill Would Have Hurt Those It Should Protect" (letter, Dec. 6), Martha Kalser expresses the opinion that a Senate bill allowing local communities to control cable companies "is better off buried." She explains that the bill would require cable companies to pay license fees to broadcasters and that these fees would be passed on to the consumer.


Review/Film; The Accidents and Miracles in Everyday Life
Mack (Kevin Kline), the central character in Lawrence Kasdan's "Grand Canyon," hauntingly describes the experience of almost being hit by a bus.
He was standing on a street corner, he recalls, and was about to step off the curb without looking when a stranger pulled him back.
When he thanked her, she smiled and said, "My pleasure," then disappeared.
She saved Mack's life, although he never returned the favor.
The spirit of that anecdote, with its grasp of life's precariousness, its awareness of the ominous and the miraculous in everyday events, its understanding of the intricate exchanges and equations that make up our destiny, seems to be what "Grand Canyon" is after.
As he did so successfully in "The Big Chill," Mr.
Kasdan here uses a deceptive casualness in approaching his contemporaries' most intimate hopes and fears.


New Health Commissioner Is Appointed
Mayor David N. Dinkins announced yesterday that he had picked Dr.
Margaret A. Hamburg to be New York City's new health commissioner, a post she has filled on an acting basis since the resignation of Dr.
Woodrow A. Myers Jr.
The Mayor picked Dr.
Hamburg, 36 years old, over another highly regarded candidate, Dr.
Lawrence S. Brown Jr., who was strongly supported by people considered influential with the Mayor.
Dr.
Brown is an executive with a drug research and rehabilitation program in Brooklyn.


Christmas Harvest
At most of his stops on this cold morning, the
driver, named Lex, picks up bread.
The best comes from the Union Square Cafe -- sourdough rye, the kind with thick crust and big holes, still squeezably fresh.
A place called Michael's Muffins and the new Au Bon Pain outlet in the Port Authority Bus Terminal offer sweeter items.
Muffins, croissants and fruit pastries ought to bring class and taste to the humblest homeless shelter's coffee urn.
Upstate farmers finished reaping their crops weeks ago, but the big season for City Harvest hit its peak this week.
The nonprofit group's seven trucks ply daily routes on New York City streets, picking up leftovers from restaurants, corporate cafeterias, caterers, fashion shoots and movie locations -- anywhere a host might overestimate appetites.
City Harvest distributes these gleanings to soup kitchens, shelters, food pantries.


Review/Film; A Job That Attracted Few Applicants
Just when the Soviet Union is coming apart, it is paradoxical that two films featuring Stalin, the personification of Soviet totalitarianism, should play in New York simultaneously.
Stalin is the paranoiac center of gravity in both Andrei Konchalovsky's dark comedy "The Inner Circle," which opened today at the Loews Fine Arts, and in Ken Palmer's "Testimony," at Film Forum 1.
In "The Inner Circle," the dictator, played by Aleksandr Zbruyev, is a rotund little demon with twinkling eyes.
Terence Rigby's more ominous Stalin, in "Testimony," is a hulking, shadowy beast.


Haitian Refugees in Cuba Will Get Gifts a Day Late
In the wake of a mushrooming barrage of criticism and embarrassing publicity, the Air Force will play Santa's helper to thousands of Haitians held at a United States refugee camp in Cuba, the Department of Defense said today.
But organizers of the drive to bring some holiday cheer to 7,000 Haitian refugees said the Defense Department's decision came too late to get 16 tons of toys and clothing donated by New Yorkers to the camp by Christmas.
They said the gifts, collected through a drive on two black-owned local radio stations, will not be delivered until Friday because of delays by officials in the administration of President Bush..


An Opening Shot Toward a Worldwide Tour?
There are many things the recent Johnnie Walker World Championship of golf was not, chief among them a true world championship.
But despite its shortcomings, the elite-field event successfully addressed -- and partly filled -- the biggest void in the game.
Critics of the Jamaica tournament could easily deride the imperfect qualification process used to select the 26-man field, the garish $2.55 million purse, a bland Tryall Golf Club made artificially tough by growing rough the consistency and length of dreadlocks, practice-round-sized galleries and a bottom-of-the-barrel date the week before Christmas.


U.N. Aide Quits Syria as Talks on 2 Germans Stall
The chief United Nations hostage negotiator left Syria for New York today facing deadlock in his efforts to free two German kidnapping victims believed still alive in Lebanon.
A United Nations official in the Syrian capital, Damascus, said that the envoy, Giandomenico Picco, left after abandoning hopes that the Germans, Heinrich Strubig and Thomas Kemptner, would be released by Christmas.


L.I. Sound Searched For Missing Hunters
State Police divers searched today for two missing duck hunters whose boat capsized in Long Island Sound near Rocky Neck State Park.
The missing men were identified by the police as Bruce Nelson, 41 years old, of Deep River, and Thomas Dancona, 36, of Moodus.
Their capsized 14-foot aluminum boat was found at about midnight on Monday.


Review/Film; From Claude Chabrol, A 'Madame Bovary' With Isabelle Huppert
Claude Chabrol's "Madame Bovary" is a seemingly meticulous adaptation of Gustave Flaubert's ever-astonishing novel that, on its publication in 1857, was unsuccessfully prosecuted by the French Government for "immorality."
The movie looks splendid.
It was filmed in Rouen and in neighboring villages and landscapes on the lower Seine.
All appears to be authentic: country roads, meadows, foliage, weather, coaches, costumes, houses, even the bibelots on a mantelpiece and the circumscribed wanderings of a flock of geese in a barnyard.


Reform Plans By Jail Chief Go Unfulfilled
Allyn R. Sielaff bounded into City Hall last year with a huge agenda: to make the city's jail system more humane and less costly.
His priorities were to put the brakes on a $1 billion building program, segregate violent inmates and reduce overcrowding through the supervised release of nonviolent inmates.


Gavin G. Borden, 52, Founder of Book Firm
Gavin Gail Borden, the founder and president of Garland Publishing Inc., died on Thursday at his home on New York City.
He was 52 years old.
He died of cancer of the salivary gland, his family said.


Lower Prices For Gasoline
Motorists traveling over the Christmas holiday are paying an average of 26 cents less for a gallon of gasoline than in the comparable period a year ago, the American Automobile Association said yesterday.
The association said the average price for self-service, regular unleaded gasoline was $1.108 a gallon, down from $1.371 a year ago, when world oil markets soared because of the crisis in the Persian Gulf.


U.S. Plans Scholarships To Push Foreign Studies
When the Soviets challenged the United States' technological prowess with the launching of their Sputnik satellite in 1957, America responded by pumping more money into the study of science and mathematics.


3 Men Killed in Robbery at Bodega in Brooklyn
Two gunmen burst into a Brooklyn bodega Monday night and killed three workers inside, taking about $500 from the cash register before fleeing in a getaway car, the police said.
The three workers were shot at 9:55 P.M. at R &amp; G Grocery, a busy 24-hour store at 830 Macon Street in Bedford-Stuyvesant.


Another Use for Microwave Beams: A Plane to Relay Calls
Although the technology may be at least a few decades away from pumping electricity to earth from outer space, microwave beaming seems destined to find smaller-scale applications much sooner.
In Canada, for instance, a consortium is seeking investors to build an electric airplane that would be powered by microwaves beamed from the ground.
The aircraft, called Sharp -- for stationary high-altitude relay platform -- would stay aloft from six months to a year and be used as a signal-relay transmitter for cellular telephone calls.
But sponsors point out that Sharp could also be used for scientific payloads or airborne surveillance of the earth.


Machinists In United Pact
Machinists for United Airlines have overwhelmingly approved a five-year labor contract with the air carrier, a union spokesman said today.
The contract was approved late Monday by 80 percent of the union members voting, said Dennis Hitchcock, the machinists' union spokesman.
The union has 27,000 members working for United.


Wine Talk
ON Nov. 17, CBS News devoted a segment of its weekly program "60 Minutes" to what it called the French Paradox: the fact that the incidence of coronary heart disease in France is 40 percent lower than it is in the United States.
This, despite a French diet high in fat and cholesterol.
American and French researchers interviewed by "60 Minutes" pointed to an apparent relationship between moderate alcohol consumption, particularly red wine, and a lower rate of heart disease.
The French, the researchers said, not only consume high-fat diets, they also smoke more and exercise less than Americans.


CHRONICLE
FREDERICK McCLURE, President Bush's Congressional liaison, has announced that he is leaving the Administration to join an investment banking firm in Texas.


Personal Health
In its campaign against birth defects, the March of Dimes has focused its energies on mothers-to-be.
Now it is taking a hard look at the other factor in the baby equation.
"Men have babies, too" is the slogan of a new campaign to help men realize that their living habits and occupational and recreational exposures could harm their children.
Men are now being urged to consider how substances they deliberately or inadvertently take into their bodies may affect their sperm and alter the outcome of their partner's pregnancies.


Keating Is Released on Bail
Charles H. Keating Jr. raised the rest of his $300,000 bail today and left a Federal detention center, but his son was left to spend Christmas behind bars.
The elder Keating, who was convicted on state fraud charges earlier this month, vowed to fight the Federal Government's case against him on charges of fraud and racketeering in connection with the collapse of Lincoln Savings and Loan, the largest collapse ever of a savings and loan association.


Plight of the Retired
To the Editor:
Losing one's job can be financially and emotionally traumatic, as described in your Dec. 10 article on a group of women in Norwalk, Conn., whose husbands are victims of downsizing.
Equally traumatic, but receiving little attention, is the plight of the retired person living on interest from investments carefully planned throughout a working life, and who now finds that while expenses such as medical bills are increasing, interest is being cut again and again.


(Christmas) Greetings From the President of the United States
WHITE HOUSE followers have never been short of material, from handwritten notes to taped conversations to the tell-all memoirs of erstwhile Presidential confidants.
But Presidential Christmas cards have rarely been seen by more than their 150,000 or so recipients and, of course, their families and friends.
Now Presidential holiday sentiments are open to public view at an exhibit of official White House Christmas cards, dating from 1961 to 1990, at Sunnyside, the historic home of Washington Irving here in Tarrytown.
The exhibit is sponsored by Historic Hudson Valley, a preservation association.


As Far as Enforcing Naughty and Nice, Santa Is No Match for Los Abuelos


Injured Grandmother Aided by 2-Year-Old
The Lopez family of Elizabeth spent Christmas Eve at St.
Elizabeth Hospital, still marveling at 2-year-old Sal Michael Lopez.
The boy knew just what to do when his 79-year-old grandmother, Catherine McMullen, tripped going down the basement stairs on Friday, broke her leg and could not move.


Raiders Close Practices
Because of changes being made by the Los Angeles Raiders, Coach ART SHELL said yesterday that his team would hold closed practices this week for the first time since the franchise moved from Oakland in 1982.
"I want to make sure nothing gets out," Shell said.


Progress Slows at Salvador Peace Talks
Despite strong international pressure and earlier vows of peace by Christmas, progress has slowed in talks between the Salvadoran Government and its rebel adversaries, negotiators and diplomats said today.
After a day in which Government representatives had talked privately of asking to suspend the talks, diplomats said tonight that both sides appeared committed to continuing their discussions through the end of the year.
But even as the Government and rebels agreed to set aside other differences to begin discussing a cease-fire, diplomats and negotiators said it was still unlikely that the Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, would leave the United Nations next week with the peace treaty he has made a last goal of his tenure.
And if left to a new United Nations leadership, they said, the mediation effort's future would be uncertain at the least.


Burmese Troops Reinforced as Civil Unrest Grows
The military Government of Myanmar, alarmed by rebel attacks within 50 miles of the capital and large anti-Government demonstrations by students in two cities, is reinforcing troops in several regions to counter widening civil unrest, according to Administration officials and independent experts on the country, formerly Burma.
Neighboring Bangladesh put its frontier forces on high alert today after Burmese troops attacked a Bangladesh Army base, killing at least one soldier, the Bangladesh Government reported.


Airlines Set A 2d Round Of Fare Rises
Some of the biggest United States airlines confirmed yesterday that they were raising most domestic fares by 2 percent as of Jan. 3, the second round of price increases within a week.
Last Thursday, the airlines said they were raising their bargain advance-purchase fares, which require Saturday-night stay-overs, by $20 round trip.
The increases are part of a strategy to stem the multibillion-dollar losses they have reported as a result of the Persian Gulf war and the recession.
In the slowdown many carriers cut fares to stimulate travel.


Without Presidency to Shoot For, Cuomo Takes Aim at Republicans
In the four days since he announced that he would not run for President, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo seems to have sharpened the vitriol he directs at the Republicans who control the New York State Senate, whom he depicted as forcing him to renounce a presidential candidacy because they would not agree with him on a solution to state's budget woes.
The Governor has stepped up warnings that he will use his veto power to be a player over the coming months in state lawmakers' reapportionment of both their own districts and those of the New York Congressional delegation.


Progress Slows at Salvador Peace Talks
Despite strong international pressure and earlier vows of peace by Christmas, progress has slowed in talks between the Salvadoran Government and its rebel adversaries, negotiators and diplomats said today.
After a day in which Government representatives had talked privately of asking to suspend the talks, diplomats said tonight that both sides appeared committed to continuing their discussions through the end of the year.
But even as the Government and rebels agreed to set aside other differences to begin discussing a cease-fire, diplomats and negotiators said it was still unlikely that the Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, would leave the United Nations next week with the peace treaty he has made a last goal of his tenure.
And if left to a new United Nations leadership, they said, the mediation effort's future would be uncertain at the least.


On Every Street, They Light a Path to Christmas
It was nine years ago today, on Christmas Eve, that Barbara Morgan's vision of a brighter Garwood became a reality along two blocks of Locust Avenue.
Since then, almost every house on nearly every residential street in the borough has ushered in Christmas with the inviting glow of luminaria -- stumpy candles in sand-filled paper sacks lining curbs, sidewalks and walkways like landing lights for Santa Claus.


Laughter Greets Gifts For Neediest
After Santa left, they just hugged the red and green packages, courageously planning to save them until Christmas Day.
But when Duane Ortega made the big bold move by opening his present on Monday, pandemonium erupted.
"Aiee! Aiee!" the 32 toddlers screeched in the East Harlem gymnasium.
The wrapping paper seemed to moan before their relentless efforts.
Four-year-old Vladimir Ramos, his face ablaze with wonder, pulled the cord on his new See N' Say.
"I am a cow," it said.
"I go moooooo." Then he jumped aside because Mark Moreno, 5, was coming by with his new yellow truck.
Mark took a pit stop by Albert Ramierez, 3, who was staring blankly at a box containing an orange horse named "Pokey."


John Vincent Frank Travel Agency President, 72
John Vincent Frank, the retired president of a New York travel agency, died on Sunday.
He was 72 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Frank died of cardiac arrest, his family said.


Ho-Ho-Hum at Finer Stores, Too
A Christmas Eve walk through some of Manhattan's toniest shopsfound store owners still hoping for a Merry Christmas, but acknowledging that they were not having a watershed day.
And while some retailers maintained that business was strong, several said profits were flat to down from last year.
Nearly all agreed that individual consumers were buying less.


Home, Sweet Home? Not With These Nets
It is a heckler's dream team.
When the Nets take the floor at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the wisecracks are sure to follow.


Bush Reluctantly Concludes Gorbachev Tried to Cling to Power Too Long
Forewarned on Monday by President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia that Mikhail S. Gorbachev plans to resign on Wednesday, President Bush has reluctantly reached the conclusion that his friend and political ally clung to power too long and dulled the luster of his achievements, Administration officials said today.
The officials said Mr.
Bush decided in October, when he met with Mr.
Gorbachev for the last time in Madrid, that the Soviet leader had lost the struggle for power with Mr.
Yeltsin and had simply not yet acknowledged that to himself.


Books of The Times; A Life Devoted to Others' Literature
Kurt Wolff A Portrait in Essays and Letters Edited with a Foreword by Michael Ermarth.
Translated by Deborah Lucas Schneider. 223 pages.
University of Chicago Press. $24.95.
Dedicated readers interested in books as lasting literature should be delighted by "Kurt Wolff: A Portrait in Essays and Letters." Dedicated people in the publishing industry will have all their romantic expectations gratified by this biographical assemblage of one of the 20th century's greatest trans-Atlantic publishers.


Faithful Pray for New Miracle To Aid Stolen 'Weeping' Icon
Chris Karalekas, a 33-year-old shipping executive from Astoria, Queens, came because he believed that his prayers before the icon may well have helped his wife get through a difficult pregnancy.
Rosa Perales, a 53-year-old housewife, came from the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn because the theft had moved her so.
"You can't believe how it made me cry," she said.


Study Says Clean Air Goals Can Be Met by Oil Concerns
An independent consulting firm that conducted a survey of oil refineries has concluded that they can meet the deadlines specified by the Clean Air Act for less-polluting gasoline and diesel fuel.
The conclusion stands in stark contrast to the protests of oil companies, which argued when the rules were debated last year that the changes could not be made as quickly as would be required.
A draft of the study, produced for the Energy Department by the firm, Cambridge Energy Research Associates, in Cambridge, Mass., put the costs at fairly modest levels.
But the study also said that the new rules might drive some small refineries out of business, and that some refineries might have trouble getting construction permits in time to complete the work needed to make cleaner fuel.


Accepting the Harsh Truth Of a Blue-Collar Recession
For all the talk of a "white collar" recession, it is blue-collar workers who have been hardest hit by the current economic slump, losing more jobs and enduring far higher rates of unemployment.
Five times as many blue-collar jobs have evaporated, and jobless rates are more than twice as severe.
More and more, blue-collar workers are facing the harsh truth that though the economy will no doubt come back, their lost jobs are probably gone for good, given the relentless advance of automation and international competition.
Last week's announcement by the General Motors Corporation that it plans to shut 21 assembly plants and shed more than 70,000 jobs over the next few years -- only about a third of the cuts will come from the salaried ranks -- was just the most recent indication that the squeeze on blue-collar factory workers will continue.


Allegre's Circuitous Route Back to Houston
While the Giants are home for the holidays, the Jets will be practicing today thanks to Raul Allegre.
It has been only one week since the 32-year-old kicker was signed to replace the injured Pat Leahy.
Allegre dubbed himself the answer to a trivia question: Who was a kicker for the Giants and the Jets in the same season?


Federal Judge Approves Trial On Bias Claim
In a case involving claims of discrimination against Orthodox Jews that has attracted national attention, a Federal judge here today cleared the way for a trial based on claims that a new village was formed this year in Rockland County to keep Jews out.
The opinion by Federal Judge Gerard L. Goettel was a victory for a small community of Orthodox Jews who claim that the village of Airmont in the Rockland County town of Ramapo was formed to use "strong" zoning to prevent them from building houses of worship they say they need in their neighborhoods.


What New Storms For Eastern Europe?
To the Editor:
Lest we be lulled into excessive complacency by some of the assurances of Stephen M. Meyer in "Hyping the Soviet Nuclear Peril" (Op-Ed, Dec. 12), let us consider the long-run implications of the breakup of the Soviet Union and the emergence of 6 to 12 states with new armies, some with access to large numbers of tactical nuclear weapons, a possibility that Mr.
Meyer does not exclude.


Metropolitan Diary
CHRISTMAS MORNING We took the red-ribboned basketball from beneath the Christmas tree and shoveled a clean, clear path underneath the rusted rim outside (back then, it used to snow in December).
Taller than any Knick, my Dad would hit jumper after jumper and steal my wild dribble with a grin and a wink until the morning sun broke loose and I finally beat him in a game of one-on-one (who would have guessed the fix was on) as the holiday kissed the all-star connection between a seasoned power forward father and rookie point guard son. -- ROGER GRANET
. . .
A recent lunch hour finds Patricia B. Cohen on line at a delicatessen in lower Manhattan.
When it is her turn to order, Ms.
Cohen asks for a tuna and tomato on whole wheat.
"Do you want mayo on the bread?" the counterman wants to know.
She asks if he has any low-cholesterol mayonnaise.
"Naw," he says. "We're a deli. We don't care about health."
. . .
Dear Diary:
Christmas stirs up all sorts of memories -- minor as well as major -- and so I am not surprised to have recently recalled the time I was living on the Upper West Side and heard a male voice floating into my open window inquiring, "Well, why can't they go ahead and get married
without
a wheelbarrow?"
That was the same week a friend was wakened by a shout into the common airshaft: "Turn down that damned string quartet!" -- BARBARA LA FONTAINEN
. . .
Dear Diary
Something I think about every Christmas: Brooklyn in the early 1940's.
Every Tuesday night was dish night at the movie house around the corner and by going week after week it was possible to collect a complete set of dinnerware.
Dishes weren't the only premiums offered.
My mother collected white porcelain statuettes of presidents and their wives.
These figurines, which were about four or five inches high, have become an essential part of my Christmas memories.
Under our tree was a representation of the Nativity scene, with the three kings solemnly watching.
And just beyond them, also watching, were George and Martha, Abe and Mary, Franklin and Eleanor. -- STEVE ABBRUSCATO
. . .
Our friends Charles and Noel the travelers, recently paid a visit to San Francisco.
To save time, they addressed their stamped postcards (a splendid shot of the Conservatory of Flowers) before they left the city but left the message side blank, to be filled in during the flight back to New York.
When they returned home, the cards were nowhere to be found.
Not, however, lost for all time.
A few days later, several of their friends back East received the cards, postmarked San Francisco and inscribed with their return address and the following message: "Hi. We found this along with four other cards, signed Charles and Noel, on the sidewalk. We're sure they were having a good time and thinking of you so we mailed the cards for them. Best in God's love, Ron and Rosie, Augusta, Ga."
On their next trip, Charles and Noel plan to send a card to Ron and Rosie.
. . .
Dear Diary:
It happened in Tudor City, around 5:45 P.M. with the heading-home crowd.
In the middle of 43d Street, schmoozing with a friend, I'm edged aside to make room for a fellow pulling along a carry-on with wheels.
Suddenly the bag sways, threatening collapse.
The fellow does an about-face.
He glares down.
"Sit!" he commands.
The bag teeters for a second or two.
Then it steadies upright.
They roll smoothly on their way. -- LOUISE HORTON
. . .
Philip Hackbarth was walking down the hall of his Union Square apartment building when he spotted the sign taped on the bottom of a door.
This is what it said: "I already have the following menus on file," followed by a list of seven local Chinese restaurants.
Then, in larger letters: "Please, No More Menus. If You Put a Menu I Already Have Under the Door, I Will NEVER Call."
The following day he noticed that some changes had been made: the first restaurant had been crossed off and in its place, "You are now in the garbage can." The second restaurant had also been crossed off .
In its place: "You are now off the list FOREVER."
Two down, five to go. Mr. Hackbarth eagerly looks forward to the daily scorecard.


Homelessness Rises, but Not as Issue
Early in the 1988 New Hampshire primary campaign, almost every Democratic Presidential candidate accompanied Mayor Raymond L. Flynn of Boston on a visit to a city-run homeless shelter.
Once there, the Democrats talked with residents of the city's Long Island Shelter while television cameras captured the candidates' concern and beamed the images to neighboring New Hampshire.
So far in this campaign, no candidate has visited the center, though all have invitations from Mayor Flynn.
Only one, Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, has expressed an interest in making such a visit.


November Durable Goods Orders Up 1.2%
In a sign that some economists took as encouraging, new orders for big-ticket durable goods rose 1.2 percent in November, the second straight monthly rise, the Government said today.
But other analysts cautioned that durables orders often swung wildly from month to month.
Still, the announcement by the Commerce Department surprised many analysts, both because the rise, to $124.7 billion, marked the first back-to-back increase since April and because many economists had forecast a drop of more than 1 percent.


Colleges Wary of Easing Curbs on South Africa
Not many years removed from the days when students were erecting mock shanty towns and staging protests against apartheid, a handful of universities and colleges are now taking tentative steps toward liberalizing their policies banning the investment of endowment funds in companies doing business with South Africa.
But, like the process of dismantling white rule in that country, campus officials and shareholder groups are moving slowly and cuatiously to loosen the restrictions.


Foreign Affairs; Checking It Twice
It turns out that the sweat socks President Bush bought on his recent shopping spree weren't Christmas gifts for Barbara Bush.
Mr. and Mrs.
Bush have a longstanding policy of not exchanging Christmas presents.
"They have everything they need, and anything they want they can get," explained Anna Perez, the First Lady's spokeswoman.


The Pop Life; Blues Band's Success Is Belated but Sweet
It's Christmas Day, and as easy as it might be to dwell on the recession, a collapsing record industry and whatever other evils are at hand, what we have here is an optimistic story.
It's the tale of the Holmes Brothers, who have released their second album, the terrific "Where It's At" (Rounder), a strange and beguiling mixture of bar-band blues, soul, funk, gospel and country music.
The band's success shows that with the right sense of proportion, the record business can be the salvation of worthy projects that are usually dismissed.
And the Holmes Brothers, three men in their 50's -- Wendell Holmes on guitar, Sherman Holmes on bass and Popsy Dixon on drums -- are just the sort of musicians usually left behind by the record industry.
Unmarketable in a larger pop sense because of their age and the styles of music they perform, squeezed out by a lack of small places to play, they are prime candidates for poverty and the unemployment lines, so often the fate of journeymen musicians.


MCI Cable Project
The MCI Communications Corporation's MCI International subsidiary said it would "actively participate" in construction and installation of TAT-11, a trans-Atlantic fiber- optic cable system between the United States, Britain and France.
The system is expected to be completed in August 1993.
MCI is a leader in a consortium of 25 telecommunications carriers investing in the system.


Banker Cuts B.C.C.I. Ties
A former official of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International has agreed to break all connections with B.C.C.I. and cooperate in the investigation of the scandal-ridden bank, the Federal Reserve announced today.
In exchange for agreeing to the cease-and-desist order, the Fed said it was dismissing administrative charges against Khusro K. Elley, the former head of B.C.C.I.'s New York office and a senior executive of the First American Bank of New York.


Girl, 14, Is Killed by Gunfire After Leaving Brooklyn Party
A 14-year-old Brooklyn girl was shot to death on a street in Crown Heights early yesterday morning, apparently the innocent victim of a dispute that erupted at a party she had just left, the police said.
Friends of the girl, Shakena Joseph, said she was trying to flee when the shooting started outside an apartment building at 1341 Eastern Parkway.
The police said she was struck once in the chest shortly after 1 A.M.


Washington Talk; After Years, An Inquiry Is in Search Of an End
Lawrence E. Walsh, the Iran-contra independent counsel, may be approaching the end of his inquiry, the longest investigation since the special prosecutor law was enacted in 1978.
"I think we're giving a strong signal that we're trying to wind down," Mr.
Walsh said in an interview marking the half-decade since he was appointed to investigate the Reagan Administration's secret sales of weapons to Iran and the covert efforts to arm the Nicaraguan rebels.


49ers Punish the Playoff-Bound Bears
The Chicago Bears were quick to cling to their consolation prize.
"We're still playing," quarterback Jim Harbaugh said.
Beaten, 52-14, by the San Francisco 49ers in their regular-season finale on Monday night, the Bears had little else to grab hold of as they shifted their focus to the playoffs.


Neill McAllister, 65; Towing Concern Head
Neill Alexander McAllister, a retired executive of McAllister Brothers, a marine towing and transportation company founded by his great grandfather, died on Tuesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 65 years old and lived in Belle Terre, L.I., and Tequesta, Fla.
He died of complications from esophageal cancer, said his daughter, Suzanne McAllister of Manhattan.


Keeping the Faith by Staying on Track
The morning sun had already climbed to its peak when Bill Shoemaker emerged from his barn office at Hollywood Park and began rolling down the bumpy dirt road that leads to the track.
The day was set in full motion -- there were horses and hot-walkers all around -- and Shoemaker seemed to find a serenity in simply being here.
He had made this trip many times before, from the stables to the track to watch another of his thoroughbreds gallop easily around the track, but it must seem special now.
He can smell the crisp dawn air, feel the hurried activity around him, hear the workers calling out to one another.


Opposed by Doctors, New Chief of Hospitals Is Starting Already Battered
Coming off a bruising confirmation process, the new Westchester County hospitals commissioner says he will work to forge good relations with the doctors and hospital officials who opposed him.
"I have to prove myself, and I will," said the commissioner, Mack L. Carter Jr.
"We're beginning from day one."


From Bensonhurst to Connecticut and Back
The faces of the Lafayette High School basketball players were pressed against the window of the charter bus as it rolled down a steep hill behind a large building toward a field house and adjacent parking lot in the rear.
"This is a high school?" Adam Belkin, the junior point guard, said, as the bus pulled up to the front entrance of Danbury High School, concluding a two-and-one-half-hour ride from the edge of Bensonhurst in Brooklyn to this distant Connecticut neighborhood of split-level homes and neat, expansive lawns.


Moscow's Main News: Prices Will Go Up Jan. 2
Ordinary Muscovites, their money losing buying power constantly, are aware of the cataclysmic politics giving birth to a new country.
But they seemed more concerned today with the Government's announcement of price increases on food and other goods designed to move the new Russia toward a market economy.
The Government plans are to take effect Jan. 2, after years of vacillation on how to move the state-controlled, heavily subsidized system of production and supply to a freer-wheeling market.
Under the plan, increases are to be as high as three or four times current prices for a range of goods and services including bread, sugar, milk, butter, cooking oil, vodka, electricity, gasoline and public transport.


All Markets Closed Today
Because of the Christmas Day holiday, all financial markets, banks and government offices in the United States will be closed today.


Editorial Notebook; Hollywood: History by Default
John F. Kennedy's assassination was the most traumatic spectacle of the television age, and because many still doubt that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone, it remains an open-ended trauma.
But even that doubt cannot account for all the criticism of the movie "JFK," Oliver Stone's unpersuasive attempt to prove that Government conspirators arranged the assassination.
The criticism began while the movie was still being filmed.
Political journalists have since tried to blow it off the screen.
The critics even include former President Gerald R. Ford, a member of the Warren Commission.


Ellis P. Steinberg, 71, Chemistry Researcher
Ellis P. Steinberg, a former research director of the Argonne National Laboratory's chemistry division, died Sunday at Bernard Mitchell Hospital in Chicago.
He was 71 years old and lived in Park Forest, Ill.
He died of pancreatic cancer, his wife, Esther, said.


Food Notes
Foie Gras, Some From Afar
The French celebrate Christmas and New Year's with foie gras.
This year, both domestic and imported foie gras are available in the New York region for entertaining in the French style.
The Marketplace at Macy's Herald Square is carrying imported Rougie goose foie gras in port wine aspic.
This is pure foie gras, not a mousse or pate.
A jar with 6.2 ounces of the velvety foie gras is $39.95.
It can be ordered through Macy's at Your Service, (212) 695-4400, extension 2492.
At Caviarteria, 29 East 60th Street, the same item is $60.


And a Dickcissel in a Park Tree
Although they go about their business without any regard to what is happening to them, New York City's birds are now being diligently counted and sorted.
Cadres of birders are out this month in the parks, squares, swamps and waterways conducting the annual Christmas Bird Census.
The census was started almost a century ago by birders who felt it was better to go out on Christmas morning to count birds than shoot them.
Today it takes place on December weekends instead of just on the holiday, but reminders of Christmas still creep into the counting.


FINANCE BRIEFS
COMMON STOCK *
Liberty Bancorp, Chicago, converted its Liberty Federal Savings Bank unit from a mutual savings bank to a stock savings bank through the sale of $33 million in common shares for $10 each to employees, employee benefit plans and depositors.


Guess This Brut's Origin. Wrong! It's New Mexico.
MICHAEL SKURNIK, a wine importer and distributor in Westbury, L.I., received a box of two unfamiliar sparkling wines last March from New Mexico.
The samples were labeled Gruet brut and Gruet blanc de noirs.
He recalls saying to himself: "New Mexico? Forget it!" and putting both bottles aside.
Soon he received a telephone call from the producer.
"We had a very interesting technical conversation," Mr.
Skurnik said.
"I got curious and tried the wines." He ordered the brut almost immediately.


Some Take the High Road, Some the Bus
At 6:45 A.M., most of the 47 passengers aboard Bus 5412 were still in a somnolent sprawl: heads back, mouths open, limbs colliding.
Richmond was a memory and the long, neck-stiffening miles of the Carolinas were yet to unfold.
Then the inky horizon began to glow pink, and the driver, Emmett Diggs Jr., brushed aside talk of discomfort with a hushed tribute to a bus journey's virtues.


Mother Pleads Not Guilty to Stabbing Baby
A 21-year-old woman from Old Bridge pleaded not guilty today at her arraignment in Superior Court to charges that she stabbed her newborn baby to death.
A Middlesex County grand jury indicted Michelle Schnitzer last week on charges of first-degree murder and unlawful possession of a weapon.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.36
4.00
7.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.82
3.74
6.47
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.89
3.84
6.58
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.47
6.45
8.03
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.51
7.52
8.28
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.65
9.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.72
6.72
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Quotation of the Day
"That's what you do when your daughter is standing before you singing a song of purity and hope. You cry." -- BARBARA ROOT, at a school Christmas pageant in Manhattan.  [ 28:6. ]


Norton Loses Theft Lawsuit
The Norton Company has lost a lawsuit that charged a former employee and a competitor with stealing trade secrets of a $20 million product line.
Norton, an abrasives manufacturer, had charged an ex-worker, Gordon E. Hickory, and Abrasive Industries of Florida with the theft of technology used to make steel-cutting wheels for mills and foundries.


Citicorp View On Write-Offs
Citicorp said yesterday that Federal bank examiners had completed their annual review and that the banking company's write-offs of bad loans and reserves for future loan losses were "in line with management expectations."
The company declined to say what its expectations were, but said that earnings would be announced Jan. 21.


Wilder Runs on a Record of Achievement, and Thwarted Efforts
Like all Presidential candidates, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder says he is running on his record.
In one sense, it is a record of huge achievement, the record of a man who overcame poverty and racism to become the first black ever elected governor in the United States.


Sports of The Times; To Hoops On Its 100th
I SENT a Christmas gift recently to the Springfield, Mass., Y.M.C.A.
It was a basketball.
This doesn't exactly make me Kris Kringle, but it was the least I could do.
I've been playing basketball ever since grammar school, ever since high school, ever since college, and still haven't stopped.
I understood Isiah Thomas when he mentioned in an interview why he had built a basketball court in his house.
"Do you play anything else? Golf, say, or tennis?" he was asked.
"No," he said.
"Maybe one day. But, really, any chance I get, I play basketball. I'm still a hooper at heart." There are many levels of hoopers, from Isiah on down to -- well, just on down.


Viola Appears to Be Fit
FRANK VIOLA should be fit to pitch for the Boston Red Sox next season, the team's doctor said yesterday.
Dr.
ARTHUR PAPPAS examined Viola at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester on Monday and said Viola's left elbow, shoulder and hand seemed fine.
Viola, the former Mets left-hander, said yesterday that he felt confident after the physical exam, which was required to complete his three-year, $13.9 million deal with the Red Sox.


Corrections
An article yesterday about plans to extend United States diplomatic recognition to Soviet republics misstated the plan for Armenia.
It is one of six republics that are expected to receive recognition quickly.


CHRONICLE
When ROGER ANGELL's back went into spasm  At The New Yorker, it left a chasm.
No "Greetings, Friends!" could he write,


Bethlehem Journal; On Another Silent Night, Tidings That Bring Hope
Last year was the worst, Nadia Yussef said.
Last year, war was in the air.
Combined with the continuing Palestinian rebellion known as the intifada, it virtually wiped Bethlehem off the tourist map.
Almost no one came.


Bengals, Wyche Part Company
Sam Wyche will not coach the Cincinnati Bengals in 1992, and his departure is as controversial as the style that marked his eight seasons as their coach.
The Bengals' general manager, Mike Brown, said yesterday that Wyche had resigned after a morning meeting that reportedly lasted nearly two hours.
Wyche said later that he did not resign but was dismissed.


Deer Hunting Isn't a Form of Herd Control; Bows Are No Better
To the Editor:
In "Stalkers of the Subdivisions" (Op-Ed, Dec. 14), James Howard Kunstler states we should consider eliminating firearms hunting in the populous northeastern United States for safety reasons.
The hunting accidents, near misses and general fear of stepping out of doors during hunting season provide ample justification for silencing the guns of autumn.


Susan Gulack Weds Stephen Weinstock
Rabbi Susan Gulack and Dr.
Stephen Weinstock were married yesterday at Temple Beth Am in Henrietta, N.Y.
Rabbi Beverly Magidson officiated.
The bride, who is 33 years old and is keeping her name, is the rabbi at Temple Beth Am in Henrietta.
She is the daughter of Marian and Julian Gulack of Fair Lawn, N.J.
She graduated from Rutgers University and was ordained after completing studies at the Academy for Jewish Religion in New York.


Accepting the Harsh Truth Of a Blue-Collar Recession
For all the talk of a "white collar" recession, it is blue-collar workers who have been hardest hit by the current economic slump, losing more jobs and enduring far higher rates of unemployment.
Five times as many blue-collar jobs have evaporated, and jobless rates are more than twice as severe.
More and more, blue-collar workers are facing the harsh truth that though the economy will no doubt come back, their lost jobs are probably gone for good, given the relentless advance of automation and international competition.
Last week's announcement by the General Motors Corporation that it plans to shut 21 assembly plants and shed more than 70,000 jobs over the next few years -- only about a third of the cuts will come from the salaried ranks -- was just the most recent indication that the squeeze on blue-collar factory workers will continue.


Hughes Replaces Motta As Coach of the Kings
Rex Hughes, the former coach of Kent State, was named interim head coach of Sacramento today, replacing Dick Motta, who surprised team officials by announcing in a radio interview on Monday that he planned to retire at the end of the current season.
"In light of Dick's plans to step down at the end of the year, we feel it is important to address our future now," said Rick Benner, president of the Kings.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY PREYING ON DEALERS IN THE BRONX
A kidnapping ring known as "the Crew" that preys on drug dealers in the Bronx has killed as many as a dozen people, most of them hostages who could not meet their ransom demands, the police say.
The ring snatches mid-level dealers at gunpoint and promises their return for ransoms ranging from $200,000 to $300,000.
Page 35.


Beyond His Togs and Coiffure, Riley Is a True Professional
Pat Riley, New Yorkers have discovered, can coach a little.
He has the Knicks leading the Atlantic Division, defending the basket as you would your wallet and assuming roles without a peep when the playing time isn't there.
He can work a game, all right.
He is more than a hairdo and a suit who took a magic carpet ride through the 1980's in Los Angeles.
The best thing about Riley is that he is a professional guy all the way, like K. C. Jones in Seattle, Don Nelson at Golden State, Wes Unseld in Washington, Cotton Fitzsimmons in Phoenix.
These are coaches, their relative talent level notwithstanding, who know what the National Basketball Association is about, who aren't about to resort to we-must-walk or we-must-run gimmickry.
Good teams, they know, do it all.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about Monday's stock market activity referred incorrectly to the taxation of stock market profits and losses.
Monday was the final day for an investor who had shorted a stock to repurchase it for the purpose of claiming a loss in 1991; other transactions that create a gain or loss may be made through Dec. 31.


L.I. Man Held in Stabbing
A Long Island man was arraigned Tuesday on charges that he stabbed his former girlfriend when she asked for money to buy Christmas presents for their children, the police said.
Robert Branch, 48 years old, was arraigned in First District Court in Hauppauge on charges of second-degree attempted murder and contempt of court by violating an order of protection obtained by the woman, said Detective Sgt.
Walter Peterson of the Suffolk County Police.
The victim, Nedennia Jemison, 32, of Coram, was treated for wounds to her neck and upper body at Brookhaven Memorial Hospital, where she was listed in stable condition.


Fannie Mae Redemptions
The Federal National Mortgage Association said today that it would redeem $160 million worth of medium-term note issues on varying dates next year.
Fannie Mae said that on Jan. 23 it would redeem a $20 million issue of 8.2 percent notes due on Jan. 23, 1996, and a $55 million issue of 8.95 percent notes due on Jan. 23, 1997.


Swiss Residents Offer Help To Au Pair Facing Charges
An outpouring of support from citizens of Switzerland -- including one pledge of about $520,000 to help pay her bail -- has been received by the 20-year-old Swiss au pair who faces charges that she murdered a 3-month-old girl in her care by setting fires at a home in Westchester earlier this month.
Swiss newspapers and television have widely publicized the case of Olivia Riner since her arrest on Dec. 2, paying particular attention to the fact that a high bail was set because there is no extradition treaty between her country and the United States.
That has kept her behind bars.


G.M. Gave Bonuses Before Making Cuts
The General Motors Corporation acknowledged today that it paid merit bonuses and increased the pay of much of its salaried work force just before it announced widespread job reductions and plant closings last week.
John Maciarz, a G.M. spokesman, said the bonuses and raises were awarded to many of the company's 100,000 non-executive salaried workers during the week of Dec. 15.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL 2-6  GORBACHEV TO RESIGN TODAY
Yielding to political rejection and the plummeting economy, Mikhail S. Gorbachev plans to announce his resignation as President of the defunct Soviet Union on television today, his office said.
Page 1


F.B.I. Defends Genetic Tests
The Federal Bureau of Investigation yesterday defended its methods of using genetic tests in the courtroom and denied that it had pressured scientists who criticized its techniques.
The bureau was responding to reports published last week in newspapers and the magazine Science that the bureau's genetic-testing methods could have serious flaws and that agents had helped Federal prosecutors trying to silence skeptics of the methods.


Bridge
Bridge games at Christmas are rather different from those played at other times of the year: There is plenty of merriment and giving, and rather more inebriation than concentration.
The diagramed example was reported by Simon Klein of Huntington, L.I., who held the South hand in a Christmas Eve game two years ago.
A brisk auction led to four hearts, which would have been beaten quickly if West had been inspired to lead the club king.
He could then have scored his heart nine on the fourth round of the suit.
A red-suit lead would have allowed South to make an overtrick, but West chose the obvious spade king, which happened to attack a crucial entry to the dummy.


Make Room for the Cambodians
Inclusiveness, the world was told only two months ago, was the key to peace in Cambodia.
The Khmer Rouge, murderers of more than a million Cambodians in the 1970's, had to be included in the U.N. transition formula, because otherwise they could destabilize arrangements from the outside.
Likewise, Prime Minister Hun Sen's Vietnamese-sponsored faction had to be included to appease Vietnam and protect fragile institutional gains since the 1979 eviction of Pol Pot.


Economic Scene
AMERICA'S frustration with Japan's growing trade surplus is threatening to boil over again.
The common complaint, echoed both in Congress and the Administration, is that the cheap dollar is not curing the United States trade deficit.
But contrary to the politicians' claims, argues Paul Krugman, an international economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology whose views were published recently by Science magazine and the Institute for International Economics, the cheap dollar has worked better than people realize.
He calls stagnating productivity, not the trade deficit, America's top economic problem.


Just What's So Hot About a Toddy? The Heat
A CHAMPAGNE fete is usually giddy; punch and eggnog summon memories of office parties past; cocktails are individual roads to a communal state.
The hot toddy, on the other hand, is an intimate libation.
To serve a toddy is to court collective childhood, to stitch a seam between public life and private worlds, to risk guests' wistfulness for flannel nighties.
A crystal flute carries one message from fingers to brain; a heavy, hot mug carries another.
Some toddy drinkers believe the message is enhanced by the physiological properties of warmed alcohol.
A warmed shot is a mellowing shot, they say.
And that may explain why warm cocktails are most often served at the end of a meal: it's a civilized way of saying good night.


Treasuries Edge Up in Light Trading
The Treasury bond market closed with slight gains yesterday, rebounding from a spate of selling early in the day.
Securities dealers said the sharp rise in bond prices that had occurred since the Federal Reserve's sharp cut in short-term rates last Friday was the catalyst for some selling yesterday by traders who wanted to lock in profits.


Women Who Lose Breasts Define Their Own Femininity
Twenty to 30 years ago, women with breast cancer worried that even if they survived the disease, the loss of a breast would somehow diminish their femininity and sexual attractiveness.
Many women hid their mastectomies, disguising their single-breasted figures with cumbersome prostheses even around family members.
Today, women are less likely to perceive breast cancer as an attack on their innate feminine nature.
For one thing, more and more women are having surgery that removes the malignancy but spares the breast.
When a mastectomy is necessary, more and more women are having reconstructive surgery using an implant or their own fatty tissue.


A Disney Dress Code Chafes In the Land of Haute Couture
Should the French have to shave their beards or scrap their lacy tights for a Mickey Mouse job?
The Walt Disney Company, which is in the midst of hiring some 12,000 people to maintain and populate its Euro Disneyland theme park near Paris, thinks so.
But in making detailed rules on acceptable clothing, hair styles and jewelry, among other things, part of its terms of employment, the company finds itself caught in a legal and cultural dispute.
A Court Is Investigating
The controversy has risen above the usual labor squabble as critics in the press, at universities and elsewhere have joined in asking how brash Americans could be so insensitive to French culture, individualism and privacy.
Most of the critics, and many people on the street, seem amazed, if not amused, that Disney found it necessary to put such a subjective and personal hygiene code in writing, and to make its violation a firing offense for everyone from the actors portraying Mickey and Minnie who greet visitors to the chambermaids cleaning hotel rooms.


Republics to Assemble Joint Team
The chief of the former Soviet Olympic Committee said today that he had won pledges of financial support from abroad to field a team at the 1992 games under the Olympic flag, the Tass news agency reported.
Vitaly Smirnov said in an open letter that 11 former Soviet republics have agreed to send a joint team to the Winter Games at Albertville, France, in February and the Summer Games at Barcelona, Spain, Tass said.


Review/Television; Subtitles Explain a Complicated Ballet
The "Great Performances" series on PBS has come up with the perfect Christmas treat in Natalia Makarova's production of "La Bayadere," which was videotaped in March in a performance by the Royal Ballet at the Royal Opera House in London and is being broadcast tonight at 9 o'clock on Channels 13, 21 and 49.
This is a ballet that truly has something for everyone: a sumptuously melodic score by Minkus, a plot as thumpingly dramatic as any old-time children's Saturday movie matinee or silent-screen film, with class and a redeeming whiff of ballet history.
It also has exciting lead roles for four dancers.
And the performers here are international stars.


Dow Gains 28.40 More, To 3,050.98
Stocks rose sharply yesterday in an abbreviated pre-holiday session, led by large industrial stocks still being swept along by the Federal Reserve's interest-rate cut on Friday.
The Dow Jones industrial average added 28.40 more points to its 88-point leap on Monday, adjourning for Christmas at 3,050.98.
The Dow traded far higher during the day, at one point momentarily surpassing its record close of 3,077.15, set on Oct. 18.


60-Minute Gourmet
WHILE looking for a festive dish for Christmas week, I thought of veal.
It is relatively expensive and considered a treat.
I began thinking about recipes that could be done in well under 60 minutes.
One dish I prepared when I was chef at Le Pavillon restaurant in Manhattan was veal Orloff.
It's a classic, rich dish and Larousse Gastronomique says the recipe may have been originated more than 100 years ago by Urbain Dubois, who was the cook for a Prince Orloff in France.
It uses a boned loin; it is a preparation that calls for slicing the loin before cooking, and each slice is covered with a mushroom mixture; then all is reassembled.
My version is easier.
Instead of a whole loin, it begins with four center-cut chops.


Soviet U.N. Seat Taken by Russia
The Russian republic formally notified the United Nations today that it was taking over the moribund Soviet Union's permanent Security Council seat as well as all its other rights and obligations in the world organization.
The notification came in the form of a letter signed by President Boris N. Yeltsin and given to Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar by Yuri M. Vorontsov, the former Soviet representative, who has now been reaccredited as the representative of the Russian Federation.


A. J. McClane, 69, A Sport Fisherman And Angling Writer
A.
J.
McClane, a sport fisherman and prolific writer on angling, died of congestive heart failure on Saturday in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 69 years old.
For more than four decades, Mr.
McClane was the most familiar and respected byline in angling literature.
The longtime fishing editor of Field &amp; Stream magazine, he also wrote more than 20 books, many of which sold widely and were standards in their field.


Ring That Kidnaps Drug Dealers Is Linked by Police to Murders
A loose-knit kidnapping ring that preys on drug dealers is responsible for as many as a dozen murders, most of them of hostages who could not meet their steep ransom demands, the police said.
The kidnapping ring, known as "The Crew," has been active for a little more than a year, snatching mid-level dealers at gunpoint and promising their return for ransoms ranging from $200,000 to $300,000, said Inspector Donald E. Moss, the executive officer of the Bronx detectives squad.
The group's activities were originally reported Tuesday in The New York Post.


This Artist Draws Inspiration From His Birds, All 72 of Them
HUNT SLONEM greeted us holding a spiny brown bundle.
It was his pet hedgehog, a squirming little conversation starter if ever there was one.
"He's my third one," Mr.
Slonem said, leaving us to guess the fate of the predecessors, all named Mr.
Hedgehog.


Suit by U.S. Accuses Miami Beach of Bias in Hiring Police Officers and Firefighters
In a lawsuit made public here late Monday, the Department of Justice has accused the City of Miami Beach of discriminating against black and Hispanic people seeking jobs as police officers and firefighters.
The action by the Bush Administration came after more than five months of negotiations between Federal and city officials in an effort to get an out-of-court agreement that would avoid a long and costly legal battle.
Those talks began after the Federal Government decided that the written tests given to applicants for police and firefighter jobs in Miami Beach were unfair to members of minorities.


BRIEFS
*
IvaxCorp., Miami, a pharmaceuticals concern, said its wholly owned unit Baker Cummins Pharmaceuticals Inc. acquired all the common stock of Baker Cummins Dermatologicals Inc., a unit of the Union Carbide Corporation, in exchange for Ivax common stock. *
MGM Grand Inc., Beverly Hills, Calif., completed the sale of the Desert Inn Casino/Hotel to Tracinda Corp. for $130 million.


GORBACHEV PLANS TO GIVE UP POWER TO YELTSIN TODAY
Driven out by political rejection and the plummeting economy, Mikhail S. Gorbachev plans to announce his resignation as President of the defunct Soviet Union on Wednesday in a television address to the nation, his office said today.
Immediately after, the launching codes for the Soviet nuclear arsenal are to be handed over to President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, according to the transition plan for shifting Soviet power to the new Commonwealth of Independent States.


Without Presidency to Shoot For, Cuomo Takes Aim at Republicans
In the four days since he announced that he would not run for President, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo seems to have sharpened the vitriol he directs at the Republicans who control the New York State Senate, whom he depicted as forcing him to renounce a presidential candidacy because they would not agree with him on a solution to state's budget woes.
The Governor has stepped up warnings that he will use his veto power to be a player over the coming months in state lawmakers' reapportionment of both their own districts and those of the New York Congressional delegation.


Giving, So There Can Be Gifts


49ers Punish the Playoff-Bound Bears
The Chicago Bears were quick to cling to their consolation prize.
"We're still playing," quarterback Jim Harbaugh said.
Beaten, 52-14, by the San Francisco 49ers in their regular-season finale on Monday night, the Bears had little else to grab hold of as they shifted their focus to the playoffs.


Small Israeli Party Threatens to Quit the Coalition
The leader of a small far-right political party said today that he was resigning his Cabinet post and pulling his party out of the governing coalition to protest Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's stand on proposals to change Israel's electoral system.
The resignation does not of itself threaten to topple the Shamir Government, which after losing the Tsomet Party's two seats in Parliament still holds a slender majority of 64 seats in the 120-member body.


Women Who Lose Breasts Define Their Own Femininity
Twenty to 30 years ago, women with breast cancer worried that even if they survived the disease, the loss of a breast would somehow diminish their femininity and sexual attractiveness.
Many women hid their mastectomies, disguising their single-breasted figures with cumbersome prostheses even around family members.
Today, women are less likely to perceive breast cancer as an attack on their innate feminine nature.
For one thing, more and more women are having surgery that removes the malignancy but spares the breast.
When a mastectomy is necessary, more and more women are having reconstructive surgery using an implant or their own fatty tissue.


Reflecting On Russia, With Hope And Fear
Just when they were beginning to adjust to American culture and life in the National Hockey League, the four Russian players in the New York metropolitan area find themselves in a state of uncertainty about the political upheaval back home and how it affects their families.
The Devils' Vyacheslav Fetisov, the heralded captain of the Soviet national team in its glory days and a native of Moscow, was the most willing to speak about life in his homeland.


New Tradition For Kwanzaa: Marketing, American Style
THE wind whistled Christmas as it toyed with scores of shoppers in Harlem who braved low temperatures and high prices to carry out a modern holiday ritual of giving and getting.
There were expensive video games to buy, dolls to overdress and lines to wait in to see a department store Santa.
But at the same time in Harlem, as in thousands of other American neighborhoods in which blacks live, another wind blows strong this yuletide season.
It is Kwanzaa, an elegantly African and aggressively American holiday of affirmation.


Stocks Higher in Tokyo
Stock prices soared nearly 2 percent in Tokyo today.
At the midday recess, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 419.75 points, or 1.9 percent, to 22,008.28.
On Tuesday, the index lost 132.30 points.


Corrections
A recipe for leek and potato soup in the "60-Minute Gourmet" column on Dec. 18 omitted a step.
A corrected version follows.
Leek and Potato Soup  2 large leeks  1 pound medium potatoes, like yellow gold, Washington or Idaho  4 tablespoons butter  1 cup finely chopped onions  3 cups fresh or canned chicken stock  2 cups water  1 bay leaf  Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste.
1.
Leeks have a great deal of sand between the leaves and must be carefully cleaned.
To do this, trim off the root end and cut off and discard the long green stems.
Split the leeks lengthwise from the stem end, then turn and split them one more time.
Rinse well.
Separate the leaves under cold running water, then chop into 1/4-inch pieces.
2. Peel the potatoes and cut them into 1/4-inch cubes (about 2 cups).
3.
Melt 2 tablespoons of butter in a saucepan; add the onions and the chopped leeks.
Cook over medium heat, stirring, until wilted.
Do not brown.
4.
Add the potatoes, chicken broth, water, bay leaf, salt and pepper, and simmer for 30 minutes.
5.
Remove from the heat, remove the bay leaf, add the remaining butter and stir.
Adjust the seasonings and serve piping hot with croutons.
Yield: 4 to 6 servings.


Deer Hunting Isn't a Form of Herd Control; Shame of Our Refuges
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 1 article on wildlife refuges points to some of the abuses that have transformed the nation's system of 472 refuges into areas of little protection for the wildlife and waterfowl species they were established to preserve.
The national wildlife refuge system, which is managed with our tax dollars, has become a set of lands catering to the few at the expense of the animals, the environment and the integrity of the entire system.
These few are the recreational hunters and commercial trappers, who represent 3 percent of annual refuge visitors.


INSIDE
Hemophilia and AIDS
Hemophiliacs, whose repeated use of blood products has left them devastated by AIDS, are demanding Government help.
Page 7.
Burmese Unrest Is Widening
The military junta in Myanmar, formerly Burma, is reinforcing troops to counter widening civil unrest.
Page 3.
Gov.
Wilder's Record
Like the fiscal conservative he professes to be, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder is running for President on his record of cutting the Virginia budget.
Page 8.
Why a Jails Chief Fell
Allyn R. Sielaff ran prison systems in four states and built an impressive record.
Then he came to New York City.
Page 33.


Hit Hard by the AIDS Virus, Hemophiliacs Angrily Speak Out
When doctors discovered four years ago that Michael Coons Jr., who has hemophilia, was infected with the virus that causes AIDS, his parents knew what to do.
"We made a pact on the way home from the doctor's office that we would never talk about it, that we would keep it to ourselves and never tell anybody," his mother, Carolyn Coons, said.


Can California Sparkling Wine Taste Like Champagne? The Quest Goes On
WHEN wine critics compare California sparkling wines with French Champagnes, they often find the California versions lacking.
But this has not discouraged wine makers here, who remain convinced that they can make a sparkling wine as good as anybody's.
Indeed, producing a sparkling wine to equal Champagne has become a sort of vinous holy grail, an elusive but endlessly fascinating goal.
And despite a declining market for Champagne and sparkling wines -- consumption in the United States is down to an estimated 14 million cases in 1991 from 18 million in 1986 -- three major wineries have recently joined the quest, with a fourth coming soon.


D.A. Meets on Barkley
An assistant district attorney in Milwaukee County met yesterday with a man whom the Philadelphia 76ers star CHARLES BARKLEY is accused of assaulting in an early-morning fight on Sunday.
"It's a serious matter, at the least the injuries were serious," said the prosecutor, MICHAEL STEINHAFEL, who met with 25-year-old JAMES R. McCARTHY, who suffered a broken nose in the fight.


When the Actors Are All Under 5, Anything Can Happen


Cray Computer
Shares of the Cray Computer Corporation lost about half their value after the company said it had lost its only customer.
Cray shares fell $5.125 each in over-the-counter trading to close at $5.75.
More than 7 million shares changed hands.
Late Monday, Cray said that the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory had decided to switch to a computer system offered by a competitor, Cray Research Inc., which is not affiliated with Cray Computer.
Cray Computer said the loss of the Lawrence Livermore business would cost it about $30 million in anticipated revenues in 1992.
Cray Research shares jumped $3.25 each on the New York Stock Exchange, closing at $37.75.


Scenes From Christmas in New York


Boy Ordered to Court Over $2 Library Fine
An 8-year-old boy who owes $2 in overdue library fines could face larceny charges if he does not show up in court to give an explanation.
The boy, James DeFrancisco, was among more than two dozen people who were notified to appear in District Court on Monday in a crackdown on failure to return books to the town library.
The $2 fine is the maximum the library imposes.





Review/Music; A Rare Opportunity For Young Musicians In a Long-Gone Style
The holiday concerts by the New York String Orchestra have become one of the season's more endearing traditions over the last 23 years, more for the promise of continuity they embody than for the performances themselves.
The orchestra's 60 musicians are high school, college and conservatory students from 15 to 22 years old.
They visit New York City on full scholarships for 11 days of chamber music and orchestral coaching in a seminar that is sponsored jointly by Carnegie Hall, the New School Concerts and the city's Department of Cultural Affairs.
During their stay, the players give a few orchestral concerts conducted by the program's founder and director, Alexander Schneider.
The first of this year's offerings, a midnight concert at Carnegie Hall on Christmas Eve, was a reassuring reminder that there are young musicians who regard the classical repertory as a vibrant heritage and are eager to become part of it.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  UNBOWED, GORBACHEV RESIGNS
Mikhail S. Gorbachev told an anxious nation that he was resigning as President.
In a leanly worded television address, Mr.
Gorbachev made no attempt to mask his regret at being forced from office or his concern that the Soviet Union was no more.
A1  WHERE IDEOLOGY FAILED
The Soviet state, marked throughout its history by great achievement and terrible suffering, died after a long and painful decline.
Conceived in utopianism and born in the violence of Lenin's revolution, the union heaved its last, bankrupt and hungry.
A1  U.S.
TO RECOGNIZE REPUBLICS
President Bush praised Mr.
Gorbachev for his role in history, bade him farewell, and said the U.S. would recognize the independence of the 12 former Soviet republics.
A1  And what is to happen now, a Soviet militiaman was asked.
A13  U.S. will need embassies in at least half a dozen new capitals.
A16  Georgia's beleaguered President promised to fight to the death.
A16  KURDS STRIKE IN ISTANBUL
Separatists shouting "Long live Kurdistan!" threw firebombs at a department store in Istanbul, setting the seven-story building ablaze and killing 11 people.
A5  ISRAEL AND THE GULF WAR
The Israeli Air Force commander was quoted as saying that the United States had a contingency plan in the gulf war that would have allowed Israel to retaliate against Iraq for its Scud missile attacks while American pilots kept out of the way.
A3  MUSLIM CHALLENGE IN ALGERIA
Elections for Algeria's Parliament, scheduled to start today, will be the first open challenge in free voting by Islamic fundamentalists to a secular Arab Government.
A3  Prince Rupert Journal: The fishermen and the nuclear subs.
A4 Iraqi foes of Hussein planning a new uprising.
A6 Kim Il Sung's son was named to head the North Korean Army.
A8  The Pope, seeing some hope, deplored the Yugoslav civil war.
A10  Christmas in Croatia can be a brief respite, like Mass in shelters.
A11  After Communism, fear of vengeance in Prague and Budapest.
A9  National A18-21, A26, B13-15, D11-12  AND A GLOOMY NEW YEAR
Christmas was bleak for retailers, who expect spending for the month to be flat or up only slightly over last December.
A1  HAWAII WITHOUT PINEAPPLES
Hawaii is losing its pineapple plantations to foreign competition, and when the fields go to alfalfa and oats, the pineapple crews will probably have to take jobs in the booming hotel business or leave home for work.
A1  APOLOGETIC HE ISN'T
Tom Harkin, driving straight for the true believers in the Democratic Party, appears to be running for President the way other men might pick a fight.
D11  Heflin says he is tired of judging his fellow senators.B15  CONCERN OVER CABINET PAPERS
Congressional investigators said some Cabinet members, upon leaving office, took classified Government documents without the knowledge of the agencies they headed and without properly safeguarding secret information.
D12  CITY ON EDGE OF INSOLVENCY
Leaders of Scranton, Pennsylvania's fifth-largest city, filed what amounts to a bankruptcy petition with the state.
A18  IN BED OF ROSES, THORNS
The politics of culture is casting a shadow over the Tournament of Roses parade in Pasadena.
The spectacle could include protests from minority groups over one of the grand marshals, who is a descendant of Christopher Columbus.
A18  CARS AS CRIME CONTROL
A Portland, Ore., law that allows confiscation of cars used for prostitution and drunken driving has led to a dramatic drop in those crimes, the police say, but some lawyers argue that the law is unconstitutional.
A20  Santa Claus is growing into his name.
A21  A new courtroom caters to victims of domestic violence.
B14  Metropolitan Digest, B1 WASTE: A 900-MILE JOURNEY
Garbage isn't just garbage anymore.
Following the trail of Ocke Ketelsen's garbage from Westbury, L.I., to Taylorville, Ill., shows why waste disposal is such a touchy environmental and political issue.
A1  Neediest Cases B9  Business Digest D1  The Home Section C1-11  Not quite twins.
C1  Encores for curtains in Britain.
C1  A tiny space, big on patterns.
C1  Where to Find It.
C2  Inside ordinary things.
C2  Currents.
C3  Home Improvement.
C4  Unclassifiable landscaper.
C8  Arts/Entertainment C13-20  Saving the world's architectural heritage.
C13  Theater: "Lotto." C13  Film: "Inspector Lavardin." C13  Music: New York String Orchestra at Carnegie Hall.
C13  "Kennedy Center Honors." D18  Rethinking the campaigns.
D18  Obituaries D14  General Richard G. Stilwell, former commander of U.N. forces in Korea.
Sports B18-25  Baseball: Tartabull talks centering on Angels.
B21  Basketball: Bulls overrun Celtics.
B22  Columns: Rhoden on N.B.A. images.
B19 On Horse Racing.
B24  Football: Jets happy to work on a holiday.
B19  Parcells reportedly offered big pact by Bucs.
B20  Mario Bailey leads Washington into Rose Bowl.
B22  Georgia Tech wins Aloha Bowl.
B22  Hockey: Crossroads to the big time.
B21  Ice Dancing: Duchesnays going for the gold.
B19  Skiing: Killy hopes to make his dream come true.
B24  Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25  Editorials A24  The revolutionary.
Jails commissioner.
Fight cancer, not RU-486.
Topics: Underground.
Letters A24  Tom Wicker: Toward the ideal.
A25  William Safire: Optimists are realists.
A25  Leonard Bernstein: Wagner's music isn't racist.
A25  Marvin Kalb: Campaign coverage: What price virtue?
A25


Review/Theater; Dreams of Winning That Turn Into a Nightmare
Every situation in Cliff Roquemore's "Lotto: Experience the Dream," at the Billie Holiday Theater in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, is familiar, and virtually every line could be picked out of the air from any week's television fare.
But surprisingly, it all works quite well; laughter builds until, at the end of two hours, the audience is shouting.
Mr.
Roquemore, who is directing his own work, is an old hand at movies, television and theater, and very smooth.
He creates the impression that he simply got together a first-rate scenic designer, Felix E. Cochren, with an exuberant group of actors, told them to clown around and then wrote around them.
That illusion draws in the audience and makes it much more receptive to all the old comic tricks that make up the play.


Pasadena Journal; This Year, Parade Isn't Smelling Like a Rose
Given the verities of Southern California weather, it is unlikely to rain on the Tournament of Roses parade on New Year's Day.
But almost everything else could go wrong.
A coalition of American Indians, blacks and Hispanic Americans has made veiled threats to disrupt the floral spectacle because one of its two grand marshals is Cristobal Colon, a Spanish aristocrat who is the direct descendant, 20 generations removed, of Christopher Columbus.
Keeping the peace will be 763 Los Angeles County sheriff's deputies, among whose ranks, says a Federal judge, lurks a band of neo-Nazis.


Short of Cash, Scranton Is Reorganizing
Unable to please the people and pay the bills, the City Council here in the state's fifth-largest city has filed what amounts to a bankruptcy petition with the state.
If the city meets state criteria for being designated a "distressed municipality," the state will in January appoint an administrator with broad powers to reorganize city agencies and dictate new labor contracts.
The current contracts are strangling the city's budget.


New Rule Set For Brokers In Housing
Starting on Jan. 1, prospective home buyers and sellers in New York State will have to sign forms that make it clear for whom a real-estate agent works.
A result of two years of negotiations between the state and the real-estate industry, the new law is expected to promote the use of separate agents by buyers and sellers.
State officials say that most home buyers do not realize that the agent usually represents the seller.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Jimmy Johnson  Chicago Blues
The rhetoric of passion is so refined and effective in American popular music that a good singer can give the least significant text the dressings of importance.
On Saturday night, in a rare New York appearance, the guitarist and singer Jimmy Johnson sang a song about his van (equipped with a water bed and a bar), a song about a mojo hand (a spell cast on him) and the song "The Things That I Used to Do," three cliches as undeniable as the national debt.
He sang them in a clenched tenor, embellishing them with guitar solos that stuttered and flew.
After a few minutes' reflection, it was clear that the songs weren't really meant to be believed -- Mr.
Johnson knows a novelty song when he sings it -- but the sound of his voice implies everything about heartbreak, overdue taxes and divorce.


Essay; Optimists Are the Realists
For Americans, 1492, 1776, 1862, 1945 and 1991 were the five best years of the past five centuries.
That's making a fairly big claim for this current year, especially when the Gloomy Guses are wailing about hard times, nuclear instability and holes in the ozone layer.


Walter Hudson, 46; Called Heaviest Man
Walter Hudson, who was once listed in "The Guinness Book of World Records" as the heaviest man on earth, died on Tuesday evening at his home in Hempstead, L.I.
He was 46 years old.
He died apparently of a heart attack, the police said.
They said the Nassau County Medical Examiner would perform an autopsy later this week.


Lageman Takes a Little Off the Top as Jets Enjoy Their Christmas 'Gift'
He got to keep most of his ponytail, but defensive end Jeff Lageman did show up for the Jets' practice today with a modified "Mohawk-style" haircut.
"Scott Mersereau cut one side of it and James Hasty did the other," said Lageman, the Jets' sack leader this year with 10, who promised the meaner look if the Jets got into post-season play.


An Ignorant Commissioner
Allyn Sielaff, who resigned Monday as head of New York City's jail system, insists he had no knowledge of contracting practices that smacked of favoritism, or worse.
But ignorance is no excuse, and he has been repeatedly ignorant.
His resignation is welcome.
The triggering incident began with plans to reduce the jail population by releasing prisoners for confinement at home under "electronic supervision" -- bracelets that transmit signals to central monitors.
After Corrections gave the contract to the BI Monitoring Corporation, a Colorado company, rejected bidders complained of unfair treatment.


Concern Rises on Papers Taken by Top Officials
When President Richard M. Nixon resigned in 1974 and wanted to take tape-recorded conversations from his Presidency with him, Congress acted quickly to halt a tradition that allowed Presidents to treat Oval Office records as personal property.
But the Presidential Records Act of 1978, which was upheld in December 1991 by a Federal district judge ruling on a lawsuit by Mr.
Nixon, said nothing about Cabinet members.


A Tiny Place, But It's Big On Patterns
THEOLOGIANS supposedly like to contemplate the number of angels dancing on the head of a pin.
Julie Mannion likes to ask herself how many patterns can dance on the surfaces of her 360-square-foot studio apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
Lately, the answer is 11.


ALGERIAN ELECTION TESTS GOVERNMENT
Algeria's parliamentary elections, scheduled to start on Thursday, will be the first open challenge in free voting by Islamic fundamentalists to a secular Arab government.
In Algeria, which has made the greatest strides toward multiparty democracy in the region over the past two years, the biggest opposition party and major contender for power is the Islamic Salvation Front, a militant fundamentalist group whose leaders oppose constitutional rule.


Harkin Seeks to Recall Democrats' History, Though Some Fear It
There is still a long line for the breakfast buffet grits and refried beans -- when Jim Hightower, the former Texas Agriculture Commissioner, is called on to introduce the featured speaker.
He grabs the podium and starts in with the adjectives.
"This is a guy who is an unabashed, unapologetic, ungentrified, un-Republicanized, old-time, little people's Democrat," Mr.
Hightower says, and the crowd lays down its collective fork and starts cheering.
"Not just a progressive, but a person who is a-ggressive. This is a guy who knows how to take on these effete elites in the White House: George Herbert Walker Bush of Kennebunkport, C. Boyden Gray of the R. J. Reynolds inheritance and J. Danforth Quayle 3d of Pluto and points beyond."


Fight Cancer, Not RU-486
Women's fear of breast cancer is grounded in reality: One of every nine American women will be found to have the disease.
So it's sad and even infuriating that one very promising drug treatment can't be tested in this country.
The drug is RU-486, which might well be effective against breast cancer.
But RU-486, used in conjunction with prostaglandin, is a safe and effective abortion agent.
And Roussel-Uclaf, the French company that developed RU-486, won't even test it in this country because it fears that American anti-abortion activists will stop buying its other pharmaceuticals.
The company has even turned down requests for cooperation on breast cancer studies from two American cancer centers.


Uncertainty Haunts Former Pan Am Workers
This was the Christmas that Herman Kobetitsch and 10,000 other Pan Am workers hoped they would never have.
Out of a job at the airline, which shut down three weeks ago, Mr.
Kobetitsch has little except memories to show for his 35 years as a mechanic.


Imperfect Pitch
While countless orchestras and string quartets have been celebrating the 200th anniversary of Mozart's death this year, historians and biographers have labored to correct the public perception of his life.
In a flood of bicentennial books and articles, they insist that Mozart wasn't the flake that Tom Hulce portrayed in "Amadeus." And a London newspaper has corrected its obituary.
On Christmas Day 1791, The Observer reported that Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, "the celebrated German composer," had died 10 days earlier in Vienna.
This year it confessed it had erred -- twice.
"We are now able to confirm," it said in belated correction, "that the composer died on Dec. 5 and was, in fact, Austrian . . . We should like to take this opportunity to apologize to the composer's family for any distress."


Frames That Conserve
Bark Frameworks 85 Grand Street (near Greene Street),  New York, N.Y. 10013; (212) 431-9080.
A picture frame that merely looks good is a failure, says Jared Bark, who owns Bark Frameworks in SoHo.
"A frame is a structure to protect the artwork," he explained.
"It should never damage the work."


Child Poverty in the U.S. Continues to Grow
To the Editor:
"Senator Moynihan," your Dec. 9 Washington Memo reports, "has become a press agent of sorts, for a statistic that was drawn from a research project called the Panel Study of Income Dynamics at the University of Michigan. It concludes that 22 percent of all American children born in the late 1960's spent at least a year on welfare before age 18. Among blacks, the figure was 72 percent."


Review/Television; A Big Round of Applause at the Kennedy Center
Those occasions when show business and official Washington rub shoulders for the world to see are not all that common.
But when they do occur, as at the Kennedy Center's annual televised gala honoring the lifetime achievements of American artists, show business tends to turn pompous, while official Washington becomes folksy.
And in "The Kennedy Center Honors: A Celebration of the Performing Arts," a two-hour special that airs tonight at 9 on CBS, the blend of oratory and corn is thoroughly engaging, if a bit overblown.
Taped on Dec. 8 in the Opera House at the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, with George and Barbara Bush in attendance, this year's gala honors the musical comedy writers Betty Comden and Adolph Green, the fraternal tap-dancing team of Fayard and Harold Nicholas, the country music giant Roy Acuff, the actor Gregory Peck and the conductor Robert Shaw.


Recession-Ravaged Town Grieves for 6 Children
Fire Chief James Staffo has been thinking about life and probability lately.
Two years ago today, his men failed to rescue three children and their mother from a trailer park fire in nearby Manheim.
Then last Sunday morning -- again, just before Christmas -- another fire claimed the lives of all six children of Sheila McLeod on East Monroe Street.
Chief Staffo wonders whether an engine company or a fire chief can be cursed.
He tries to comfort the firemen, many of them fathers, who see the dead children when they shut their eyes.
His own eyes are puffy from insomnia; their spidery red lines seem a map of grief's back roads.


Congress Is Impatient for South Asia Bureau
Coping with daily changes in the map of Eastern Europe, the State Department is also faced with the task of rearranging Asia -- though only in an organizational sense.
After six years of trying, Congress in August attached to a State Department financial authorization bill the requirement that a new bureau for South Asia be created so that the Indian subcontinent, from Afghanistan to Bangladesh, would get more attention.
Now Congress wants the department to stop stalling and act on the legislation.


Richard G. Stilwell, 74, Is Dead; Commanded U.N. Forces in Korea
Gen.
Richard G. Stilwell, retired, former commander of United Nations forces in Korea, died Wednesday at Fairfax County Hospital in Falls Church, Va.
He was 74 years old.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, the Army said.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
ALTHOUGH complete soundproofing is difficult and virtually always requires remodeling, it is usually fairly easy and inexpensive to reduce street noise or noise passing between the floors and rooms of a house.
The easiest way to combat noise is to use a white-noise generator, an electronic device available at department stores for around $50.
It produces a gentle rushing sound, which helps mask the sounds of traffic and voices.
The generators are small enough to fit under a bed.
Travel models, which are even smaller but cost around $100, are also available.


GORBACHEV, LAST SOVIET LEADER, RESIGNS; U.S. RECOGNIZES REPUBLICS' INDEPENDENCE
Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the trailblazer of the Soviet Union's retreat from the cold war and the spark for the democratic reforms that ended 70 years of Communist tyranny, told a weary, anxious nation tonight that he was resigning as President and closing out the union.
"I hereby discontinue my activities at the post of President of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics," declared the 60-year-old politician, the last leader of a totalitarian empire that was undone across the six years and nine months of his stewardship.


Israel Impeding Hostage Return, Cleric Says
Israel's brief abduction of three Lebanese Shiite Muslims will complicate efforts to end Middle East hostage taking, especially the case of missing Israeli servicemen, a pro-Iranian leader said today.
"There is no doubt that such operations will not contribute at all to completing the swap operation," said Sheik Abbas Musawi, a clerical leader of the fundamentalist Party of God.


Killy Hoping His Dream Come True Won't Melt Under Shroud of Snow
Lack of snow may have been the blight of Alpine skiers during three of the last four winters, but that is precisely what Jean-Claude Killy is hoping for when the Winter Olympic Games open in the towns and slopes around Albertville, France, next Feb. 8.
Since he is co-president of the Olympic Organizing Committee, the former downhill champion's only worry can hardly be the weather.
But as he sat in his Paris office enjoying a brief respite between inspection visits to Albertville and promotional tours around the world, it was uppermost on his mind.


BUSH LAUDS VISION OF SOVIET LEADER
President Bush moved quickly tonight to recognize Russia and other former republics of the now-extinct Soviet Union.
After praising the former Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Mr.
Bush went out of his way to express support for President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, who has emerged as the first among equals in the new Commonwealth of Independent States and as the custodian of the old Soviet Union's nuclear arsenal.


For Aging Curtains, Encores
LIKE all good ideas, it is a simple one. Also, it is ideally suited to a recession.
"People now borrow ballgowns to go to balls, so what's the difference?" Kari Biscoe said as she picked through used chintzes, moires and cottons at the Curtain Exchange in Fulham in southwest London, looking for curtains for her Norfolk country house.


The Legacy of Luro: A Winner With Style
The Sport of Kings lost one of its kings 11 days ago when Horatio Luro died in Florida.
He was 90 years old and a striking figure of a man, tall and urbane, the master of half a dozen languages who moved elegantly across the thoroughbred racing landscape of three continents for 60 years, buying and training horses, establishing landmark bloodlines, winning the big ones and charming owners and stablehands alike.
In a business that keeps trying to identify itself and its "product," Horatio Luro instinctively figured it all out: Horse racing isn't just nine races a day, it's a way of life.
And he pursued it with style and gusto.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American International Group Inc., New York, an insurance company, promoted Axel I. Freudmann to senior vice president of human resources. *
California Federal Bank, Los Angeles, named Richard Fitch, David C. Henri and Mark K. Ulmer executive vice presidents.


The Flowering Witch Hazel: A Bit of Wintertime Cheer
THE words witch hazel evoke childhood memories of hot summer nights and a fragrant astringent to soothe itchy mosquito bites.
The words also denote a small genus of easily grown shrubs, the source of this traditional remedy.
While known for its spectacular autumn color, some species are also appreciated for spidery winter flowers.
These brighten those frosty days when few plants dare show a bloom.


Fiat's First Family Seeks To Offset an Auto Slump
Faced with the likelihood of several troubled years in the auto industry and a looming, unpredictable challenge from Japan, the Agnelli family that controls Fiat S.p.A., Italy's greatest car-making empire, is looking elsewhere to offset the potential damage, executives and analysts say.
That has been the thinking behind a strategy in recent years to diversify into the French food, hotel and beverage market as Fiat's car-making operations have slumped in the see-sawing European and domestic markets.


The Revolutionary
"My life's work has been accomplished. I have done all I could." With a self-awareness seldom seen in political figures, Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev acknowledges the end of his tenure as the last leader of the Soviet empire.
He believed too deeply in socialism.
And he failed to foresee how his questioning of Marxism-Leninism would lead to the overthrow, not the restructuring, of the Soviet system, or how his democratic opening would spawn the nationalist movements that have fractured the union.


Critic's Notebook; Seeking Ways to Elevate The Presidential Race
As the 1992 Presidential campaign stutters to a start like an old car in a December frost, thoughts turn to what sort of television show it will be.
Will it once again be masterminded by operators with more skill than scruple, a la 1988?
Or will the politicians be constrained, if not by decency or by fear of a public revulsion that tends to come on late, like post-banquet indigestion, then simply by more effective rules of the game?
Voters and viewers must have learned by now not to be carried away by wishfulness in such matters, especially if Democratic chances rise in inverse ratio to the economy and put pressure on the Bushites to use again the sorts of tricks that worked for them the last time out.
But at least the networks, despite cutbacks, are conceding they have not given brilliant performances in campaigns past and are offering proposals for next year that deserve attention and, generally, support.


In the Nation; Toward the Ideal
Have civil rights laws dealt adequately with racial problems in America?
Has all that had to be done now been done?
Has the burden shifted to blacks and other minorities to prove that they can compete in the colorblind society that now should exist?
At Christmas 1991, many Americans seem to think so.
Witness the white majority's rising opposition to "quotas" -- the national shorthand for affirmative-action programs.
"Cultural diversity" -- a catchall phrase for education policies that seem to threaten the dominance of a Western-focused curriculum -- also causes widespread anxiety among whites.
Crime has converted white concern for the urban, mostly black underclass into fear and anger.


Preparing to Dance Away 1991 at Grand Central
It may look like the minutelong waltz scene from "The Fisher King" or a certain bubbly evening with Guy Lombardo in the 1960's, but it will be a first, not a rerun: a night of waltzing in Grand Central Terminal, the centerpiece of a new kind of New Year's celebration.


U.S. Plans New Embassies For Post-Soviet Republics
The breakup of the Soviet Union presents the Bush Administration with the task of setting up embassies in at least half a dozen new national capitals.
Officials at the State Department and the White House said advance teams would be sent out early next year to scout properties and communications for American diplomatic missions in six of the new capitals.


Israeli Says U.S. Planned for Gulf Raid
The Israeli press reported today that the commander of the Israeli Air Force has said in a magazine interview that the United States had a secret contingency plan in the Persian Gulf war that would have allowed the Israelis to retaliate against Iraq for its Scud missile attacks while American pilots kept out their way.
The commander, Maj.
Gen.
Avihu Bin-Nun, is also quoted as saying that Israeli pilots were ready to take off for an assault on Iraq two or three times in the first week of the war that began last Jan. 17.


After Communism, Fear of a Vengeful Justice
New laws adopted in Czechoslovakia and Hungary to punish those responsible for the abuses of the former Communist Governments are being criticized in some quarters as zealously intolerant.
At issue are laws like one adopted by Czechoslovakia's Parliament this month, which imposes a one-to-five-year prison term for "supporting or promoting movements such as fascism and Communism," and a recently enacted Hungarian law that could retroactively criminalize thousands of former Communist officials for their contacts with the Soviet Union.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY THE STRUGGLE FOR THE DAILY NEWS
The Daily News appears to have about six weeks to turn itself into a viable business after the Maxwell debacle, industry experts suggest, and some say the newspaper's convoluted management group -- controlled by an accounting firm and overseen by its creditors -- now has less chance than ever of surviving.
B3 DIGGING DELICATELY THROUGH THE PAST
Archeologists have carefully removed more than 100 skeletons from the site just north of City Hall that was known in the 1700's as the Negros Burial Ground.
With each coffin, they are building a bridge back to a people whose history was ignored for centuries.
B3.
THE PLACE TO BE ON NEW YEAR'S EVE
There will be no ball falling, no alcohol and, its promoters hope, no rowdy crowds.
First Night New York, 12 hours of entertainment in and around Grand Central Terminal, is being billed as a family-oriented alternative to the traditional Times Square celebration.
B3.
CITY JAIL CONTRACT REVOKED
New York City has revoked a $1.2 million contract it awarded to the Leon D. DeMatteis Construction Company of Elmont, L.I., to supervise the building of a $67 million jail annex on Rikers Island.
Officials say the company concealed and altered reports about possible ties to organized-crime figures.
B11.
Employment firm will pay $1.75 million to settle lawsuits over discrimination.
B5.
REGION WHERE YOUR GARBAGE GOES
Throwing out your garbage is no longer as simple as it used to be.
Garbage has become a multimillion-dollar industry, a touchy environmental issue and a major headache for places like Long Island, where the population is large and the landfills are full.
A1.
AS DEER COME BACK, SO DO THE HUNTERS
For the first time in nearly two decades, officials in Princeton Township, N.J., are allowing people to hunt the white-tailed deer in an effort to control the population.
The deer has become an increasingly troublesome pest, especially in towns on the wooded fringes of suburbia.
B6.
NEW LAW FOR HOME BUYERS AND SELLERS
Beginning Jan. 1, prospective home buyers and sellers in New York State will have to sign forms that make it clear for whom a real-estate agent works.
The new law, a result of two years of negotiations between the state and the real-estate industry, is expected to promote the use of separate agents by buyers and sellers.
B6. 'CHEATING 101': THE REVIEWS ARE IN
A junior at Rutgers University was so convinced that most college students cheat that he wrote a book to prove it.
Culling cheating methods from teachers and students at Rutgers and other campuses, he published "Cheating 101: The Benefits and Fundamentals of Earning the Easy 'A.' " The book has sold out, but the reviews are mixed.
New Brunswick Journal, B6.
NOT RUNNING, BUT STILL ON THE BALLOT?
A former New York State party chairman has said that he is campaigning to have Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo entered in the state's Democratic presidential primary as a favorite-son candidate, despite Governor Cuomo's announcement last week that he would not run.
B10.
Neediest Cases B9


Review/Film; On Buffing and Polishing Even the Stereotypes
In the long, healthy career of Claude Chabrol, from his New Wave classic "The Cousins" through his sumptuous "Madame Bovary," which opened yesterday, "Inspector Lavardin" is a trifle.
But this lighthearted detective movie shows that trifling entertainments do not have to be hack work.
This wily film has first-rate appeal and plays into some cherished stereotypes about the French: it is blase, stylish, filled with effortless charm.
Though the film appeared in France in 1986, it has its United States premiere today at the Eighth Street Playhouse.
The delay may reflect the film's slightness and the economics of distributing foreign films, but not its popularity abroad.
This is, in fact, a sequel.
The first Chabrol film to feature the urbane detective Lavardin was "Poulet au Vinaigre," which was released in France in 1985 and has yet to appear in the United States.


Plan Seeks Bright Future For City Parks
More than half of New York City's park system -- by far the largest collection of squares, piazzas and other irregular patches of green in any American city -- would be cast into deep shadow by new buildings if the city grows as fully as current law permits.
The prospect of darkened playgrounds in a city already so cramped that many highway dividers are officially recognized as parks has prompted conservationists to propose major new protections for one of New York's most precious but amorphous assets: sunlight.


G.M.'s Debt Is Causing Wariness
It's bad enough that the nation's largest auto maker can't move the metal.
Now, General Motors is having trouble moving its paper.
Several of the nation's largest money market funds are shying away from commercial paper issued by the General Motors Acceptance Corporation, the company's finance unit.
As the nation's second-largest issuer of these short-term debt securities, G.M.A.C. has more than $23 billion in commercial paper outstanding -- an amount that happens to be about $5 billion more than the value of the whole company's common stock.


Celestial Seating
PEERING into the universe doesn't mean you have to be uncomfortable.
In the Newark Museum's recently renovated mini-planetarium -- the living-roomlike dome can seat 50 -- the architect Michael Graves wanted "visitors to feel at home."
"The planetarium isn't about Buck Rogers and technology," said Mr.
Graves, who redesigned the space, and the rest of the museum, two years ago.
"It's about the celestial, about getting lost in that space." The chairs, of course, were of utmost importance, Mr.
Graves explained, because one has to lean back to see the stars.
So he chose ultra-cushy ones.


A Message From the Queen?
Queen Elizabeth II has hinted that she will not abdicate in favor of Prince Charles, British newspapers said today.
In her Christmas speech, the Queen said, "With your prayers and your help and with the love and support of my family, I shall try to serve you in the years to come." One of the papers, The Daily Mail, declared that the Queen had given a coded message that it said should end speculation she might abdicate in favor of Charles.


Sports of The Times; Searching For a Beacon Of Light
MICHAEL JORDAN walks on air.
Dee Brown leaps more than 80 stories up the Empire State Building and executes a Kong dunk.
The effervescent Earvin Johnson works magic.
The National Basketball Association is indeed phantasmic.


The Sullivan Brothers
To the Editor:
"Lest We Forget the Five Sullivan Brothers" (letter, Dec. 18) from Dan Weadock was a sad reminder of the tragic fate of the World War II Sullivan brothers aboard the cruiser Juneau.
Having been there, I wish to point out that the Juneau was part of the remnant of Task Force 13, headed south from Guadalcanal after what may have been the fiercest naval battle of the war, a ship-to-ship night engagement.
There were no aircraft carriers in the task force.


Tartabull Negotiations Centering on Angels
Danny Tartabull, whose 1991 offensive statistics were better than Bobby Bonilla's, remains the most attractive player left in baseball's free-agent market, and his prolonged availability has created one of the more intriguing developments of the off season.
Despite an angry confrontation between his agent and the Angels' general manager, California remains the team most likely to sign Tartabull, but at a price perhaps $2 million to $3 million below prior expectations, a lawyer who has had vast experience with free-agent negotiations said yesterday.


From L.I. to Angry Illinois: A 5-Day Trash Odyssey
The story of Ocke Ketelsen's garbage began Dec. 15, when he put it out on his curb in Westbury, L.I.
It was nothing special, just things like an old milk carton and some scraps of aluminum foil, and Mr.
Ketelsen didn't give it a second thought.
"Garbage is garbage," he said.
Not really, not anymore.


CHRONICLE
A top aide to GOV.
LOWELL P. WEICKER JR. of Connecticut will step down in January to take a teaching fellowship at Harvard University.
The aide, THOMAS J. D'AMORE, told The Associated Press that he has accepted an offer of a semester fellowship at the Kennedy School of Government.


Don't Rush Excavation of Black Burial Ground
To the Editor:
The demand by Federal officials to speed the rate of archeological excavation at New York's 18th-century black burial ground (news article, Dec. 6) ignores the way early African-Americans fought to defend their dead.
Death and burial stood at the center of communal black activism during the 18th century.
Often drawing on Central African and West African customs, early black communities took great care with interment.


How a New Yorker Saw His Town, 1920's to 60's
A MAJOR collection of historic architectural photographs of New York City is rarely seen by New Yorkers.
After all, it's in Pennsylvania.
Copy prints of 10,000 architectural subjects, indexed by address, architect or client, are available for $7 each from the Fay S. Lincoln Collection at Pennsylvania State University.
Anne Champagne, rare-books librarian at the Pattee Library there, has computerized access to the collection.


Prince Rupert Journal; In Nuclear Age, Canadians Adopt '54-40 or Fight'
They sail out for 10 days at a stretch in seiners and trawlers with names like Nemesis, Leslie Ellen and Eliza Joye to catch the sole, perch, cod, halibut, salmon, yellowmouth and rougheye rockfish that abound in some of the world's richest fishing grounds.
They are men like Kelvin Mark, 31 years old, who began his fisherman's life at age 7 and says "I wouldn't know how to do anything else," or Gordon Nicholls, 65, who retired as chief engineer on the Northern Dawn a few years back, but still goes out "because you just can't stop doing what you've been doing for 44 years."


Why Are the Subways Telling Us All This?
To the Editor:
Not long ago the New York City Transit Authority proposed playing music over the public-address system in subway stations.
You published letters decrying the plan, and I have since seen no mention of it.


Markets Closed
All financial markets in the United States were closed yesterday in observance of Christmas.
Banks, government offices and most businesses were also closed.


Topics of The Times
Underground Answers
A veteran subway rider, who has fretted through decades of unexplained train delays, has been somewhat mollified by the transit system's practice of telling him why his train isn't moving or isn't coming.
"There is track work ahead," a conductor announces, or "The signal is not working." It doesn't make his waits any shorter, but it does cut down his frustration.


George Stambolian, Anthology Editor, 54
George Stambolian, a professor of French literature and an editor of several anthologies of gay fiction, died at his home in Manhattan on Sunday.
He was 54 years old.
He died of complications from AIDS, said Michael Hampton, his companion.


Park, Pavilion and Roof
ON the rooftop of the Dia Center for the Arts in Manhattan, visitors can ponder a mirrored-glass pavilion while their espressos cool in the center's new cafe.
The pavilion, by Dan Graham, an artist, in collaboration with Ba-Ba Architects of New York, was designed as "a place of leisure, artistic contemplation and social interaction -- one continuous experience," said Charles Wright, Dia's director.


Having a Home Is Not a Prerequisite for Having the Spirit of Christmas


Austria's Kronberger Built for Speed, and It Shows
There are many racing skills and techniques that can be mastered in training.
Speed, however, is not one of them.
In skiing, as in most sports, it is an innate gift, wholly natural to those who have it and wholly incomprehensible to those who don't.
For the two-time World Cup champion Petra Kronberger of Austria, the gift is a heightened sensitivity in the feet and legs that allows her skis to slide just a little faster than those of her competitors.


Phi Beta Kappa and the White House
To the Editor:
I found out only recently that President Bush was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, the academic honor society, at Yale, from which he graduated in 1948.
This puts him in a class with four other Presidents: John Quincy Adams, Harvard, 1787; Chester A. Arthur, Union College, 1848; Theodore Roosevelt, Harvard, 1880; and William Howard Taft, Yale, 1878.


Harkin Seeks to Recall Democrats' History, Though Some Fear It
There is still a long line for the breakfast buffet grits and refried beans -- when Jim Hightower, the former Texas Agriculture Commissioner, is called on to introduce the featured speaker.
He grabs the podium and starts in with the adjectives.
"This is a guy who is an unabashed, unapologetic, ungentrified, un-Republicanized, old-time, little people's Democrat," Mr.
Hightower says, and the crowd lays down its collective fork and starts cheering.
"Not just a progressive, but a person who is a-ggressive. This is a guy who knows how to take on these effete elites in the White House: George Herbert Walker Bush of Kennebunkport, C. Boyden Gray of the R. J. Reynolds inheritance and J. Danforth Quayle 3d of Pluto and points beyond."


INSIDE
Health Care on Wheels
Home health care has emerged as a $15 billion industry with more than 12,500 companies and not-for-profit services, from simple nursing to mobile emergency rooms.
Page D1. 11 Turks Die in Firebombing
Kurdish separatists threw firebombs at a department store in Istanbul, setting the seven-story building ablaze and killing 11.
Page A5.


New York Cancels Builder's Contract, Citing Reports on Mob Ties
New York City has revoked a $1.2 million contract with a major construction company that officials say concealed and altered reports about possible ties to organized-crime figures.
The contract was awarded in July to the Leon D. DeMatteis Construction Company of Elmont, L.I., to supervise the building of a $67 million jail annex on Rikers Island.
But in a decision made public this week, the city said the company had withheld "troubling" information about its business associations and had submitted an altered copy of a report concerning its possible ties to reputed organized-crime figures.


Croatian Christmas: Saying Mass in Shelters
Croatian forces sought peace in underground shelters today, saying Mass while fighting went on outside across the republic.
Here in Zagreb, the first civilian plane allowed to land in the Croatian capital in five months brought tons of aid and Christmas gifts.


A First for an American
KONISHIKI, an American-born sumo wrestler, was given a shot at the sport's highest ranking of grand champion, or yokozuna, when the entries were announced yesterday in Tokyo for the New Year Grand Sumo tournament.


Sellers of Government Data Thrive
As more government records are computerized -- from Texas bankruptcy filings to New York drivers' licenses to state voter registration lists -- companies are eagerly buying access to the data and reselling it over computer services.
The companies, which range from tiny specialized concerns to big information mills like the Dun &amp; Bradstreet Corporation, Prentice-Hall and Mead Data Central, say they are finding increasing demand from banks, law firms, marketers, private investigators and journalists.


You Make the Call
A call by Mississippi State Coach JACKIE SHERRILL for fans to design a play to use in the Dec. 29 Liberty Bowl has drawn 500 entries.
The deadline for submitting the Pick a Play entries was Tuesday.


Little Software Maker With a Loud Voice
Ever since its founding in 1983, the marketing effort of Banyan Systems Inc. was virtually inaudible.
The software maker quietly provided large, sophisticated customers with the products to link vast networks of personal computers.
Now Banyan is turning up the volume to seize market share from Novell Inc., its much-better-known rival.


Numbers Tell Story of Gifts To Neediest
Most donations to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund are in round figures -- $10, $50, $100 -- but many checks are for peculiar sums and there's a story behind each of them.
"We are pleased to enclose a contribution of $135 in honor of our daughter's birthday," wrote Sally and Alan Epstein of Rye, N.Y.
"Peggy Epstein Tanner will be 34 years old so here is:


Georgia Tech wins Aloha Bowl


Text of Bush's Address to Nation on Gorbachev's Resignation
Following is the text of a televised speech President Bush made tonight after President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's resignation:
Good evening, and Merry Christmas to all Americans across our great country.


CHRONICLE
The Italians have replaced the Japanese as the No. 1 buyers of art in the world, according to an annual list of the top 200 collectors, appearing in the January issue of Art News Magazine.
In fact, the number of Japanese collectors on the list dropped to 10 from 15, the steepest decline from last year, while those from Germany increased to 18 from 10, the biggest increase.


As Hunting Rules Relax, Neighbors Become Tense
While squirrels and raccoons roam neighborhoods in suburbs closer to New York City, the most troublesome animals in outlying areas like Princeton Township are white-tailed deer.
For the first time since 1972, township officials are allowing hunters to go out with shotguns in an effort to control the deer population.


Concert for Peace At St. John the Divine
The ninth annual New Year's Eve Concert for Peace is to start at 7:30 P.M. at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street.
The free concert will feature Lukas Foss conducting the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra in a program including Bach's Fifth "Brandenburg" Concerto, Vivaldi's "Gloria," Albinoni's Oboe Concerto in D minor and songs of Leonard Bernstein.
Performers include the mezzo-soprano Hilda Harris, the folk singer Odetta and the actors George Hearn and Cicely Tyson.
Also performing are the Pipes and Drums of New York State Courts, the Ensemble for Early Music and the 100-member New Year's Eve Chorus.
The departing Secretary General of the United Nations, Javier Perez de Cuellar, is to receive the Cathedral's Peace Award, and the new Secretary General, Boutros Ghali of Egypt, is to offer a New Year's greeting.


A Small Crossroad to the Big Time
The seats at old Comiskey Park in Chicago were not all incinerated, or sent c.o.d. to some bespectacled souvenir collector in suburban Evanston, Ill.
Several hundred of them were shipped and bolted inside the almost-new arena of the Selkirk Steelers, a Manitoba Junior A Hockey League team that moved out of its converted barn last year.
The slotted wooden chairs are now filled to the brim two nights a week with shrieking parents and frostbitten scouts, watching Canadian kids practice their ancestral craft on frozen water in the Winnipeg suburb.


Gorbachev Sees Strain on Family
In leaving the Kremlin tonight, Mikhail S. Gorbachev talked briefly of the strain his family suffered during the tumultuous final months leading to his resignation.
"Things are happening to this country and to my family and this has to affect my family, a very close-knit family," he said in an interview with Cable News Network.
His wife, Raisa, suffered what he has called a "very bad attack" during the coup attempt.


Job Discrimination Case Settled for $1.7 Million
One of New York City's largest employment concerns has agreed to pay more than $1.75 million to settle lawsuits that it discriminated against black and Hispanic job applicants, city officials announced Monday.
The Cosmopolitan Care Corporation, at 330 Seventh Avenue near West 28th Street, reached an agreement last week to settle employment discrimination suits brought by the State Attorney General's Office, the city's Human Rights Commission and people who said they were discriminated against.


Jerusalem Mayor Joins Protest on Settlements


Unfree, Unknown
After what mean years they had on earth -- enslaved, impoverished and ostracized -- black New Yorkers in the 18th century were consigned to a desolate graveyard beyond the city walls.
The next light they were to see was the rising sun on Judgment Day.
Archeologists got there first.
Since October, more than 100 skeletons have been discovered, intricately measured and delicately removed from the land just north of City Hall that was known in the 1700's as the Negros Burial Ground.
With each coffin, a bridge is being built back to a people whose history was all but ignored for more than two centuries.


Holiday Cheer Fills a Harlem Block
At 10 A.M., Phyllip Coleman, who is 2 years old, was running all over his cramped living room in Harlem, just missing the Christmas tree as he tossed his new basketball at his new All-Pro free-standing basket.
Between shots, he grabbed his new Incredible Hulk doll and jumped into his new two-passenger, battery-operated red Jeep with black vinyl interior.
Phyllip Coleman's second Christmas was going very well indeed.
His grandmother, Robertus Coleman, who is raising Phyllip, in addition to her daughters, Tanisha, 19, and Shatrona, 8, was thinking she must have been crazy.
"I'm going to kill myself for buying that basket," she said as she kept one eye on the ham baking in the oven, and another on the ball bouncing perilously near the glass figurines on a shelf against the wall that was now a backcourt.
Fortunately for Mrs.
Coleman, the Jeep, a gift from one of her grandson's legions of admirers, was not yet working.


Pineapple, After Long Affair, Jilts Hawaii for Asian Suitors
For the last 13 years Kathleen Ruaburo dressed for work in thick rubberized pants and goggles and spent her days, just as her immigrant Filipino father did, in the heat and the dust picking pineapples on the Dole plantation.
Now she dons a crisp white jacket with gold buttons and sets tables for wealthy tourists at the new Manele Bay Hotel here.
Mrs.
Ruaburo's transition tells the story of pineapples in Hawaii.
The crop that symbolizes this state and for decades has been a mainstay of the islands' economy is almost gone.
Hawaiian pineapples can no longer compete in the world market.


From Appliances to Art
NO surface is sacred to Kenny Scharf.
The artist will paint anything -- vaporizers, vacuum cleaners, telephones, televisions, his daughters' bunk beds and even a Bible -- with his flashy psychedelic colors.
Then he'll glue plastic dinosaurs, fake jewels, shells, jiggly eyeballs, knobs, you name it -- just to whoop up things.
His flamboyant domestic apparatuses, as well as his installation "Closet No. 9," are on exhibit at the Queens Museum of Art through Dec. 29.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Retailers would probably like to forget Christmas 1991.
While most merchants had been prepared for a sluggish season, many said sales turned out to be even worse than expected.
Results through Monday indicate that retail spending will be flat or only up slightly in December.
A month ago, many retailers hoped to exceed last year's sales by 5 percent.  [ Page A1. ]
Pineapples are no longer a mainstay of Hawaii's economy.
The state's crop is unable to compete in the world market.  [ A1. ]


Albertville Profile; Ice Dancing for a Medal, and for France
The cultural confusion began in childhood, long before their skating struck a chord with the public and fed their Olympic dreams.
Reared and educated in the province of Quebec, Paul and Isabelle Duchesnay remember growing up in a traditional Gallic environment filled with warm croissants, Camembert cheese and, above all, the sound of French with a Parisian accent.
Not until the first day of school did Paul realize that their Canadian peers spoke the same language with a markedly different accent.


Deadline for Daily News May Be About 6 Weeks
Controlled by an accounting firm, overseen by a group of creditors including ink and paper manufacturers, and still losing money, The Daily News appears to have about six weeks to turn itself into a viable business after the Maxwell debacle, industry experts and advisers to the paper say.
That is clearly an unenviable, as well as cumbersome, situation.
And in a fiercely competitive newspaper market like New York, some analysts believe the News's convoluted management group now has less chance than ever of developing a blueprint for survival before the money runs out.
"There is no deep pocket to support further losses, so the difference between incoming and outgoing now has to be resolved very quickly," said John Morton, a newspaper investment analyst at Lynch, Jones &amp; Ryan.
"To do that, you probably need rapid concessions from unions, and I don't see that happening. I am very doubtful that the paper can survive."


Calendar: All Around Some Historic Towns
On Foot  Adventure on a Shoestring, 300 West 53d Street; (212) 265-2663.
There will be a tour of Hoboken, N.J., including the former Erie-Lackawanna railroad terminal and the Stevens Institute of Technology, which dates from 1870, starting at 1 P.M. on Saturday.
Fee, including $2 for the PATH train, $7.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Murphy's Law  The Marquee
At the Marquee last Thursday night, Murphy's Law wanted to hear you scream.
The audience happily complied when the lead singer, Jimmy Drescher, dedicated one of this hardcore band's anthems, "Sit Home and Rot," to his favorite beer.


Where the Boom Is in Health Care
A decade of rapid growth in home health care has forged a $15 billion industry with more than 12,500 companies and not-for-profit services.
Many experts expect even faster growth in years to come as home treatment proves effective for a growing range of acutely ill or disabled patients whom doctors would once have insisted on hospitalizing at great cost.
The services range from traditional visiting-nurse associations to a host of entrepreneurial start-ups like Calldoctor Inc., a San Diego-based mobile emergency-room service.
"We think it is going to be the fastest-growing business segment from the mid-1990's until well into the next century," said Gerald Celente, director of the Socio-Economic Research Institute of America in Rhinebeck, N.Y.
"Most products and services for the home-health-care market haven't been invented yet." New and Complex Services
Most home care continues to involve chronic problems that are not life-threatening and are expected to affect more and more Americans as the population ages.
But physicians at the frontiers of home health care are also expanding their work to include some stunningly acute and complex cases.


Market Place; A.M.D.'s Strength Doubted by Some
IN the world of semiconductors, this was the year of Advanced Micro Devices.
It went from a money loser to a company with rapidly rising profits as it took market share from Intel, the industry leader in supplying the chips at the heart of personal computers.
That success was well reflected on Wall Street.
Advanced Micro Device's share price, $4.875 at the end of 1990, soared by 259 percent, to close at $17.50 on Tuesday, a day on which it hit a four-year high.


Davis's Heart at Home
Family is more important than money in the view of WALTER DAVIS, who turned down better offers from other teams to rejoin the Denver Nuggets this season.
Davis's wife and children remained at the couple's home in Denver when he was traded last season to the Portland Trail Blazers.
This year, when Davis was released, he jumped at the chance to go back with the Nuggets and be with them full time.


Bridge
The last tournament of the year begins tomorrow at the Vista International Hotel, at the World Trade Center in Manhattan.
It is the Greater New York Bridge Association's Winter Regional, which will last five days.
These major events are scheduled:


Iraqi Foes of Hussein Gather to Plan New Uprising
Eight months after their revolt was crushed, Iraqi opposition groups are gathering again in a new attempt to topple the Government of Saddam Hussein.
They have been invited to a meeting in the Syrian capital this week by a prominent Shiite Muslim cleric who says Iraq is now ripe for a new move to remove President Hussein.
The Iraqi cleric, Ayatollah Mohammed Baqer al-Hakim, announced after holding talks with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria that he had invited leaders of the main opposition organizations to meet in Damascus to draw up a strategy for seizing power in Baghdad.


RETAILERS REPORT SALES FELL SHORT OF DIM FORECASTS
Retailers would probably like to forget Christmas 1991.
While most merchants had been prepared for a sluggish season, many said sales turned out to be even worse than expected.
Even the last-minute shopping frenzy was not enough to give merchants anything to cheer about.
As recently as a month ago, many retailers had hoped to exceed last year's sales by 5 percent.
But results through the close of business on Monday indicate that spending will be flat or up slightly in December.
The major retail chains are scheduled to release their final monthly sales results next week.


Barge Spills Gasoline Into Kill van Kull
A tanker barge ran aground in Kill van Kull beneath the Bayonne Bridge last night, spilling about 19,000 gallons of gasoline and blocking ship traffic on the waterway that separates Staten Island and New Jersey, the Coast Guard said.
The barge, owned by the Mobil Oil Corporation, tore at least four holes in its forward, port-side tank when it ran aground at 6:15 P.M., about half an hour after low tide, Lieut.
Larry Clark of the Coast Guard said.


Added Incentives To Enter Races
When the awarding of prize money on the World Cup circuit began last season, the elite of the sport discovered what recreational skiers have known for a long time: it pays to enter races.
Organizers of amateur events, ranging from light-hearted, obstacle-course races to serious cross-country races, have been enticing participants with prizes for more than a decade.
"We find that people plan their ski weekends just to enter our races," said Steve Johnson, vice president at Molson Breweries, which sponsors obstacle-course races at 90 ski resorts across the country.
The prizes awarded through drawings, fanny packs filled with gifts and apres ski parties, are inducements to enter, he said.


Players Are Stunned By Wyche's Exit
SAM WYCHE's former players would like to know why he is leaving the Cincinnati Bengals.
They were stunned when the team announced Tuesday that Wyche had quit as head coach.
Wyche disagreed, saying he had been fired.


Child Poverty in the U.S. Continues to Grow; A Misogynist Work
To the Editor:
Re your Dec. 9 Washington Memo on Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and welfare: If all that were wrong with society were welfare dependency, that problem could be solved by eliminating welfare, something almost every political demagogue since the Depression has proposed.
Unfortunately, Mr.
Moynihan's insistence that "we were right" and your description of his "worrying out loud about the rise in dependency and the collapse of the family since at least 1965" masks many of the problems in his "explosive paper subsequently dubbed 'The Moynihan Report.' "


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE boy wasn't getting good grades in junior high school.
His parents had tried everything from hiring tutors to lecturing him about how important his school records would be for the rest of his life, all to no avail.
Finally, they decided to bribe him.
They gave him a credit card.
"It was a major disaster," said Dr.
Peter A. Spevak, the director of the Center for Applied Motivation in Washington, who later worked with the family.
"The boy spent several hundred dollars a week on things for himself and his friends, but his grades were still bad."


Quotation of the Day
"I hereby discontinue my activities at the post of President of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics." -- MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV.  [ A1:5. ]


New Attention for an Obscure Inventor
Samuel Morey never got his due during his lifetime, but residents in the neighboring towns of Fairlee, Vt., and Orford, N.H., hope it may come to him 150 years after his death.
A prolific inventor whose first patent was signed by President George Washington in 1793, Morey has lapsed so deeply into historical obscurity that even Vermont biographical reference books omit his name.


Home Video
'Fantasia' Available
For those who still want to buy "Fantasia," the advice from retailers is don't run but walk, though at a purposeful pace, to the video store.
Close to 13 million tapes of the Disney classic are in circulation and, in the opinion of some in the industry, the film could surpass "E.T. the Extraterrestrial" as the best-selling movie ever.
But though there is bounty now, it doesn't mean the supplies in stores will last forever.


Student's Guide to Test-Taking: Shifting Gears for an Easy 'A'
FALL semester finals are over and Michael Moore, a 24-year-old junior at Rutgers University, is proud to say he did not cheat on a single one.
That is more than he will say for most college students.
Mr.
Moore, a journalism major from West Chester, Pa., is so convinced that most students cheat that he wrote a book to prove it.
Culling cheating methods from teachers and students at Rutgers and at several other campuses, he put them together and, using his Macintosh computer, wrote and published "Cheating 101: The Benefits and Fundamentals of Earning the Easy 'A.' "


Rocks, Boulders And Other Pets
WHEN Liz Huntington and her husband, Dan Brinkerhoff, fled Brooklyn two years ago for the hinterlands of Galilee, Pa., they planned to rely on Mr.
Brinkerhoff's woodworking skills and Ms.
Huntington's quilt-making abilities to pay the bills.
"But the economy didn't support that," Ms.
Huntington said.
So, a year later, with a baby boy in tow, the couple turned to stones for inspiration.


A White Christmas: You Missed It if You Blinked


Deep Little Worlds Inside Coffee Tables
NIK Mills calls his diorama coffee table, left, a "detailed snapshot of the earth's surface." Looking straight down at it, the viewer can see verdant hillsides as manicured as the finest Scottish golf courses, healthy-looking fir trees and a clear Lucite river.
Tiny female figures sunbathe on the banks, and a lone skinny-dipper tests the water.
There are also tiny figures on the hills: a coterie of intrigued Boy Scouts.


The Soviet State, Born of a Dream, Dies
The Soviet state, marked throughout its brief but tumultuous history by great achievement and terrible suffering, died today after a long and painful decline.
It was 74 years old.
Conceived in utopian promise and born in the violent upheavals of the "Great October Revolution of 1917," the union heaved its last in the dreary darkness of late December 1991, stripped of ideology, dismembered, bankrupt and hungry -- but awe-inspiring even in its fall.


Waterlogged Texas May Get More Rain


Chairman Resigns Post Amid Rift at Indian Air
The chairman of state-owned Indian Airlines said yesterday that he had resigned because of what he said was lack of Government support in resolving a strike by pilots over the weekend.
S.
S.
Ramdas, the airline's chairman and managing director, said by telephone that he quit "because of a feeling of being let down."


On Moscow's Streets, Worry and Regret
When Aleksandr Ivanovich left his post guarding Red Square to go to dinner tonight, the bright red flag of the Soviet Union was fluttering above the Kremlin wall.
When the militiaman returned to duty outside the Lenin Mausoleum he looked up and saw the white-blue-and-red striped flag of of the new Russia, whipping in the wind as if there had never been a Bolshevik Revolution.
"It was a good surprise," said the young officer wearing a fur cap and long gray greatcoat in the cold center of what had been the symbolic heart of the Soviet Union until a few minutes before.
The militiaman, who identified himself with his first name and that of his father in the Russian style, declining to give his family name, said he had not seen Mikhail S. Gorbachev resign as Soviet President on television.


Books of The Times; A Universe of the Observed and the Observers
Hopeful Monsters  By Nicholas Mosley 550 pages. Dalkey Archive Press. $21.95.
The title of Nicholas Mosley's fascinating new novel, "Hopeful Monsters," which was the 1990 Whitbread Book of the Year in Britain, refers to "things born perhaps slightly before their time; when it's not known if the environment is quite ready for them."


Markets Head Quits Wasserstein, Perella
After only five months as head of capital markets at Wasserstein, Perella &amp; Company, Luis S. Mendez is resigning, Wall Street executives said.
Mr.
Mendez, 54 years old, first developed a relationship with Bruce Wasserstein and Joseph Perella when he was head of the equity department at the First Boston Corporation and they were running the mergers and acquisitions unit.


On Tom Harkin
Mixing pugilism and politics, the Iowa Senator is running for President with an appeal built on his combative personality.
Strategies: The Democrats and '92.
Page D11.


Private Group Leading Angkor Restoration
After a generation of war, looting and environmental damage that has ravaged the historic Cambodian city of Angkor, plans to restore the huge complex of 8th-to-14th-century temples will finally start to take shape next month, when the first members of an international conservation team arrive in the Cambodian jungles.
Although archeologists have made their way to Angkor in recent years, it is only with the signing of a peace treaty on Oct. 23 that actual restoration has become possible.
The treaty provided for the establishment of an interim coalition government that includes the Khmer Rouge.
In the weeks since the signing an official of the brutal former Communist Government was attacked and Cambodians have demonstrated against Khmer Rouge participation.
Although political instability could threaten preservation efforts, the project is getting under way at last.


Maxwell's Shell Game Could Happen Here
To the Editor:
"Robert Maxwell's Shell Game" (editorial, Dec. 12) strikes an ironic and slightly complacent note in its willingness to shift the blame for the plight of New York's Daily News across the Atlantic.


Gorbachev's Six Tumultuous Years at Soviet Helm
March 1985: Mikhail S. Gorbachev succeeds Konstantin U. Chernenko as Communist Party General Secretary.
At 54, he is the youngest Soviet leader since Stalin.
April 1985: Gorbachev emphasizes the urgent need to reshape society and the economy with processes he calls glasnost, or increased openness, and perestroika, or political and economic restructuring.


Strike at Small Steelmaker Poses a Big Test for a Union
In this quiet industrial and farming area about 30 miles west of Philadelphia, a contentious strike by steelworkers may well reveal how much power the union still has and at what cost to the nation's big steel producers.
The strike target is Lukens Inc., a relatively small but profitable steel producer.
From Lukens's perspective, the big issue is whether to yield to a demand by the United Steelworkers to eliminate a common industry practice known as contracting out.
Under the practice, nonunion workers are hired to perform duties not directly tied to making steel.


Critic's Choice/Dance; The Excitement of Ailey, a la Carte
The Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater's winter season at City Center ends this weekend with a wide selection of new and old pieces, performed by some first-rate dancers.
For those who like it short and sweet, tonight's program offers a smorgasbord of excerpts from such Ailey classics as "Memoria," "Night Creature" and "Blues Suite," with the full "Revelations." The three dancers who have performed "Cry" this season will each dance a section of the solo work, and the longtime Ailey star Dudley Williams will perform "A Song for You." The full versions of Ailey's "Blues Suite," "Memoria" and "Revelations" will be performed tomorrow night.


Williams Recovering From Apparent Stroke
TED WILLIAMS, a member of the Hall of Fame, appears to have suffered a minor stroke about a week ago, but he is receiving treatment and recovering nicely.
Apparently, the former Boston Red Sox outfielder has lost some weight, but feels "very healthy."
Word of the stroke came not from Williams, who at 73 remains as close-mouthed and media-shy now as he was when he batted .406 in 1941, but from friends.


Bush Picks Nominee For Commerce Post
President Bush announced today that he would nominate Barbara H. Franklin, a well-connected management consultant, corporate director and Republican fund-raiser, to become Commerce Secretary next year.
Ms.
Franklin would become the third woman in the election-year Cabinet of Mr.
Bush, who has usually drawn less support from women than men.
She was one of the first women to receive an M.B.A. from Harvard, and her Government career began in 1971, when President Richard M. Nixon brought her into his Administration to recruit more women.


Fatal Feud Divides a Village in Maine
Residents of this hamlet on the rocky coast of Maine believe that the feud between two neighboring families here was what the war between the Hatfields and the McCoys would have been like if there had been videotape.
In August 1989, Michael Phillips and his wife, Florence, trained their video camera on the home of their neighbor, Richard Uffelman, in an effort to gather evidence for a harassment suit, and then set out on a walk.
The camera recorded what followed: a barrage of gunfire by Mr.
Uffelman and his two sons, 10 and 12 years old, who shot at the Phillipses from the Uffelmans' living room.


Parcells Coy Amid Talk Of Coaching
The Green Bay Packers say they want to talk to Bill Parcells about their head coaching vacancy.
A source close to the Packers says Parcells is interested in the job.
Parcells says nothing has happened.


Review/Film; Drifting In and Out Of a Kafkaesque Reality
"NAKED LUNCH," adapted by the dauntless David Cronenberg from William S. Burroughs's 1959 landmark novel, represents a remarkable meeting of the minds.
It's hard to imagine another film maker who could delve so deeply into the monstrousness of Mr.
Burroughs's vision, in the end coming up with a bona fide monster movie of his own.
Yet while Mr.
Cronenberg's ingenious approach to his material matches Mr.
Burroughs's flair for the grotesque, it also shares the author's perfect nonchalance and his ice-cold wit.
Seldom has a film maker offered his audience a more debonair invitation to go to hell.
The director of "The Fly," "Dead Ringers" and "Scanners" will not disappoint viewers who appreciate his devilish ingenuity.
Instead of attempting the impossible task of adapting "Naked Lunch" literally, Mr.
Cronenberg has treated this disjointed, hallucinatory book as a secondary source.
Concentrating instead on Mr.
Burroughs himself, the drug experience that colors his writing and the agonies of the creative process, Mr.
Cronenberg also devises purely metaphorical versions of the author's wild and violent sexual scenarios.
The result, by turns bracing, brilliant and vile, is a screen style as audacious as Mr.
Burroughs's is on the page.


CHRONICLE
It's a New York idea transplanted to Aspen, the power lunch for women.
It's to be held this afternoon at the Little Nell Hotel and the women will pick numbers to determine where and with whom they sit.
The Colorado event is expected to draw 200 women, who were asked to fill out "titles, boards and other credentials" on their reservation forms.
The lunch is modeled after a celebrity-studded lunch given annually in New York.
That lunch was started by GAEL GREENE, the food writer, who is among those expected in Aspen.


At the Movies
Claude Chabrol's Work
Here, there and everywhere.
That just about describes Claude Chabrol.


Beyond Just Complaining; Self-Fullfilling Pessimism Is Said to Infect New York
New Yorkers are good complainers.
They love to moan about taxi drivers who don't know their way around the city, stalled subway trains, insufferable co-op boards -- anything to get across the constant indignities they have to put up with.
But lately, this pessimism has grown to the point where many people say they no longer see it as a reflection of other problems, but as a problem in and of itself.
It is leading business executives to curtail investments in local operations and expand elsewhere.
Longtime residents are making plans to move far away.
Some even think this new pessimism is causing consumers to spend less.


Jobless Claims Fell by 20,000 in Midmonth
New applications for jobless benefits fell 20,000 in mid-December, the Government said today, but the number of claims remained at recession levels.
The Labor Department said first-time unemployment claims for the week that ended on Dec. 14 fell to 473,000, from 493,000 the previous week, which was inflated by a surge of applications after the Thanksgiving holiday.


Save Ellis Island's Ghosts
There are two Ellis Islands, one vibrant, one dying.
The vibrant part includes the Main Building, a vast brick temple to America's past, opened with fanfare in late 1990 and rechristened the Ellis Island Museum of Immigration.
It is an architectural triumph and a worthy tribute to the 12 million people who passed through its doors in their passage to this nation of immigrants.
The other Ellis Island, untouched by the restorers and off limits to visitors, lies south of the Main Building.
It contains the ferry slip, a decaying hospital, contagious disease wards and many dark, forbidding rooms.
This Ellis Island is the focus of a dispute between two competing forces.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about Senator Daniel P. Moynihan's efforts to have the Federal Government repay New York State for rebuilding the Thruway misstated the amount of repayments authorized by Congress last month for two other states.
California will get $1.6 billion and Texas $1.1 billion.


China Blames Gorbachev for the Debacle
China reported today without comment the resignation of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, but in a separate analysis the official press agency blamed him for his country's troubles.
News about the disintegration of the Soviet Union has been reported swiftly and dispassionately on Chinese radio, and to a lesser extent in Chinese newspapers and television.
The Chinese leadership appeared to derive a measure of satisfaction in the difficulties of its former Communist "big brother," partly as a cautionary tale that abandoning Communist Party rule might lead to chaos and economic decline.


The Republican Obligation in Albany
Once again Albany is paralyzed, unable to close New York State's budget gap or even agree on a strategy for closing it.
And once again the Republican Senate, led by Ralph Marino of Long Island, is the stumbling block.
After nearly two months of fruitless negotiations, the Senate majority leader has an obligation to help forge a compromise.
The legislators will have to approve hundreds of millions of dollars in spending cuts -- the last thing they want as they approach re-election.
Mr.
Marino wants Medicaid and social services to take the bulk of the cuts, imposing disproportionate pain on the poor and unemployed.
If Mr.
Marino produced a humane plan for spending cuts, it would be worth considering.
But he has not.


CHRONICLE
There are a few powerful women left in places other than Aspen this week.
In Bernardsville, N.J., MILLICENT FENWICK was ruminating about power, too.
The former United States Congresswoman who was the inspiration for the "Doonesbury" character Lacey Davenport, says that retirement has not mellowed her distrust of Democrats or of big Government.
"I have noticed that the automatic reaction to problems of high-minded, intelligent and sometimes adorable Democrats," she said, "is 'Government must do something.' Republicans say, 'We must do something.' I have noticed it everywhere."


What of the Children of Interracial Marriage?
To the Editor:
While your Dec. 2 front-page article on interracial marriage explores the views of people in black-white marriages and quotes professionals who have studied them, it leaves out the voices of the products of such marriages: interracial children.


A New Generation Discovers LSD, and Its Dangers
Cocaine, marijuana and alcohol have been losing popularity among high school students for years, but a growing number of young people are using LSD, the drug that helped define the counterculture of the 1960's.
"We thought it had largely faded away," said Robert C. Bonner, the head of the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration.
"But we're seeing an increase in use of the drug now, a re-emergence."


Small Plane Crash Lands On Highway
The pilot of a small private plane made an emergency crash-landing on Interstate 95 here this morning, suffering serious injuries but avoiding a collision with any cars or trucks on the highway.
The crash tied up southbound traffic for four hours, the state police said.
Because of a post-Christmas lull, the highway -- usually bumper to bumper with 18-wheelers, mini-vans and sedans during a normal morning rush -- was virtually empty at 9:16 A.M., when the pilot, Stanley Postyn, radioed that he was having trouble with his single-engine Piper Comanche, the state police said.


Regulators Moving to Break Local Telephone Monopolies
Led by New York regulators, state officials around the country are moving to end the virtual monopolies that local telephone companies have long enjoyed.
In a far-reaching order, the New York State Public Service Commission on Nov. 25 adopted new rules that are likely to spur far greater competition in local telephone service than at any time since the industry's earliest years.


Prosecutors Considering A Howe Felony Charge
Federal prosecutors are considering expanding the misdemeanor drug charge against Yankee pitcher Steve Howe to a felony, a Montana law enforcement official said today.
Ben Yarbrough, the chief of the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration in Montana, said in a telephone interview from his office in Great Falls that the case could be widened from possession of cocaine to "conspiracy to be involved in a drug scheme."


Study Says U.S. Is Not Monitoring Arms Aid
The United States is not adequately monitoring what happens to billions of dollars in arms and military equipment supplied each year to foreign countries, a report from the General Accounting Office has concluded.
A 10-month investigation by the office's national security and international affairs division found in spot checks that equipment had been sold in contravention of American law or had simply disappeared from the custody of foreign governments that were lax in keeping records on military transfers from the United States.


Elmore Spencer Upset
The National Collegiate Athletic Association should spend more money on lifetime scholarships for student athletes and less on the organization itself, according to Nevada-Las Vegas starting center ELMORE SPENCER.
"They're raping the players and they're raping the schools," Spencer said in Las Vegas.


Beijing Journal; Trading Cloak and Dagger for Pen and New Ideals
In 1981, when Dai Qing was a novice Communist spy and the United States was a potential enemy, her bosses once asked her to try to engage an American reporter as a source for the Chinese Government and to draw up a memo on her subject.
She obeyed.
But now a decade later, she is a reporter and no longer an obedient servant: she has resigned from the Chinese Communist Party.
And in a strange twist, the American Government turned out to be a friend and helped her obtain permission to go abroad from unwilling Chinese officials.


Bobby Hull on Attack
Once known for his blistering slap shot, BOBBY HULL is now firing verbal blasts at the National Hockey League.
"All you see are these big kookaloos," Hull said during a visit to Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan.
"That's why the game looks like it's played by robots. They all play the same way, other than a chosen few. They're all like trees."


On Bill Clinton


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
4.50
4.50
10.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.82
3.82
6.49
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.91
3.89
6.59
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.46
6.47
7.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.50
7.51
8.23
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.65
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.71
6.72
7.47
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Don't Alter Rape Law Because of Smith Case; Discouraging Lesson
To the Editor:
What important lesson can we learn from the rape trial of William Kennedy Smith?
That if an intelligent medical student can pick up an unknown woman and have sex with her, we can assume that hundreds of thousands of men and women who should know better are acting just as irresponsibly.


Listen, New York, This Man Just Wants to Learn English
Sam Baraker, who arrived in Brooklyn 10 months ago from Ukraine, has been looking for someone who will speak English with him.
He spends five mornings a week in an English class for immigrants, but that is not enough.
"I have no friends in America," he said.
"Now I have an empty life. I cannot connect. If I have language, and job, then I have full life. I need learn English. I need conversation with people."


Don't Alter Rape Law Because of Smith Case; Not at Georgetown
To the Editor:
Wherever did Catharine A. MacKinnon ("The Palm Beach Hanging," Op-Ed, Dec. 15) get the idea that "pornography" is "used in some medical schools to desensitize students"?
That William Kennedy Smith could possibly have learned that "no" means "yes" through curricular pornography at Georgetown (of all places) is simply absurd.


Gary Hager, 40, Dies; Was Interior Decorator
Gary Hager, an interior decorator with the Manhattan-based firm Parish-Hadley Associates, died yesterday at his sister's home in Williamsville in Erie County.
He was 40 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, his family said.


For Children
Children's Holiday Movies  Metropolitan Museum of Art  Fifth Avenue at 82d Street  Manhattan  (212) 879-5500  Recommended ages: 3 to 10  Tonight and tomorrow
In the cavernous Uris Center Auditorium on the lower level of the Met, four short films, to be shown tonight and tomorrow at 7:30 P.M., should keep the softer flame of Christmas flickering.
Before or after a visit to the Baroque creche in the Medieval Sculpture Hall, children can watch "The Great Frost," a color film whose story is a passage from Virginia Woolf's "Orlando." In animation by Seymour Chwast, the English countryside is turned to stone after a severe frost while London swirls in a carnivalesque atmosphere.
The pithy, highbrow narrative -- "petrifaction ensued" -- then focuses on a mysterious skater on a London pond wearing "oyster-colored velvet," who disappears and then reappears to swell Orlando's heart.


Washington Journal; It's a Mad, Mad World for Map Makers
Oh, to be in Bishkek, now democracy's there.
As Bill Gotthardt, the maps editor at the National Geographic Society, bends over his light table crossing out one more place name on the old Soviet map, one gets the distinct impression that he might prefer being in Frunze Bishkek, the capital of Kirghizia Kyrgyzstan, rather than here trying to cope with the cartographic revolution in the Soviet Union Commonwealth of Independent States.
Not that he says anything like that.
Faced with the biggest upheaval in map making since the end of European colonialism in Africa in the mid-1960's, Mr.
Gotthardt shows no indication of panic or anxiety, though the society's maps are growing obsolete faster than you can say "Commonwealth of Independent States."


Strickland Wants Fans to See That Bad Guys Aren't So Bad
From DePaul to the Knicks to the San Antonio Spurs, controversy has been Rod Strickland's constant companion.
Strickland's latest adventure, a bitter two-month contract holdout with the Spurs, ended Monday when Strickland signed for one year at $1.3 million.
Angry that Strickland had missed the first 24 games, San Antonio fans greeted him with more boos than cheers when he was introduced before Monday's game against the Sacramento Kings.
He started and played 35 minutes, contributing 12 points and 6 assists in a 101-90 victory.


Turning Over A Ship Adrift
President Bush's choice for Commerce Secretary, Barbara H. Franklin, will inherit an agency diminished by its loss of primacy over international trade and somewhat weakened by the management style of its current leader, Robert A. Mosbacher.
Mr.
Mosbacher, who will leave next month to head the President's re-election campaign, has played a limited role in interagency debates on business-related issues like tax and health policy and international trade.
Unlike his combative predecessor, Malcolm Baldrige, he has spent much of his tenure jetting around the world on trade missions with the nation's corporate elite, seeking to open new markets for American exports.


Review/Art; The Esthetic Universe Of Asian Lacquerware
It's not every day that an exhibition of an ancient and esoteric art form charts a complex esthetic universe, and does so in ways that are immensely accessible.
This, however, is the achievement of "East Asian Lacquer: The Florence and Herbert Irving Collection," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, an intense, quietly stunning show that is one of the sleepers of the season.
Accompanied by a useful and well-illustrated catalogue, this display of 190 examples of Chinese, Japanese, Korean and Okinawan lacquerware from the 13th to the late 19th century is cause for celebration among scholars of Oriental art, and at the museum, too.
The collection that Mr. and Mrs.
Irving have assembled over the past 25 years is eventually to be given to the Metropolitan, transforming it into a major center for the study of lacquer in this country.


Deadpan Buster in a Crazy World
NEAR the middle of "Sherlock Jr.," Buster Keaton, as a movie projectionist who wants to be a detective, walks down the aisle of the theater and enters the film he's showing to save the girl on the screen.
It may be the most beatifically funny and deranged sequence in all cinema as Buster, who knows only the physical laws of our world, attempts to adjust to those of movies.
Someone keeps changing the locations on him.
One minute Buster is in a drawing room; a split second later he's in the Sahara.
Standing on a small, isolated rock in the middle of the ocean, he dives in and lands, headfirst, in a snowbank.
Buster copes.
He doesn't shake his fist at the gods, question their motives or feel sorry for himself.
There isn't time; it's enough just to keep up with a landscape that won't stand still.


BRIEFS
Common Stock  *
Data Map Inc., Eden Prairie, Minn., privately placed one million shares of common stock at $1.50 a share.
The company, which designs and markets geographic information software, said it would use the proceeds for working capital and development.


Art in Review
'The New American Ghetto'  Storefront for Art and Architecture 97 Kenmare Street SoHo Through Jan. 18
Operating in a pint-sized space on a shoestring budget, this downtown nonprofit gallery has mounted a major show on American urbanism.
It is based on the work of Camilo Jose Vergara, a journalist who has been photographing poor communities across the United States for 15 years.
Mr.
Vergara's pictures record the emergence of what he contends is a new urban form.
Unlike the traditional skid row, which was a product of social neglect, today's slum is as institutionalized as an Army camp.
And in contrast to the public-housing projects of a generation ago, the ghetto is now a full-service community where the services consist of shelters, clinics, police stations and prisons.
Mr.
Vergara's photographs show this development unfolding in stages in cities nationwide: the collapse of local industries that once provided jobs; the demolition of residential buildings that have decayed beyond repair and the appearance on this erased terrain of new, fortresslike buildings that house what the photographer terms "the homeless industry." Not all of Mr.
Vergara's images are bleak.
Many poor communities are rich in wall paintings blazing with color and indignation.
It is evident, however, that such murals are now as standard a feature of ghetto life as methadone clinics; the viewer is left with the impression that even outlets for anger have been institutionalized.


Lawsuit Challenges New Political Map
A lawsuit challenging Connecticut's re-apportionment plan was filed today in the state's highest court.
The suit in state Supreme Court was brought by a group of Hartford lawmakers and residents opposed to how the state's new political boundaries have been drawn.
A hearing was set for Jan. 14.


Don't Alter Rape Law Because of Smith Case
To the Editor:
In "The Palm Beach Hanging" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15), on the rape trial of William Kennedy Smith, Catharine A. MacKinnon suggests treating rape cases as civil cases, requiring proof by a preponderance of the evidence, rather than proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
This suggestion is contrary to the interests of a society attempting to deal with rape as a real social problem, rather than an occasion for ideological rhetoric.


Russians Greet Raising of New Flag With Expressions of Pride and Relief
The 149 million people in this country woke up today living under the Russian flag in a land called Russia for the first time in 74 years.
Some marked the transition as an event of national pride, some viewed it as a reminder of an agonizing rebirth that was still under way, while others ignored it in their daily struggle with food shortages and hunt for presentable New Year's gifts.


Market Place; Mild Optimism For Steelmakers
IN the last year, the steel industry has suffered some of its worst times since the early 1980's.
After years of closing plants, laying off workers, and improving productivity, steelmakers' fortunes began to improve markedly by the late 1980's.
But the recession has eroded nearly all those gains.
The question now: How long will the bad times linger?


Clinton Delivers a Mainstream Message With a Southern Accent
Bill Clinton moved easily through a meeting room at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel here, chatting up the Democrats who had put on expensive suits and velvet holiday dresses to meet the Arkansas Governor and write $500 checks for his Presidential campaign.
After spending weeks on the campaign trail in chilly New Hampshire, Mr.
Clinton was back in the region he knows best: the South.
That night, he collected endorsements from two important Georgians, Gov.
Zell Miller and Senator Sam Nunn, and raised $75,000 from well-heeled Atlantans.
Today, he flew to Tennessee to woo Democrats with deep pockets in Memphis and Nashville.


Slow Year In Drilling For U.S. Oil
When the final weekly figures for the year are released on Friday, oil-drilling activity for the United States in 1991 is certain to rank as the slowest of any year since the Government restricted drilling for military reasons in 1942.
The energy industry clamped down on domestic drilling as it confronted low prices for crude and natural gas, the recession and environmental laws that forbid the industry to drill in prime areas of potentially big reserves in Alaska and near the California coastline.


Albany May Halt Funds to Build Group Homes for the Mentally Ill
New York State leaders are seriously considering ending or sharply curtailing spending to open new group homes for the mentally ill for the next 15 months -- a money-saving move that city officials say would mean more disturbed people on the streets, in homeless shelters and in hospitals.
The proposals are part of broad cuts to close an estimated $5 billion budget gap through the end of the next fiscal year.
State Senator Ralph J. Marino, the majority leader, advocates a 15-month moratorium on expansion of community-based housing for the mentally ill, including 1,616 apartments promised for the homeless mentally ill in New York City.


Bonds Post Modest Rise in Light Day
Bond prices rose modestly yesterday on the strength of slight buying by mutual funds and other investors who had cash but were not willing to keep it invested in low-yielding short-term securities.
By late in the day, the 8 percent Treasury bonds due in 2021 were offered at 105 7/8, up by an eighth of a point on the day, to yield 7.50 percent, compared with 7.51 percent late on Tuesday.
Shorter-term issues were little changed, with two-year notes closing with a yield of 4.83 percent and five-year notes at 6 percent.


On My Mind; Don't Send Aid
Don't send aid, Russians in Moscow kept saying -- bring it.
Bring it, manage it, guard it.
That message was repeated to me over and over as the days of the Soviet Union came to an end.
It was the plainest testimony to the destruction by Communism not just of the economy but of trust in almost everything connected with government and bureaucracy.


Tax-Exempt Yields Are Up; Taxables Continue to Drop
Yields on tax-exempt money market funds showed a significant rise over the last week, according to IBC/ Donoghue's, which monitors the funds and issues The Money Fund Report.
At the same time the taxable funds continued their steady downward progress, dropping quite sharply.
Referring to the tax-exempts, Walter S. Frank, chief economist for IBC/ Donoghue's, said that yields had probably risen "because of the large supply of municipal securities that has come to market before the year end."


On Stage, and Off
'Will Rogers' Answers Back
The producers of "The Will Rogers Follies" say "not guilty" to charges of discrimination in its casting, first to a grievance filed by Actors' Equity with the League of American Theaters and Producers, and this week in response to a letter from New York City's Human Rights Commission, which states its intention to investigate charges of discrimination made by a group called Performers Against Racism in Theater and Stage.


Steinbrenner Gets Ready to Knock on the Door
George Steinbrenner quietly, but determinedly, started on the road back yesterday, telling his partners that he will attempt to return as the Yankees' managing general partner as soon as lawyers conclude talks to eliminate two lawsuits that serve as major obstacles to his comeback.
Steinbrenner and the partners met in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., five days before Robert Nederlander is scheduled to step down as managing partner, the role from which Steinbrenner was ousted by Commissioner Fay Vincent 19 months ago.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stock prices rose to record levels, continuing a rally that has defied gloomy expectations about the nation's economy and apparently reflecting confidence that a recovery will finally appear in 1992.
The Dow climbed 31.98, to 3,082.96.
That represents a 5.8 percent rise in the four days since the Fed rate cut and puts it 17.1 percent above its level on Jan. 1.  [ Page A1. ]


2 Cut Ratings on G.M. Debt
Two rating agencies lowered their grades yesterday on debt issued by the General Motors Corporation and its finance unit, citing their doubts about how readily the cutbacks by the company would reverse its fortunes.
The expectation of lower ratings has raised the interest rates the company must pay for financing.
But the ratings remain investment grade, and keep the General Motors Acceptance Corporation's commercial paper from falling into a lower tier that is more difficult to market.


Arts Festival Gives the Apple a Run for Its Bubbly
Yes, the apple will drop in Times Square on New Year's Eve, but this year it faces competition.
As an alternative to the traditional crush on Broadway, revelers can feast on New York's first First Night, a menu of more than 40 events in midtown Manhattan, ranging from clog dancing to medieval singing.
First Night, a celebration that originated in Boston 15 years ago and has since spread throughout the United States and Canada, has been organized by the Grand Central Partnership, a coalition of property owners, tenants and city officials seeking to revitalize a 50-block area around Grand Central Terminal.


Raiders Expected to Start Marinovich
Two days before their wild-card playoff game at Kansas City, the Los Angeles Raiders were still operating in secret.
But the one thing that Coach Art Shell wanted private is apparently common knowledge now: Todd Marinovich, the rookie quarterback who played to rave reviews on Sunday, will be his starter against the Chiefs again on Saturday.
Shell acknowledged today that both Marinovich and Jay Schroeder, the team's starter for 33 consecutive games until last week, were both getting practice time.


Review/Art; Examining How 'Maus' Evolved
The latest exhibition in the Museum of Modern Art's "Projects" series devoted to contemporary art could not be better timed to the literary calendar.
It traces the evolution of "Maus," Art Spiegelman's affecting comic-strip recounting of the Holocaust, the second and concluding volume of which has recently been published and already become a fixture on best-seller lists.
The problem for the list-makers has been how to define "Maus," which has been categorized under both fiction and nonfiction. (Sunday's New York Times Book Review switches the second volume from fiction to nonfiction on its best-seller list.) Mr.
Spiegelman's work is not like most comics.
Nor is it strictly fine art.
It confounds simple description.


Sarah Nederlander, 97
Sarah Nederlander, the matriarch of the Nederlander theatrical family, died on Dec. 19 at her home in Southfield, Mich.
She was 97 years old.
She died of natural causes, said David Techner, funeral director of the Ira Kaufman Chapel in Southfield.


Oilers' Running Game Is Passed Over
Early this season, Houston had put the run back in its run-and-shoot offense.
Allen Pinkett opened the season with 144 yards rushing against the Raiders and followed it the next week with 101 yards against the Bengals.
By the time the Oilers made it around to playing the Jets in the seventh week of the season, though, Houston's running game was out of gas.
The Jets stuffed the Oilers' ground game even more, limiting them to just 27 yards rushing, which shifted the emphasis to the passing attack.


Ruby's Gun: $220,000 and a Million Questions
In a hotel ballroom still decorated for Christmas, Earl Ruby sat at a table yesterday near the black snub-nosed revolver his brother Jack used to kill Lee Harvey Oswald and, as he has for 28 years, answered questions about The Conspiracy: the Grassy Knoll, the Mafia, the Warren Commission, and now, Oliver Stone.
"I'm sure you've been asked this a million times," Albert Perry, a schoolteacher from Connecticut, said, and then asked, "Do you think Oswald acted alone?"


Swinging to Your Own Beat on New Year's Eve
PRIVATE parties are one New Year's Eve option; sulking at home is another.
Some hardy thousands rub shoulders with strangers in the midnight crowd at Times Square.
But for those who want to mix the thrill of big-city anonymity with a sense of underlying camaraderie, music offers the perfect social catalyst.
In New York City, huge numbers of people prefer not just to ring in the New Year, but to twang it in or stomp along with it, to ease the year in with the voice of a favorite crooner or to crash into January with a beat they can feel in their bones.
On New Year's Eve, the places that present music in New York do their best to book performers who can turn a roomful of strangers into a community of revelers.


Pilot Is Injured in a Crash-Landing on Connecticut Highway


Love, Politics and Disaster In 19th-Century Ireland
Ireland's English problem is given a provocative twirl in "Parnell and the Englishwoman," the four-part Hugh Leonard drama beginning on Sunday on public television's "Masterpiece Theater" (Channel 13 at 9 P.M.).
Trevor Eve plays Charles Stewart Parnell, born in Ireland in 1846 and going on to become the leader of a movement that many historians still consider the biggest missed opportunity for settling the long bitter tensions between Ireland and England.
Francesca Annis plays Katherine O'Shea, the married woman who becomes Parnell's lover and, in the end, his wife.
She will also, tragically, be his downfall.
Parnell was what the Irish call a quare fella.
His mother was an American.
He himself, a member of the landed gentry, was Protestant, not much of a political asset in a country dominated by the Roman Catholic Church.
Yet elected to the British Parliament in 1875, his efforts to expose the cruelties of English landlords in Ireland and to establish home rule for his country made him so popular with his constituents that he became known as Ireland's uncrowned king.


Occidental Sells Cattle Interests
The Occidental Petroleum Corporation completed the sale of its herd of purebred cattle and the Ankony Shadow Isle name and trademarks to the Ankony Angus Corporation of Georgia.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed, but the price was expected to be less than $2 million.
The herd was among the more unusual operations Occidental has put up for sale since the death of its former chairman, Dr.
Armand Hammer, last December.
Dr.
Ray R. Irani, the new chairman, has sold operations to reduce debt and refocus the company's attention on core businesses of oil and chemicals.
He has said Occidental's debt load will be cut by $3 billion by 1993.


Devils Squander Leads, Not to Mention Confidence
It is perhaps too early to push a panic button or activate a siren, but the Devils' record in the Patrick Division has reached alarming proportions.
A marvelous opportunity to improve their division mark tonight went up in smoke for the Devils in their game against the Islanders at Nassau Coliseum.


Concerts and Goings-On
Here is a sampling of New Year's Eve events in New York City.
New Year's Eve
ALL BACH CONCERT, St.
Jean Baptiste Roman Catholic Church, Lexington Avenue and 76th Street, Manhattan.
Program features Orchestral Suite No. 3; Mass in F; the "Brandenburg" Concerto No. 4, and Cantatas Nos. 158 and 189, performed by the Amor Artis Chorus and Baroque Orchestra; Johannes Somary, music director; Cheryl Bensman Rowe, soprano; Jeffrey Dooley, countertenor; Patrick Romano, tenor, and John Ostendorf, bass. 8 P.M.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 874-4513.
BIG APPLE CIRCUS, Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center.
A holiday performance of this season's show, "Greetings From Coney Island," at 9:30 P.M.
Tickets, $30 to $75, include a champagne toast and favors.
Information: (212) 307-7171 or (212) 721-6500.
"BRANDENBURG" CONCERTOS, Tisch Center for the Arts, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
All six concertos performed by the New York Chamber Symphony; Jaime Laredo, conductor. 8 P.M.
Tickets, $37.50.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
"BRANDENBURG" CONCERTOS, Bargemusic, Brooklyn Bridge, Fulton Ferry Landing.
Bach's "Brandenburg" Concertos Nos. 3, 5 and 6; at 7:30 P.M.
The musicians will be Theodore Arm, Carmit Zori and Eriko Sato, violinists; David Fedele, a flutist; Ik-Hwan Bae, Paul Neubauer and Robert Rinehart, violists; Fred Sherry, Jian Wang and Sund-Won Yang, cellists; Robert Wolinsky, a harpsichordist, and Lewis Paer, a bassist.
The tickets, $100, include champagne.
Information: (718) 624-2083.
BRAZILIAN MUSIC FESTIVAL, Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Manhattan.
A nine-week festival featuring a variety of performers begins New Year's Eve with shows by Tania Alves at 10:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.
The cover charge is $45; there is a two-drink minimum.
Reservations: (212) 244-3005.
CHINATOWN TOUR, sponsored by Adventure on a Shoestring.
A tour of the area, led by Howard Goldberg, founder of the group, is followed by dinner at a local restaurant. 6 P.M.
The tour fee is $5; dinner is an additional $8.
Meeting place and reservations: (212) 265-2663.
"FIRST NIGHT AT THE PUBLIC: A NEW YEAR'S EVE REVELATION," Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, Manhattan.
An evening of music, dancing, film, poetry and comedy featuring the Brazilian band Sambrazil; screenings of Jean Cocteau's "Blood of a Poet," and vintage cartoons and participatory performances by the theater ensemble Home for Contemporary Theater. 9 P.M.
Tickets are $15 a person or $25 a couple.
Information: (212) 598-7150.
GALA NINTH ANNUAL NEW YEAR'S EVE CONCERT FOR PEACE, Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, 1047 Amsterdam Avenue, at 112th Street, in Manhattan.
Featured performors are the Brooklyn Philharmonic Orchestra, conducted by Lukas Foss; Hilda Harris, mezzo-soprano; Carol Wincenc, flutist; Scott St.
John, violinist; Humbert Lucarelli, oboist; the Pipes and Drums of New York State Courts; the Ensemble for Early Music; the singer Odetta; the actors George Hearn and Cecily Tyson, and others. 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 662-2133.
FIREWORKS DISPLAY, South Street Seaport, lower Manhattan.
Best viewing is from the streets along the East River in lower Manhattan and the Brooklyn Heights Promenade. 9:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 732-7678.
FIREWORKS DISPLAY, Prospect Park, Grand Army Plaza, Park Slope, Brooklyn, at midnight.
"THE MIKADO," Symphony Space, Broadway and 95th Street, Manhattan.
Gilbert and Sullivan's operetta is presented by the New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $30 to $45, and include a champagne gala.
Information: (212) 864-5400.
MARATHON READING, Paula Cooper Gallery, 155 Wooster Street, SoHo.
Nonstop reading of Gertrude Stein's "Making of Americans" begins Dec. 30 at 6 P.M. and runs through 7 P.M.
New Year's Day.
Free.
Information: (212) 787-8556.
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC, Avery Fisher Hall.
Leonard Slatkin conducts a New Year's Eve program that includes Herold's "Zampa" Overture; Faure's "Pavane"; Saint-Saens's "Carnival of the Animals"; Josef Strauss's "Ohne Sorgen," and Johan Strauss Jr.'s Overture to "Die Fledermaus," "Artists Quadrille," "Champagne" Polka and "Emperor" Waltz. 8 P.M.
Remaining tickets are $75.
Information: (212) 875-5030.
A ST.
GEORGE'S NEW YEAR'S EVE, St.
George's Episcopal Church, 209 East 16th Street, Manhattan.
A celebration with music, poetry and dance, featuring Kenneth Dake, an organist; Kathleen Fogarty, a soprano, and Christine Kuhnke, a dancer. 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 475-0830.
TIMES SQUARE.
Annual celebration of the New Year.
Crowds begin forming about 10 P.M. to witness the fall of the lighted ball at midnight.


Don't Alter Rape Law Because of Smith Case; Collective Guilt
To the Editor:
Catharine A. MacKinnon's "Palm Beach Hanging" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15) exudes the prejudice that permeates feminist legal theory.
Referring to men as a "group sexually trained to woman-hating aggression" and as a "group who aggress," she stereotypes millions of innocent men as rapists and fosters the concept of collective guilt invoked by Hitler and Stalin to justify exterminating racial and political minorities.


G.E. Names New Head For Distribution Unit
W.
James McNerney Jr., who was named yesterday as the new head of the General Electric Company's $1.7 billion Electrical Distribution and Control business, is quick to say he has a lot of homework to do.
He comes to his new post with a background in consumer products, consulting, and a variety of assignments at G.E. that have little to do with the circuit breakers, automation controls, switches, transformers and other industrial equipment in which his new group specializes.
Mr.
McNerney, 42 years old, will replace Stephen Rabinowitz, 48, who was named vice president in charge of special projects.
In a news release announcing the changes, John F. Welch Jr., G.E.'s chairman and chief executive, ambiguously described the unit as "one of G.E.'s most competitive global businessess." When asked whether he thought Mr.
Welch meant that G.E. products had an unusually strong position or that the industry was a particularly tough one for G.E., Mr.
McNerney was uncertain.


Economic Scene; What's Different About This Slump
WHAT was at first regarded by the Bush Administration and the Federal Reserve as a mild and brief recession has become a long and painful one, possibly even what some economists are calling a "quiet depression."
David M. Jones, chief economist of Aubrey G. Lanston &amp; Company, says this slump is distinguished from its postwar predecessors by a clash between a dangerously overleveraged economy and unusually severe bank loan stringency.
"The threat posed is an all-out private-sector credit contraction and asset price deflation, accompanied by mounting corporate bankruptcies and bank failures," he said.
"The resulting decline in consumer wealth could curtail spending for a prolonged period."


'Son of Sam' Isn't a Free Speech Ruling
To the Editor:
It is astounding that the Supreme Court would unanimously overturn the "Son of Sam" law without acknowledging its fundamentally punitive nature.
Despite your plaudits (editorial, Dec. 12) and those of others in the publishing industry, the ruling was not a victory for free speech.
Rather, it was a victory for the news media (aided by an inept defense by New York's Attorney General), which convinced the Court that it violated the First Amendment.


Art in Review
'New Photography 7'  Museum of Modern Art
11 West 53d Street Through Jan. 7
If anything unites the three disparate photographers in the latest edition of this continuing series of group exhibitions, it's the essentially pictorial nature of their work.
The German photojournalist Eberhard Grames presents a series of color photographs from a trip to East Germany in 1989.
Made with a large-format camera, the pictures capture the country's rundown, threadbare quality and the lives of its inhabitants.
But the images' crisp detail and soft colors give the scenes an artificial quality, as if they were sets on a Hollywood backlot or in some perverse Disneyland.
Mr.
Grames approaches his glum subject with an essentially lyrical eye.
In one image, a young boy stares cockily through the broken window of a rusted-out car in a lot strewn with debris.
The oil-smeared "DDR" sign on the back bumper completes the overly obvious symbolism.


Politicians Remain Stalled In Transit Negotiations
Transit officials worked feverishly yesterday with representatives of Mayor David N. Dinkins and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to try to break the political stalemate over New York City's subway and bus fare.
But with the critical vote on the fare scheduled for today, no consensus appeared to have emerged.
The Transit Authority, which operates the subway and buses, has proposed that the $1.15 fare be raised to $1.40 on Wednesday to cover a projected $263 million deficit in its 1992 budget.
By law, the agency's $3.6 billion budget must be in balance at the start of the new year.


Quotation of the Day
"I say, 'Can you help me with pronunciation?' Some people help me. Then I say, 'Maybe we meet after for speak English.' I give my telephone number. I say, 'Call me.' No one call me." SAM BARAKER, learning English in New York City.  [ A1:5 ]


Dow Soars to Record 3,082.96 Despite Vulnerable Economy
Stock prices jumped to record levels yesterday, continuing a rally that has defied gloomy expectations about the nation's economy.
The rise apparently reflects confidence that a recovery will finally appear in 1992.
In a market that showed surprising strength, with many investors still distracted by the holidays, several indexes reached highs.
The rally began in earnest when the Federal Reserve cut interest rates last Friday; the clear belief is that low interest rates will encourage companies to invest, and with yields down on other investments, stocks have become a more attractive option.


Cal's White to Stay
California tailback RUSSELL WHITE ended rumors that he would enter the 1992 National Football League draft by announcing yesterday that he would play his senior year in Berkeley. (AP)


Sports of The Times; Coslet's Wife Knows The Score
ALL illusions end when Bruce Coslet opens the front door.
He has been trying to spread the impression that the Jets are an 0-0 team, starting their unexpected playoff season on Sunday in Houston.
But as soon as Coslet gets home, his wife, Kathy, sets him straight, as wives are known to do.
"My wife's theory," Coslet explained yesterday, "is that we beat Chicago, New England and Indianapolis. We're 11-5 on a roll."


Odd Couple in South Africa: Mutual Needs
At a news conference last Friday, Nelson Mandela, the president of the African National Congress, dismissed a question about whether his public argument with President F. W. de Klerk minutes earlier had damaged their ability to work together.
"It's a closed matter," Mr. Mandela said. "I've forgotten about it."


Counselor for Braves
The Atlanta Braves are putting their minds to continued success.
The National League champions have hired JACK LLEWELLYN, a sports psychologist who worked with pitcher JOHN SMOLTZ last season.
Smoltz started the season 2-11, then began sessions with Llewellyn and wound up 14-13.


METRO DIGEST
CUTS WEIGHED FOR MENTALLY ILL
Top New York State officials and legislators are seriously considering ending or sharply curtailing spending to open new group homes for the mentally ill next year -- a money-saving move that New York City officials say would translate into more disturbed people on the streets, in homeless shelters and in hospitals.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY BROTHER, CAN YOU SPARE A LINE?
For 21 immigrants, the hardest thing to find in New York may be one American besides their teacher who will speak English with them.
But Sam Baraker, who arrived 10 months ago from Ukraine, has discovered one solution after many unsuccessful attempts to parley on the subway: ordering catalogues through 800 numbers.
A1.
FARE FIGHT RAGES ON
Transit officials worked feverishly yesterday with representatives of Mayor Dinkins and Governor Cuomo to break the political stalemate over New York City's subway and bus fare.
But with the critical vote on the fare scheduled for today, no consensus appeared to have emerged from the private negotiations.
B3.
BIDDING ON AN ASSASSIN'S GUN
What would you pay for the gun that killed Lee Harvey Oswald?
An unnamed buyer paid $220,000, as the gun and 300 autographs and other pieces of Americana were auctioned off in the Omni Park Central Hotel, and Jack Ruby's brother, Earl, answered questions about conspiracy theories and Oliver Stone.
B3.
HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS RECALL NEEDIEST
Remembering their fears or their families or their heroes, dozens of people who escaped Nazi Germany show their gratitude every year by contributing to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
B3.
State will not finance TriBeCa drug center.
B2.
Tears for another stolen icon.
B4.
REGION NO AGREEMENT, AND NO BREAK
Governor Cuomo ordered all members of the Republican-led State Senate back to work on Friday, interrupting their Christmas break in an apparent effort to force the reluctant legislators to act on an $875 million deficit-reduction package that the Assembly has already approved.
B2.
WACHTLER MAKES A PROMISE
In what appears to be the latest salvo in his budget fight with Governor Cuomo, Sol Wachtler, New York's Chief Judge, has promised to try to raise judges' pay.
B5.
PLANES LANDS ON I-95
Thanks to the post-Christmas lull in traffic, the pilot of a small private plane was able to make an emergency landing on Interstate 95 in Stratford, Conn., seriously injuring himself but avoiding a collision with any cars or trucks.
B5.
FOR RUSSIA WITH LOVE
Casey Morano and Frank Mina had a great idea: They formed a partnership to help investors do business in the Soviet Union.
Then came the struggle to make contacts without a telephone in a language they didn't speak in a disintegrating land -- and the discovery that Russians are a lot like Americans.
Our Towns, B5.
The Law B16  Chronicle B4


Restaurants
Defying all odds -- and, some might say, common sense in this recession -- the Essex House has unveiled not one but two lavish restaurants: Les Celebrites, an art-festooned, $65-a-person dining room, and Cafe Botanica, a breezier yet ambitious spot in the splendid renovated lobby.
Two years in the making as part of a hotel renovation, Les Celebrites is surprisingly small, with only 14 tables, yet unabashedly opulent: giant gilded columns and ceiling moldings, thickly upholstered rugs and crescent-shaped banquettes, dark mahogany walls, thick red carpets, softly strategic lighting.
The tables for 54 guests are set with Bernardaud Limoges plates, Christofle silver and glittering crystal.
Nice touches, but unnecessary really, for the food of Christian Delouvrier, the chef, would be heavenly on paper plates.


Review/Film; Artist Looks For Material By Talking To Strangers
A nearly perfect antidote to today's jazzy conception of montage, seemingly designed for short attention spans, is Rob Tregenza's stylistic tour de force titled "Talking to Strangers," being shown today at the Lincoln Center Film Society's new Walter Reade Theater at 8 P.M.
The film will be presented eight more times, at different hours each day, through next Tuesday.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 586 money market mutual funds decreased by $6.14 billion, to $478.97 billion, in the week that ended on Tuesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 217 institutional funds decreased by $3.71 billion, to $159.17 billion.
The assets of the 281 general-purpose funds were down by $1.38 billion, to $176.77 billion.
The 88 broker-dealer funds decreased by $1.05 billion, to $143.03 billion, the institute said.


For Joey, Theresa, Brian, Grace
A speechless movie star, a lesbian center fielder, an offensive lineman called Pops and the daughter of a symbol made the short list of 1991 column subjects I called up this week to wish a Happy New Year.
This is not quite true.
I didn't call Joey Asaro because he can't talk.
He has cerebral palsy and he is mentally disabled.
You have to see Joey to believe him, better yet play basketball with him.
Joey is 39, the joyous sparkplug of the Wildcats, the San Francisco Center for the Handicapped team.
According to Coach Ron Jones, whom I did call, Joey is very happy over his reception as a featured actor in the recent NBC movie, "A Special Victory," in which he played a Special Olympics basketball player.
"Of course, Joey's always happy," said Jones.
"He's just happy to be here, banging into walls."


Rangers Solve Deficit With 7 Big Goals
After watching the Rangers give up six goals tonight in the first period, Coach Roger Neilson went into the dressing room and told his players to keep up the good work.
It was an odd bit of psychology, but Neilson's soft sell resulted in the hardest sort of triumph.
The Rangers came all the way back from a five-goal deficit at the Capital Centre, stealing an 8-6 victory over Washington that gave them a seven-game winning streak and a quite unexpected share of first place in the Patrick Division.


Art in Review
George Woodman Barbara Toll Gallery 146 Greene Street SoHo Through Jan. 11
Better known as a ceramicist, George Woodman here shows some of the photographs he has concentrated on in recent years.
Mr.
Woodman's pictures share the antique, romantic air of the photographs of his daughter Francesca, who killed herself a decade ago, but they lack the edge of existential anguish that marked her work.
Mr.
Woodman prints some of his photographs on large pieces of paper that he coats with emulsion, recalling the rough-and-ready constructions of Mike and Doug Starn; this comparison is further strengthened by Mr.
Woodman's reliance on images from art history.


Robinson And Spurs Jolt Knicks
It looked as if David Robinson was filming a sneakers commercial last night at Madison Square Garden.
One minute he was soaring above the rim for a ferocious dunk.
The next minute, he was blocking one of the Knicks' shots.


INSIDE
Massacre on Train in India
Gunmen described as Sikh separatists systematically shot Hindus on a train in Punjab state, killing at least 49 and wounding 20.
Page A3.
Korean Arms Compromise
North Korea pledged to sign an accord on arms safeguards and allow early inspections of a research site, a South Korean official said.
Page A3.
Subic Withdrawal Seen
The United States will withdraw from Subic Bay Naval Base by the end of 1992, according to an aide to the Philippine President.
Page A6.
Body May Be Hostage's
A body found dumped in Beirut is believed to be that of slain American hostage William Buckley.
Page A6.
New Commerce Aide Named
President Bush has picked Barbara H. Franklin, a well-connected management consultant, to become Commerce Secretary.
Page D1.


Don't Alter Rape Law Because of Smith Case; Leave Loutishness Out
To the Editor:
Before the rape trial, William Kennedy Smith was guilty until proven innocent, and now those like Joyce Purnick (Editorial Notebook, Dec. 14), as if not satisfied by the verdict of not guilty, declare him, well, guilty to a degree.
What service is it for the rights of rape victims to divert attention from the real issue to Mr.
Smith himself?
The real issue is rape, not Mr.
Smith's loutish behavior.


A Weeklong Celebration of Black Heritage Begins


Art in Review
'The 20th-Century City: New York 1900-1990' Houk Friedman Gallery 1094 Madison Avenue (at 82d Street) Through Jan. 4 'New York Stories' Douglas Drake Gallery 50 West 57th Street Through Jan. 10 'The Great New York Show, Part III' Howard Greenberg Gallery 120 Wooster Street SoHo Through Jan. 18
Probably no other city has been photographed as often and to such striking effect as New York, a fact amply demonstrated by these three delightful shows.
Not surprisingly, they overlap somewhat; after all, we're only talking about one city here.
Nevertheless, each manages to offer a distinctive view of New York as it has been captured, and invented, on film.


Dr. Ambrose P. Merrill; Physician, 80
Dr.
Ambrose P. Merrill, a former president of the Hospital Association of New York State, died on Monday in Guilderland Center Nursing Home in Guilderland, outside Albany.
He was 80 years old and a longtime resident of nearby Delmar.
He died of abdominal cancer, said a funeral home spokesman.


Corrections
A caption yesterday with a picture by The Associated Press, about the telecast of "The Kennedy Center Honors: A Celebration of the Performing Arts," misidentified the man at the center in the back row.
He was George Stevens Jr., who produced the program, not James D. Wolfensohn, chairman of the Kennedy Center.


Review of Plan By Banc One
The Banc One Corporation of Columbus, Ohio, said yesterday that it would re-examine its plans to invest $65 million in Premier Bancorp of Baton Rouge, La., after the Federal Reserve imposed new conditions as part of its approval.
Banc One proposed to buy $65 million of long-term bonds issued by Premier in a transaction that would leave Premier independent for now, but would give Banc One an option to buy Premier in four or five years.
The Fed said Tuesday that Banc One must also agree to provide additional financial support to Premier if needed.


Art in Review
Jurgen Albrecht  Blum Helman Gallery  20 West 57th Street  Through Jan. 11
This is the first show in New York City for Jurgen Albrecht, a 37-year-old German sculptor who has produced sculptures too much in the spirit of other artists, from Maria Nordman to Donald Judd and John McCracken.
With museum board, paper and plastic, he has made a series of rectangular tunnels, as much as 13 feet long, open at one end and hung just below eye level.
Through the openings, a viewer sees miniature versions of long white corridors, interrupted by partitions and doorways and illuminated through plastic patches along the tops of the tunnels.
The result is a cross between gazing into a kaleidoscope and perusing an architectural model.


Study Tying Gene to Cancer Risk Draws Fire
A report in the current issue of The New England Journal of Medicine says that as many as 1 percent of women carry a gene that can greatly increase their risk of breast cancer if they are exposed to even low levels of X-rays.
But experts on cancer and radiation are challenging the report, saying the data do not support such a provocative and disturbing statement.
The author of the report, Dr.
Michael Swift of the University of North Carolina, studied 19 women with a single copy of a gene that causes ataxia telangiectasia, a disease affecting coordination, when a person inherits two copies.


Bush Is Hopeful on Arms Cuts
President Bush said he expected to meet soon with President Yeltsin and said arms-control treaties should become easier to reach.
Page A12.


Cellist Recital at Metropolitan Museum
The cellist Matt Haimovitz is to give his only New York recital this season at 7 tonight at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
On the program is the New York premiere of Gyorgy Ligeti's Sonata for Unaccompanied Cello, along with solo works by Bach and Britten.
Mr.
Haimovitz is to be joined by Steven Mackey, a composer and guitarist, in "Improvisations," for guitar and cello.


UNION PUT TO REST, KREMLIN'S ARSENAL IS NOW IN DISPUTE
One day after the demise of the Soviet Union, officials of Russia, Ukraine and the other members of the new Commonwealth of Independent States turned their attention back to the critical military, economic and other issues left unresolved when they agreed to their new association.
Those problems had been brewing in recent weeks as the former Soviet republics tried to forge common policies on control of nuclear and conventional forces and on economic reforms, particularly with Russia due to start a new pricing policy next week.


State Kills TriBeCa Drug Project
New York State has decided not to finance a proposed drug rehabilitation center in TriBeCa, sinking a project that ignited charges of influence peddling and not-in-my-backyard opposition in a neighborhood of artists' lofts and popular nightspots.
A private agency, Project Return, wanted to build an 80-bed center for recovering drug addicts at 107-113 Franklin Street.
The $6.3 million center, to be financed by the state, would also have held the agency's executive offices and a small outpatient service.


Lawyers Expect Ambiguities in New Rights Law to Bring Years of Lawsuits
As they prepare to try cases under the new civil rights act signed last month by President Bush, job discrimination lawyers say it is riddled with confusing and ambiguous provisions that will take the courts years to straighten out.
The goal of the law, which Congress adopted after a bruising two-year debate and many compromises, is to make it easier for women and members of minorities to sue employers on grounds of discrimination.
But legal experts say that in trying to paper over deep philosophical divisions on the issue of racial preferences, the lawmakers further clouded many issues.


Bush Says He Wants to See Yeltsin and Is Hopeful on Arms Control
President Bush said today that he expected to meet with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia soon and predicted that the demise of the Soviet Union would make arms control treaties easier to reach.
Speaking shortly after he signed the Senate's approval of a treaty that cuts NATO and former Warsaw Pact nonnuclear forces in Europe, Mr.
Bush said the two leaders discussed a meeting in a telephone call earlier this week but had not set a date.


Corrupt Officials in Cambodia Put the Country Up for Sale
When a rumor swept through this battered city the other day that the Minister of Transportation, Ros Chhun, had evicted six families from a handsome Government-owned house and sold it off, pocketing the money himself, hundreds of people poured out of the slums and took revenge.
They hauled the furniture out of the house and built a bonfire.
Then they set fire to the Jeep parked outside.
They threw stones through the windows and ripped new white tiles off the walls.
The police were called, but most of them had not been paid in months, so they just watched.
Pocketing the Profits
In the two months since the United Nations brokered a fragile peace agreement for Cambodia, ending 21 years of civil war, people in this weary, barely functioning city reacted first in amazement, and last weekend in violent anger, as officials of the Vietnamese-backed Government sold the country building by building.


AFTER THE SOVIET UNION: Capitalism's New Frontier - A special report; Hunting for Riches in Ex-Soviet Lands
American companies are treating the territories of the now-defunct Soviet Union as wild, unpredictable places, without reliable laws, but good for trying to strike it rich with ventures that skim the cream from an economy in disarray.
Even Fortune 500 companies are signing deals that have a frontier quality.
In fact, the upheaval seems to be stimulating imaginative deal-making, not inhibiting it.
The greater the turmoil and risk, the greater the concessions the authorities in the newly independent lands seem willing to grant, although concern is surfacing that deals born today may be canceled tomorrow by some future government that views them as one-sided and exploitative.
Promise of Big Profits
The guiding principle appears to be this: Gamble as little as possible in a risky investment that might very well return a jackpot profit, if the money is not lost altogether in the chaos.
Robert S. Strauss, a millionaire Texas lawyer and the United States Ambassador to Moscow, describes the potential and the risk by advising business people that if he were younger -- he is 73 -- he would invest $100,000 in the old Soviet Union and run it up into $10 million, but that if he had $10 million, he would gamble only $100,000 of it.


North Korea Vows Atom Inspections
North Korea made a new pledge today to sign and carry out an agreement to allow international inspections of its secret nuclear research center "at an early date," a South Korean official said.
After a day of talks between the Koreas, however, major differences remained over how the inspections would take place and who would make them, raising questions about whether any agreement could be implemented.


Germany Is a Challenge For Post-Soviet Europe
Europeans are adjusting this week to two major shocks.
The Soviet Union is gone, and Germany is back.
East of the Urals, a power center has collapsed.
But in the heart of Europe, an old one is re-emerging.


BRIEFS
*
First Security Corp., Salt Lake City, a bank holding company, completed the acquisition of Utah Bank and Trust, Bountiful, Utah, and merged it into First Security Bank of Utah, Salt Lake City. *
Fuji Heavy Industries, Tokyo, reached a preliminary agreement with Guizhou Aviation Industry to help Guizhou build mini-cars in southern China.


Prof. John Brian Harley, Expert On History of Maps, Is Dead at 59
John Brian Harley, a professor of geography who was a leading expert on the history of maps, died last Friday in Milwaukee.
He was 59 years old.
He died of a heart attack while driving to his campus office at the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee, said Prof.
David Woodward, a university colleague.


Wachtler, in Letter, Vows To Seek Raises for Judges
Despite budget cuts and hundreds of layoffs that have devastated the New York State court system, the state's Chief Judge has pledged to fight for pay increases for more than 1,100 state judges, saying they "deserve and must have" raises denied to them for more than four years.
"While judges must share the pain of the fiscal crisis, it is grossly unfair to single them out among the personnel of the co-equal branches of government to bear financial sacrifices far greater than those being imposed on others," Chief Judge Sol Wachtler of the Court of Appeals said in a letter to the judges.
"Please rest assured that I will continue to use all of my energies to achieve a salary increase for judges."


Colony Hotels President Has Started Settling In
When she was appointed president of Colony Hotels and Resorts last month, Joan Sills became probably the only woman to head a leading hotel company with worldwide operations.
The 42 properties that Colony manages and markets consist of more than 8,700 rooms in hotels, resorts, condominiums and time-share units from Hawaii to Phuket, Thailand (where a luxury Colony hotel will open in April).
Started in Hawaii almost 25 years ago, Colony "just came along for the ride," Ms.
Sills said, when the Carlson Companies of Minneapolis bought it in 1979, along with the much bigger Ask Mr.
Foster travel agencies.
Both are now part of the Carlson Hospitality Group, which includes all the hotel and restaurant operations of the $8.1 billion Carlson Companies, one of the largest privately owned corporations in the United States.


Books of The Times; Tales of a Man Young and Old, Snapshots of a Life
A Handbook for Drowning By David Shields 178 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $19.
In his last novel, the critically acclaimed "Dead Languages" (1989), David Shields turned the story of Jeremy Zorn, an adolescent boy with a bad stutter, into a kind of metaphor for the difficulties of communication and the limitations of language itself.
Though the book occasionally threatened to buckle under the weight of its philosophical implications, its youthful hero and his family emerged as memorable and finely observed characters, people with the power to insinuate themselves into the reader's own imagination.


Home, for the Holiday
After a two-year absence, St.
John's will participate in the Eastern College Athletic Conference Holiday Festival basketball tournament, which begins this evening at Madison Square Garden.
The Redmen will face Fordham after Memphis State plays St.
Joseph's of Philadelphia in the opening game of the doubleheader.
The winners will meet tomorrow night to determine the 40th champion of an event that St.
John's has won 10 times since the tournament began in 1952.
The Redmen last won in 1987.


The Spoken Word
LECTURES AND PLAYS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Family Matters: An Immigrant Memoir," a dramatization of the lives of immigrant children, will be performed Sunday at noon.
It will be followed at 1 P.M. by "It's Tough to Make a Nickel," a musical by Nick Acarim about the lives of immigrant children at the turn of the century, and at 2 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a lecture on the history of the Tenement Museum building.
Tickets to each program are $10 ($8 for the elderly; $5 for students).
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, Crown Heights.
"African Art and the Cycle of Life," by Leonore Krieger, today at 2 P.M.; "Quattrocento: Early Italian Panel Paintings," by Marybeth Flynn, tomorrow at 2 P.M.; "Objects of Myth and Memory: American Indian Art at the Brooklyn Museum," by Lloyd Oxendine, Sunday at 2 P.M.
All talks free with museum admission of $4 ($2 for students and $1.50 for the elderly).
Information: (718) 638-5000.
LECTURES AND GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art "Stuart Davis," by Lewis Kachur, today at 11 A.M.; "Sienese Painting," by Frank Martin, today at 3 P.M.; "The Search for a Cultural Identity: American Painting 1900-1945," by Jane English, today at 6 P.M.; "Virgin, Temptress and Housewife: The Changing Image of Women in 16th- and 17th-Century Northern Europe," by Maja Kastler, today at 7 P.M.; "Ideals of Beauty and Power in African Figurative Sculpture," by Alisa LaGamma, Sunday at 11 A.M.
All free with museum admission of $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3764.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
"American Life in American Art," by Amy Winter, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "Alexis Smith," by Ms.
Winter, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
All free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.


Networks' Starting Lineups Shaky
Guess who called NBC on Christmas Eve about future employment?
Sam Wyche, the recently deposed coach of the Cincinnati Bengals.
And guess who will be a guest commentator Sunday on CBS's "The NFL Today?" Why, Sam Wyche.
Wyche is the most telegenic of the fired, soon-to-be-fired, resigned or retired National Football League coaches at a time when there may be a few openings on the CBS and NBC football announcing rosters.


ISLAMIC MOVEMENT LEADS IN ALGERIA
Islamic fundamentalists appear to have achieved a clear edge today in Algeria's first free parliamentary elections, taking a commanding lead in the first round of voting for 430 seats in the National Assembly.
Run-off elections will be held Jan. 16 between the two leading candidates for those seats in which no candidate received a majority in the first round.


49 Slain by Gunmen on Train in India
A group of gunmen, reported to be Sikh separatists, marched through a hijacked passenger train in Punjab state this evening and systematically shot Hindu passengers, leaving at least 49 dead and 20 wounded, Indian news agency reports from the area said.
The massacre appears to mark an intensification of violence by Sikh groups intent on establishing an independent Sikh state in the Punjab, the agency reports said, and comes just two months before Parliamentary elections are to be held there.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Dec. 20
Dec. 13
Dec. 21
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.2
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.2
2.9
Gasoline stocks
214.8
214.4
223.7
Distillate stocks
140.8
142.3
131.5
Crude imports, daily
5.4
5.8
5.6
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.8
1.5
Crude stocks
335.8
340.4
334.0
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
87.1
87.0
83.8
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


No Budget Deal, No Break: Cuomo Orders Senate Back
The struggle over the state budget continued today with no progress, but, as he said he would last week, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo ordered all members of the Republican-led State Senate back to work on Friday.
The Governor's executive order applied only to the Senate, not to the Democratic-controlled Assembly.
It appeared to be an attempt to force the Senators to act on an $875 million deficit-reduction package that the Assembly has already approved.
The Senate Finance Committee rejected that package on Monday.


Ross Top Candidate
Georgia Tech Coach BOBBY ROSS is the leading candidate to replace DAN HENNING as the San Diego Chargers' coach, General Manager BOBBY BEATHARD said yesterday.
"Everything points toward Ross," said Beathard, who added that "there's no done deal."


TV Weekend; Examining the Scandals at a U.S. Relief Agency
Sunday's edition of "Special Assignment," on CNN at 9 P.M., takes apart the record of the Agency for International Development.
If Mark Feldstein's report is reasonably accurate, the agency, which distributes food, medicine and other help to the needy around the world, has been bilked by its own officials and employees.
Gene Richardson, its assistant inspector general for investigations, says: "Our crime rate is essentially higher than virtually every other agency in the Government."
Contractors have squeezed kickbacks out of programs to help feed Pakistan's poor.
A deputy director went to prison for accepting nearly $100,000 in payoffs for awarding contracts to Honduras.
Three scientists who were supposed to use aid money to find a cure for malaria, that world-class killer, instead made killings of their own.
And there's more.


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Tuesday misidentified Alex Stadler's job at the GTE Corporation.
He is a vice president of the corporation in Stamford, Conn., in charge of considering plans for GTE's worldwide electrical products group; he is not a vice president of the group.


INTERNATIONAL A3-13
FORMER REPUBLICS AT ODDS  Military and economic disagreements among former Soviet republics are growing more heated as the new commonwealth tries to arrive at common policies.
Ukraine wants Russia to delay a plan to free prices at the start of the new year.
A1  U.S.
INVESTORS SNIFF PROSPECTS
American companies are treating the territories of the former Soviet Union as wild, unpredictable places without reliable laws, but also as good places to try to strike it rich with ventures that skim the cream from an economy in disarray.
A1  President Bush said he expected to meet soon with President Yeltsin.
A12  About 149 million people wake up in a country called Russia.
A12  SELL-OFFS ENRAGE CAMBODIANS
With only a few months left before United Nations troops take over, the Cambodian Government has been hawking everything it can to foreign investors, from former French villas to school dormitories.
The people are reacting with amazement and with violent demonstrations.
A1  TRAIN MASSACRE IN INDIA
A group of gunmen reported to be Sikh separatists systematically shot Hindu passengers on a train in Punjab state, leaving at least 49 dead and 20 wounded, reports said.
A3  LOSING TRACK OF WEAPONS
The General Accounting Office says the United States is not adequately monitoring what happens to billions of dollars in arms and military equipment supplied each year to foreign countries.
A5  SOUTH AFRICANS RIVETED BY CLASH
A televised clash between President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela, leader of the African National Congress, has thrown new light on a relationship that has sustained political change in South Africa.
A8  SUBIC TO CLOSE IN 1992
An aide to President Corazon Aquino said that the United States would withdraw from Subic Bay Naval Base by the end of 1992.
A6  Yugoslavia's presidency says it is drawing new boundaries.
A10  NATIONAL A14-20  SPURRING PHONE COMPETITION
Led by New York regulators, state officials around the country are moving to end the virtual monopolies that local telephone companies have long enjoyed.
A1  RECORD DAY FOR STOCKS
Stock prices rose to record levels, continuing a rally that has defied gloomy expectations about the nation's economy and apparently reflecting confidence that a recovery will finally appear in 1992.
A1  BUSH CABINET CHOICE
Barbara H. Franklin, a well-connected management consultant, corporate director and Republican fund-raiser, is President Bush's choice to become Commerce Secretary when Robert A. Mosbacher leaves to head the President's re-election campaign.
D1  LSD MAKES A COMEBACK
Cocaine, marijuana and alcohol have been losing popularity with young people for almost a decade, but a growing number are trying LSD, the drug that defined the counterculture of the 1960's.
A15  CLINTON'S QUEST
Gov.
Bill Clinton is struggling to make himself known outside the South and overcome any notion that he will be solely a regional candidate for President.
A16  CONFUSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS
Lawyers and employers say the new civil rights act contains so many ambiguities and unanswered questions that it is hard to tell how courts will interpret it.
A20  A KILLING ON VIDEOTAPE
A small town in Maine is divided over a family feud that led to the slaying of a couple -- a slaying the victims recorded on a videotape they were planning to use in a harassment lawsuit.
A14  OFF THE MAP
Washington Journal: At the National Geographic Society, cartographers are crossing off name after name from the old Soviet map.
Washington Journal.
A14  More rain fell in Texas, raising the threat of more flooding.
A14  Law Page B16  Reserve funds to repay clients of thieving lawyers are running dry.
At the Bar METROPOLITAN, Digest, B1 CUTTING BACK ON BEDS
New York State leaders are seriously considering ending or sharply curtailing spending for new group homes for the mentally ill for the next 15 months -- a money-saving move city officials say would mean more disturbed people on the streets, in shelters and in hospitals.
A1  SOMEONE TO TALK TO
Sam Baraker likes to talk.
To strangers on the street, subways and at the other end of 800 numbers -- anyone who will let the Ukrainian immigrant practice his English.
A1  Neediest Cases B3  BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Weekend C1-34  The big bash: What to do on New Year's Eve.
C1  Buster Keaton retrospective.
C1  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  Film: At the Movies C10  "Naked Lunch." C1  "Fried Green Tomatoes." C3  "Talking to Strangers." C12  Restaurants C28  Art: "Maus" at the Modern.
C3  The Art Market C16  Word and Image: David Shield's "Handbook for Drowning." C34  Obituaries D16  John Brian Harley, expert on history of maps.
Sports B6-13  Baseball: Steinbrenner wants in.
B7  Felony charge considered for Howe.
B13  Basketball: Knicks lose to Spurs.
B7  Thomas leads Pistons over Magic.
B10  Nets beat Rockets.
B11  Columns: Vecsey on Coslet.
B7  TV Sports B8  Lipsyte on heroes of 1991.
B9  Football: Parcells stays coy.
B7  Noll resigns as Steelers' coach.
B8  Jets not intimidated by Moon.
B9  Hockey: Rangers rally to beat Capitals.
B7  Devils and Islanders tie.
B12  Editorials/Op-Ed A32-33  Editorials A32  Save Ellis Island's ghosts.
G.O.P.'s obligation in Albany.
David C. Unger: China.
Letters A32  A. M. Rosenthal: Don't send aid.
A33  David H. Halevy: The terrorists' payoff in the hostage deal.
A33  Michael Lind: Recognize the power of the new Germany.
A33


In Brooklyn, Thieves Take Away a Statue Of St. Bernadette
Thieves who spent Christmas night chiseling away at a pedestal in a rectory garden in Brooklyn stole a three-foot statue of St.
Bernadette, two days after a religious icon was stolen from a church in Queens, the police said.
"It's upsetting that someone would do something like this to a church," said Kim Coiro, an eighth grader at the school at St.
Edmond's Roman Catholic Church in Sheepshead Bay, where the white alabaster statue was discovered missing yesterday morning.
"It's disrespectful."


Art in Review
Ronald Jones Metro Pictures 150 Greene Street SoHo Through Jan. 4
Ronald Jones's new amalgams of object and text, art, history and science suggest what might happen if Frank Stella, Joseph Kosuth and Haim Steinbach made art together.
Big, topsy-turvy combinations of fairly recognizable objects, these works are certainly Mr.
Jones's most ambitious efforts to date.
They may also be his best, but that doesn't mean they're easy, or fun, to look at.


Don't Alter Rape Law Because of Smith Case; A Person Facing Ruin
To the Editor:
Joyce Purnick's Editorial Notebook ("Why Cheer for William K. Smith?" Dec. 14) hears the evidence but suffers from the ideological deafness concerning the Smith trial that isolates many thoughtful men and women.
The cheering was not for Mr.
Smith -- his behavior was self-centered and caddish by the standards of virtually all.
The cheering was for a person facing ruin -- 15 years in prison and expulsion from a profession for which he had trained many years -- not from decisive forensic evidence but almost exclusively on the basis of someone's accusation.


H.U.D. Asked To Aid Project In Newark
After waiting more than two years for the Newark Housing Authority to comply with a court-approved agreement to build 1,777 units of housing for the poor, housing advocates today petitioned the Federal Government to appoint a receiver to run the construction program.
Work at five sites around the city was to begin this year and be completed next year, but the Housing Authority has repeatedly obtained approval of construction delays from the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.


Art in Review
Conceptual Abstraction Sidney Janis Gallery 110 West 57th Street Manhattan Through tomorrow
Conceptual abstraction must be a state of mind, because this uneven exhibition is a stylistic hodgepodge, a mix that diminishes the efforts of all involved, good painters and not-so-good alike.
There's a fair amount of refried formalism here, as well as instances where artists have plopped down on signature techniques or motifs and aren't budging, no matter how monotonous their work becomes.


In the Year of the Soft Sell: The Subtle and The Dubious
Nike Does It Again
Wieden &amp; Kennedy Inc., the Portland, Ore., agency that coined the anthemic phrase "just do it" for Nike Inc., has taken its own advice.
It has produced one of the year's most admired campaigns -- again.


EXECUTIVES
*
Anchor Bancorp Inc., Hewlett, L.I., a bank holding company, named Geraldine Telchin first senior vice president in charge of the company's marketing and public relations. *
Health Management Associates Inc., Naples, Fla., which operates acute-care hospitals, named Kelly E. Curry executive vice president and Stephen M. Ray senior vice president.


Don't Alter Rape Law Because of Smith Case; Right to Fair Trial
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's comment on the trial of William Kennedy Smith in "Trials and Truth" (column, Dec. 4) is alarmingly one-sided.
Her point appears to be that the search for truth was jeopardized by Judge Mary Lupo's ruling barring the testimony of Mr.
Smith's three other accusers.
However, such a ruling seems at least as respectful of truth-seeking as an analogous feminist achievement of our time: rape-shield laws.


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
Jett at the Academy
Joan Jett, the Academy, 234 West 43d Street, Manhattan, (212) 307-7171.
Strip away the uptown production on Joan Jett's recent album, "Notorious" (Epic), and her metal pose falls away to reveal plain, punky power pop.
She's tougher than the average fluffy female singer, to be sure, but there's a sweet heart at her core.
Though underrated because she's been around so long, perhaps she'll have a chance at this gig to show off her gutsy, stomping rock-and-roll side.
The New Year's Eve show starts at 8 P.M.
Tickets are $27.50 in advance, $30 the day of the show.
Jersey Blues
Screamin' Jay Hawkins, Lone Star Roadhouse, 240 West 52d Street, Manhattan, (212) 245-2950.
For Screamin' Jay Hawkins, every day is New Year's Eve.
His elaborately ruffled, garishly colored outfits would stand out at any costume party, and his deep voice is as ghoulish as a dead man's.
The sputters, groans and eyeball rolls that adorn songs like the famed "I Put a Spell on You," "Alligator Wine" and "Frenzy" are half the show, but with luck he'll show up with his coffin and do the night up in real style.
Show times on New Year's Eve are 10 P.M. and 12:30 A.M.
Prices are as follows: $70 for reserved seating includes both shows, dinner and Champagne; $38 unreserved tickets include both shows and Champagne; $20 admits one for second show.
Triple Bill of Garage Rock
Mudhoney, the Lyres and the Mummies, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
This garage party consists of loud guitars, festive Farfisa organ and more than a passing nod to the raw sounds of 1960's-style punk.
Mudhoney, from Seattle, layers white-noise guitar interplay, deadpan vocals, heavy-metal bluster and a nihilistic world view into a 1990's postpunk answer to the Velvet Underground.
The mid-80's cult heroes the Lyres, from Boston, plunder the decadent attitude, cheesy organ stomp and raw vocals of 60's garage rock.
The Mummies, from San Francisco, work a similar sonic groove but add the irresistible gimmick of wrapping themselves from head to toe in mummy costumes.
Music starts on New Year's Eve around 10 P.M.; doors open at 9.
Tickets are $30, which includes a buffet and a Champagne toast.
Poindexter's Rhythms
Buster Poindexter, Grand Ballroom, Ramada Hotel Pennsylvania, Seventh Avenue at 33d Street, Manhattan, (212) 279-3700, extension 444.
Cocktail lounges, tuxedos, slick pompadours and the occasional tasteless joke are the basis of Buster Poindexter's act, so his New Year's Eve gala should be bursting with the evening's trademark glitz and hoopla.
A faux sophisticate with a long history of genre-bending showmanship, Mr.
Poindexter, a k a David Johansen, leads a rhythm-and-blues revue extraordinaire, complete with horns, backup singers in slinky sequined dresses, and an incomparable version of "Hit the Road, Jack." Plus, he looks great sitting atop a piano.
On New Year's Eve the show is 9:30 P.M. to 2 A.M.; $159 a person includes open bar and a buffet dinner; $189 a person buys all of the above plus a room.


Review/Art; When the Outside World Is Danger
With "The Loophole of Retreat," her powerful new work now on view at the Whitney Museum's branch in the Philip Morris building, Ellen Driscoll enters the rich territory between sculpture and installation art.
In recent years she has become known for her abstract sculptures based on organic forms or archeological artifacts like jugs and horns.
These objects are executed in rough materials whose highly textured surfaces echo the sense of the passage of time that her forms evoke.
In her new work Ms.
Driscoll uses her awareness of the expressive possibilities of abstract shape and her sensitivity to materials to consider a specific historical event that resonates with political and psychological significance.
Her installation at Philip Morris was suggested by the story of Harriet Jacobs, a former slave from North Carolina who published her autobiography in 1861.
While attempting to escape, Jacobs was forced to live for seven years in the eaves of her grandmother's shed, near the home of her master.
Throughout her confinement she had only a tiny hole in the wall through which to see the outside world.
Out of this dramatic story Ms.
Driscoll has constructed a smart, moving work that touches on a wide range of topical issues, including the relationship between the physical and the psychological, as well as that of vision and power.


Arts Festival Gives the Apple a Run for Its Bubbly
"First Night New York," a celebration lasting 12 hours and featuring more than 40 performances and participatory events at 20 Manhattan locations, is to begin on New Year's Eve at 11:30 A.M.; the sponsor is the Grand Central Partnership.
Two special pre-first night performances by the a cappella group the Persuasions are planned on Dec. 30.
A ticket good for all activities is $9 (free for those under age 5
). Information: (212) 818-1777. Programs are subject to change. A schedule follows.
Monday
A CAPPELLA CONCERT, Grand Central Terminal. The Persuasions. 12:30 and 1:30 P.M.
New Year's Eve
PARADE, from the main branch of the New York Public Library at Fifth Avenue and 41st Street to Grand Central Terminal; juggling by Jerome W. Benton in the main concourse at Grand Central, 11:30 A.M.
WACKY HAT-MAKING, Grand Central Terminal.
Workshop led by Wendy Brackman.
Noon.
Also 1:30 and 2:30 P.M. at Doral Park Avenue Hotel, 70 Park Avenue, at 38th Street.
BACH'S LUNCH, Church of Our Saviour, 59 Park Avenue, at 38th Street.
Classical-music performance with box lunch ($5).
Noon.
UNUSUAL AND FAMILIAR COLLECTIONS, Olympia and York Building, 237 Park Avenue, at 45th Street.
Noon to 6 P.M.
JOHN JONAS QUINTET, Whitney Museum at Philip Morris, 120 Park Avenue, at 42d Street. 12:30 P.M.
OPENING CEREMONY, Grand Central Terminal, main concourse. 12:45 P.M.
STORYTELLING, Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street.
With Getchie Argetsinger. 1 and 2 P.M.
VIOLIN AND PIANO CONCERT, Church of Our Saviour, 59 Park Avenue, at 38th Street.
With James Graseck, a violinist, and Doris Stevenson, a pianist. 1 P.M.
SNOW SCULPTURE (weather permitting), Olympia and York Plaza, 237 Park Avenue, at 45th Street.
Gerald S. Lynas, artist. 1 P.M.
VOCAL CONCERT, Pan Am Building Lobby, 200 Park Avenue, at 45th Street.
String of Pearls, a trio. 1 P.M.
BALLET, Roosevelt Hotel, Grand Ballroom, Madison Avenue and 45th Street.
"The Seasons, a Ballet for the New Year," choreographed by Betteanne Terrell, with music by Verdi. 1 and 2:30 P.M.
QUINTET IN 30'S TRADITION, Grand Central Terminal, main concourse.
Twilight Time. 1 P.M.
MODERN DANCE, Roosevelt Hotel, Grand Ballroom, Madison Avenue and 45th Street.
"Angels," a dance piece choreographed and performed by Cindi Lee; other dancers will also perform. 1:45 P.M.
JAZZ, BLUES AND FUNK.
Whitney Museum at Philip Morris, 120 Park Avenue, at 42d Street.
The Michael Marcus-Zane Massey Quintet. 2 P.M.
CLASSICAL FLUTE, VIOLIN AND CELLO, Church of Our Saviour, 59 Park Avenue, at 38th Street.
The Pro Pecunia Trio. 2 P.M.
DANCING FROM THE COTTON CLUB, AND MAGIC, Doral Tuscany Hotel, 120 East 39th Street.
Silver Belles, a sextet; and Jeff Sheridan, a magician. 2 P.M.
OPERA HIGHLIGHTS, Pan Am Building Lobby. Manhattan Opera Association. 2:15 P.M.
CLASSICAL MUSIC, Pierpont Morgan Library, Atrium, 29 East 36th Street.
Lisa Johnson, flutist, and Saori Kikumoto, harpist. 2:30 P.M.
FLAMENCO MUSIC AND DANCE, Grand Central Terminal.
Carlota Santana Spanish Dance. 2:45 P.M.
TEA DANCE, Doral Tuscany Hotel, 120 East 39th Street.
Topical Tap with Jane Goldberg. 3 P.M.
ICE SKATING SHOW, Sky Rink, 450 West 33d Street.
Ice Theater of New York, 3, 4 and 5 P.M.
FOLK SONGS, Whitney Museum at Philip Morris, 120 Park Avenue, at 42d Street.
Don Haynie and Sheryl Samuel. 3 P.M.
50's ROCK-AND-ROLL, Pan Am Building Lobby. Squeaky Clean. 3:30 P.M.
CHAMBER MUSIC, Church of Our Saviour, 59 Park Avenue, at 38th Street.
Downtown Chamber Players; Galina Heifet, violinist, and Mimi Stern-Wolfe, pianist. 4 P.M.
GOSPEL MUSIC.
Whitney Museum at Philip Morris, 120 Park Avenue, at 42d Street.
The Singingairs. 4 P.M.
SALSA AND RUMBA MUSIC, Grand Central Terminal, main concourse.
The Ned Sublette Band. 4:30 P.M.
MOVEMENT, HUMOR AND TEA DANCE, Doral Tuscany Hotel, 120 East 39th Street.
Dancenoise. 4:30 P.M.
CLASSICAL BRASS MUSIC, Pan Am Building Lobby, 200 Park Avenue, at 45th Street.
Meridian Arts Ensemble. 5 P.M.
DANCE, Roosevelt Hotel, Grand Ballroom, Madison Avenue and 45th Street.
With the choreographers Zvi Gotheiner, Sheila Kaminsky, Bebe Miller, Felicia Norton, David Rousseve, Cathy Ward and the Kevin Wynn Collection. 5 P.M.
MARIMBA MUSIC, Whitney Museum at Philip Morris, 120 Park Avenue, at 42d Street.
Valerie Naranjo Marimba Ensemble. 5 P.M.
MEDIEVAL VOCAL MUSIC, Church of Our Saviour, 59 Park Avenue, at 38th Street.
Anonymous 4. 6 P.M.
GUITAR AND BASS MUSIC, La Fortuna Restaurant, 16 East 41st Street.
Barry Glick, guitarist, and Murry Wall, bass player, 6 P.M.
GOSPEL AND RHYTHM AND BLUES, Whitney Museum at Philip Morris, 120 Park Avenue, at 42d Street.
Rosalinde O'Rourke, pianist and singer. 6 P.M.
MAGIC, CI Ristorante, 101 Park Avenue, at 41st Street. Jeff Sheridan, magician. 6 P.M.
1930's QUINTET, Doral Tuscany Hotel, 120 East 39th Street. 6 P.M.
DANCE IN PUBLIC PLACES, Grand Central Terminal. Ann Carlson, choreographer. 7 P.M.
PIANO MUSIC, Doral Tuscany Hotel, 120 East 39th Street. Al Clogston, pianist. 7 P.M.
BLUEGRASS MUSIC, Roosevelt Hotel, Grand Ballroom.
Madison Avenue and 45th Street.
John Herald Bluegrass Band. 7 P.M.
JAZZ MUSIC, Colors Ristorante, 237 Park Avenue, at 45th Street.
Bill Mays, pianist; Ed Howard, bass player. 7 P.M.
CLASSICAL PIANO, Church of Our Saviour, 59 Park Avenue, at 38th Street.
Andreas Haefliger, pianist. 7:30 P.M.
MUSIC, STILT WALKERS AND CLOWNS, Plaza at Philip Morris, East 42d Street.
Frank London's Brothers (and Sisters) Brass Band; Alice Farley's Stilt Walking Fantasy. 7:30 P.M.
MUSIC AND DANCING, Grand Central Terminal.
Orchestra of St.
Luke's, conducted by Michael Feldman and the Alden-Barrett Quintet dance band. 8 to 10:30 P.M.
JAZZ, SWING AND RHYTHM-AND-BLUES, CI Ristorante, 101 Park Avenue, at 41st Street.
The Feetwarmers. 9 P.M.
SQUARE DANCING, CLOGGING AND WESTERN SWING, Roosevelt Hotel, Grand Ballroom, Madison Avenue, at 45th Street.
Pat Cannon's Foot and Fiddle Dance Company. 9 P.M.
BIG BAND MUSIC AND DANCING, Roosevelt Hotel, Terrace Room, Madison Avenue, at 45th Street.
George Gee Orchestra. 9 P.M.


Review/Film; Women Finding Strength In Women
Two different stories are told in "Fried Green Tomatoes," tales loosely bound together by crackerbarrel feminism and antic Southern charm.
The earlier and more compelling story involves two beautiful young women: Idgie Threadgoode (Mary Stuart Masterson), a tomboy and a fiercely free spirit, and the more ladylike Ruth (Mary-Louise Parker), with whom Idgie is tacitly in love.
In a series of flashbacks, the film follows Idgie and Ruth through a wide range of bittersweet events that test their loyalty to each other.
In the process, it also offers a portrait of a lulling, rustic, Klan-ridden Alabama in which the characters' willful innocence often gives way to harsh racial realities.


At the Bar
In this era of Rambo litigators, lawyers are forever being urged to be more civil.
Moreover, at a time when law firms are either closing or laying off people in droves, lavish spending is unwelcome.
Here is a tale about some New York lawyers who, during an otherwise unremarkable contractual dispute, set a new standard for fellowship and frugality.
On Nov. 25 three lawyers from Manhattan -- Eli Greenberg and Eric Levine of Wolf, Haldenstein, Adler, Freeman &amp; Herz, and Gregory Arenson of Proskauer, Rose, Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn -- assembled in Los Angeles for the latest stage of Charles International v.
Chevignon, a garden-variety lawsuit between two clothing manufacturers.
They had come to question a third businessman, an Algerian-born, French-raised head of a perfume company, in the Wilshire Boulevard offices of Baker &amp; Hostetler.
The session was set for 4 P.M.


John B. Matthews; Retired Professor, 69
John B. Matthews, a retired professor of business administration at Harvard, died Sunday at Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 69 years old and lived in Belmont, Mass.
His death was caused by progressive heart disease, his family said.


Recognize the Power of the New Germany
With its decision to recognize Croatia and Slovenia on Jan. 15, Germany proved it is no longer an economic giant and a political dwarf.
It succeeded in pressing the European Community to recognize the Yugoslav republics against the objections of the United States and the United Nations.
This act symbolized the collision between the post-World War II global order and the emerging post-cold war European order.
If the gap between European and world institutions is not to grow, Europe's greatest power should be made a permanent member of the directorate of the world's great powers: the U.N.
Security Council.
The new Germany, like its predecessors, has proved that it is a revisionist power, intent on reshaping Europe.
Germany's initiatives -- often opposed at first by France, Britain and the United States -- have helped bring about the reunification of Germany within NATO, the Soviet evacuation from Eastern Europe and the extinction of the Warsaw Pact.


Diner's Journal
Jaiya-Thai
For years, aficionados of Thai food have been trekking to Broadway in Elmhurst, Queens, to indulge in what may be the best Thai food in New York City, at a little storefront place called Jaiya-Thai.
Well, the transit system's revenue loss is now Manhattan's gain: Jaiya-Thai has opened a branch at 396 Third Avenue, at 28th Street.
Larger than the original, the new restaurant is done in light gray with luminescent Thai paintings on the walls and neat rows of tables.


A Main Ingrediant for a Haiti Food Source Arrives


Glory Years Long Gone, Noll Resigns
Chuck Noll, who had brilliant teams in the 1970's but ordinary ones in the 1980's, resigned yesterday after 23 seasons as head coach of the Pittsburgh Steelers.
The decision by Noll, who will be 60 years old on Jan. 5, was not unexpected although no successor was named by Dan Rooney, the club president.
In 1969, Rooney, heading a franchise that had never even played in a title game, hired Noll, a little-known 37-year-old assistant coach for the Baltimore Colts.
Yesterday, Rooney said of him, "Chuck is a great man and he hasn't changed from day one."


Jets Know That Intimidating Moon Is a Big Key to Stopping Houston
When the Jets march into the Astrodome on Sunday for their first playoff game since 1986, they will be playing their sixth matchup this season against one of the three American Conference quarterbacks selected for the Pro Bowl in January.
The Jets went 2-0 against Miami's Dan Marino, including the 23-20 overtime victory last Sunday that put them in the playoffs, and were 0-2 against Buffalo's Jim Kelly, who was selected as the Pro Bowl starter.
The last time the Jets played against Warren Moon, the Houston quarterback had a career day against them, completing 35 of 50 attempts for 423 yards and 2 touchdowns.


Hibernians Bar Gay Irish From Parade
For the second straight year, the St.
Patrick's Day Parade Committee has refused to allow a gay Irish group to join its march, and Dinkins administration aides have begun discussions about placing the parade in different hands.
The parade committee, a panel of the Manhattan chapter of the Ancient Order of Hibernians, has also voted to bar from the march the division in its own organization that invited the gay group to join it last spring.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  Continental Basketball Association  LA CROSSE CATBIRDS -- Waived Daron Hoges, center.
SIOUX FALLS SKYFORCE -- Acquired Bobby Phills, guard, and future considerations from the La Crosse Catbirds for Ken Redfield, forward.
Acquired Mike Williams, center, from the Fort Wayne Fury for the rights to Myron Brown, guard.
Waived Chuckie White, forward.
Hockey  National Hockey League  NEW YORK RANGERS -- Traded Greg Millen, goaltender, to the Detroit Red Wings for a 1992 draft choice.
Traded Guy Larose, center, to the Toronto Maple Leafs for Mike Stevens, left wing, and assigned Stevens to Binghamton of the American Hockey League.


Petrovic and the Nets Stay Focused and Win
Drazen Petrovic had the last laugh tonight, and so did the rest of the Nets.
In the third quarter of New Jersey's game against Houston, the Rockets isolated Vernon Maxwell against Petrovic, and Maxwell exploited the guard matchup repeatedly by driving past Petrovic and scoring 16 third-quarter points.
So conspicuous was the damage Maxwell did that Petrovic finally had to be benched late in the quarter.


The Art Market
Avedon at the Whitney
When David A. Ross succeeded Thomas Armstrong as the director of the Whitney Museum of American Art in January, the art world wondered whether the Whitney would try to overcome the criticism that its exhibitions seemed to be guided by trendiness more than scholarly pursuits.
What is the first major retrospective Mr.
Ross is planning?
A two-floor blockbuster show of the fashion photographer Richard Avedon's work scheduled for 1994.


Chiron to Acquire 50% Of an Italian Concern
The Chiron Corporation, a biotechnology company based in Emeryville, Calif., said today that it had agreed in principle to acquire 50 percent of the vaccine business of Sclavo S.p.A., a privately held Italian company, for 75 billion lire, or about $64.4 million.
Ciba-Geigy Ltd., the Swiss drug company, will acquire the Sclavo vaccine business and contribute it to a new Dutch holding company, in which Chiron will have a half interest.
Ciba-Geigy and Chiron, which already have a joint venture in vaccines known as the Biocine Company, had previously announced that Chiron would acquire only a 19.9 percent interest in the Sclavo business.


Business With Russians Suddenly Gets Personal
IT seemed so easy.
Casey Morano, an owner of Matthew's Seafood House on Fire Island, and Frank Mina, a boatyard operator in Bay Shore, both had Long Island's long winters free.
To pass time profitably, they formed a partnership last winter.
They'd help investors develop business in the Soviet Union.
All they had to do there was make hundreds of business contacts without a telephone in a language they didn't speak in a disintegrating land they had never seen within a crumbling Communist culture where the first thing a store manager does with a new shipment of goods is close the store to avoid crowds.


Stocks Off in Tokyo
Stocks fell here today, as investors took profits on higher opening prices following Thursday's rally on Wall Street.
The 225-issue Nikkei average lost 117.75 points, or 0.52 percent, to close at 22,437.32.


Thieving Lawyers Draining Client Security Funds
Frederick Miller runs the New York State fund that reimburses people who have been robbed by their lawyers, and he has been sending out a lot of checks lately.
There is no end in sight, so he's getting pretty worried.
"We have pending losses in excess of $35 million," Mr.
Miller said.
"We have assets of approximately $2 million."


CHRONICLE
Barely will she have time to recuperate from lunch when Mrs.
Nitze will give a dinner tonight for her father-in-law, PAUL H. NITZE, the former United States arms negotiator who took the famous "walk in the woods" with his Soviet counterpart, Yuli A. Kvitsinsky, in Geneva in 1982.
"It's just my annual family and friends party -- I have it every year on the same night," she said, running through a list of dates staked out by other party givers in the ski resort: LESLIE WEXNER, tomorrow; RUPERT and ANNA MURDOCH, Monday; MARVIN DAVIS on New Year's Eve; GERALD and BARBARA HINES, also on New Year's Eve; MARIAN DAVIS, with a black-eyed peas party on New Year's Day, and ANNE BASS, with a buffet supper on New Year's Day.


New Names For New Lands
With the independence of the former Soviet republics, a number of changed names and spellings have emerged in diplomatic messages and official English-language pronouncements.
Five of the republics have adopted preferred English-language versions of their names, and their preference generally guides the usage of other governments.


In a Hard Year, Subtlety Outdid the Hard Sell
Call it whistling in the dark, or smiling through the apocalypse: The advertising that bombarded consumers this year tried mightily to sell with style, despite some tight budgets, and to sell with a smile, despite much gloom.
"People were continuing to do good, quality work," said Jay Schulberg, executive vice president and executive creative head of Bozell Inc. in New York.
"That was no minor achievement."


Many Who Fled Hitler Contribute to Neediest
Every year, dozens of people who escaped Nazi Germany show their gratitude by contributing to The New York Times Neediest Cases.
"We were refugees from Hitler's Germany and are deeply grateful for the haven we found in this country and the opportunity to start a new life," Hannah, Werner and Marcia Herz of Kew Gardens, Queens, wrote in a note attached to their $50 contribution.
"Once again we commemorate our family's arrival in the United States on Dec. 20, 1937, with our contribution to the Neediest Cases. We do this in memory of our parents, Alfred and Hedwig Herz, who started the tradition as soon as they could afford it."


Sounds Around Town: On New Year's Eve
Cole, Coward and Company
Julie Wilson and William Roy, "Cole and Coward," Kaufman Theater, 534 West 42d Street, Manhattan, (212) 563-1684.
Julie Wilson is the most dramatically convincing cabaret singer since Mabel Mercer, and William Roy, her pianist, musical director and occasional singing partner, is a knowing sidekick.
The first half of the show focuses on Cole Porter, with the emphasis on his wittier songs.
The second half belongs to Noel Coward, from whose sentimental lyrics Miss Wilson wrings every last ounce of truth.
Show time is on New Year's Eve is 8 P.M., and all seats are $25.
The engagement runs through Jan. 5.
Brazil and Baroque
Tania Alves, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Manhattan, (212) 244-3005.
The Ballroom begins its second annual Brazilian season on New Year's Eve with the singer Tania Alves, who is appearing through Jan. 4.
One of Brazil's leading soap-opera stars, Miss Alves is also a multi-instrumentalist and a specialist in German Baroque music, as well as being a diva of the Brazilian musical avant-garde.
She will perform two shows on New Year's Eve, at 10:30 P.M. and 1 A.M.
There is a cover charge of $45, plus a two-drink minimum.
Transfer and Trio
Manhattan Transfer and the Monty Alexander Trio, the Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Manhattan, (212) 475-0049.
A strong double bill features the impeccably smooth pop-jazz quartet Manhattan Transfer performing a rare acoustic show with Yaron Gershovksy on piano and Alex Blake on bass, followed by Mr.
Alexander's trio, with a special guest, the saxophonist James Moody.
Mr.
Alexander's show is to include a tribute to Nat (King) Cole, who was the biggest influence on his pianism.
The early show, "Round Midnight," which begins at 7 P.M. and goes until 12:30 A.M., and costs $180 a person at tables and $100 a person at the bar.
For the late show, which starts at 1 A.M. and lasts indefinitely, table seating is $140 a person and bar seating $75.
An Old Acquaintance
Hildegarde, the Russian Tea Room, 150 West 57th Street, Manhattan, (212) 265-0947.
The veteran cabaret legend Hildegarde, 85 years old and still going strong, will give two performances of her show, "Should Old Acquaintance Be Forgot," on New Year's Eve.
It will feature favorites from her repertory, like "Darling Je Vous Aime Beaucoup," and selected seasonal songs.
The shows are at 8:30 and 11:30 P.M.
There is a $45 music charge, plus a $35 food and beverage minimum.
LaVern Baker Is Back
LaVern Baker, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan, (212) 758-2272.
There is much more to LaVern Baker than her hits of the 1950's and early 60's like "Tweedle Dee," "Jim Dandy" and "I Cried a Tear" might suggest.
She has a jazz-and-blues side that connects her stylistically to Bessie Smith by way of Dinah Washington.
New Year's Eve performances are at 8:45 and 11:30 P.M. with a cover charge of $25 for the first show and $35 for the late show, plus the club's standard two-drink minimum.
Miss Baker's regular engagement continues through Jan. 4.
Political Improvisation
Scott Blakeman, Penny Arcade and the First Amendment Comedy Troupe, Duality Playhouse, 119 West 23d Street, Manhattan, (212) 678-0076.
Scott Blakeman is an astute, funny political observer and Penny Arcade a character actress of range and depth who is not afraid to test limits.
At its best, the First Amendment, an improvisational troupe whose show is based on audience suggestions, pulls funny and spontaneous social commentary out of a hat.
Shows are at 8 and 10 P.M.
New Year's Eve.
Tickets are $20 for the first show, which includes a Champagne toast, and $30 for the second show, which includes two glasses of Champagne, snacks, dancing and party favors.
A 1991 Magazine
Chicago City Limits, 351 East 74th Street, Manhattan, (212) 772-8707.
The annual New Year's Eve show by one of New York's oldest improvisation troupes is a "Musical Magazine" that will look back at 1991, contemplating the collapse of the Soviet Union, life at David Duke's campaign headquarters, the Clarence Thomas hearings and New York City's budget crisis.
The troupe includes Gary Adler, Carole Bugge, Wendy Chatman, Carl Kissin, Judith Searcy, Rick Simpson, John Cameron Telfer and its director, Paul Zuckerman.
Shows are at 8 and 11 P.M.
A party with dancing and hors d'oeuvres follows the late show.
Tickets are $25 for the first show and $35 for the late one, with champagne and noisemakers included.


Occidental Sells Cattle Interests
The Occidental Petroleum Corporation completed the sale of its herd of purebred cattle and the Ankony Shadow Isle name and trademarks to the Ankony Angus Corporation of Georgia.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed, but the price was expected to be less than $2 million.
The herd was among the more unusual operations Occidental has put up for sale since the death of its former chairman, Dr.
Armand Hammer, last December.
Dr.
Ray R. Irani, the new chairman, has sold operations to reduce debt and refocus the company's attention on core businesses of oil and chemicals.
He has said Occidental's debt load will be cut by $3 billion by 1993.


Editorial Notebook; Buying Time With Capitalism
"Welcome to Beijing Hyundai." The South Korean sign, in big English letters, catches your eye as you step outside Shoudu International Airport.
Although China maintains diplomatic links with North and not South Korea, it's now doing business with some of the South's biggest businesses.
Samsung's logo adorns airport luggage carts.
Ads for Lucky Goldstar and Daewoo products can be seen in central Beijing.
The airport Hyundai sign carries an implicit additional message: In today's China, business takes priority over politics, at least for foreign business travelers.
Chinese citizens are also welcome to enjoy the fruits of the booming entrepreneurial economy.
But they must act within the political guidelines of the moment.
Passive cynicism is tolerated; speaking out against the party or Government invites shockingly harsh punishment.


Women Turn Their Statements Into Questions?; My Client Is Not Guilty?
To the Editor:
As an under-35, now and then unwitting perpetrator of the declarative utterances that end in a question mark, to which Lynne Sharon Schwartz refers in "This Is an Article on Diction?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15) and a law student, I found Ms.
Schwartz's comments of special interest.
The issue is of particular significance in the law, an area Ms.
Schwartz does not mention, where words are the practitioner's most important tool.
Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes cautioned that "A word is not a crystal, transparent and unchanged, it is the skin of a living thought and may vary greatly in color and content according to the circumstances and the time in which it is used."


Moves Afoot to Combat Loan Swindles
With her personal finances buckling after losing her job as a computer operator, Cynthia Bovell of Woodbridge, Va., found a classified ad in a local newspaper offering loans of up to $15,000.
When she sent the New Jersey company that had placed the ad $400 as an advance fee for securing the loan, the mother of three with a savings account of zero became one of the hundreds of thousands of consumers and small businesses swindled through one of the nation's fastest-growing scams.


Wacker to Minnesota
JIM WACKER, who coached Texas Christian to only two winning seasons in nine years, was named coach yesterday at Minnesota, which has not been to the Rose Bowl in 31 years.
Wacker, whose Horned Frogs finished at 7-4 this season, replaces JOHN GUTEKUNST, who resigned under pressure after the Gophers went 2-9.
The 54-year-old Wacker will receive a $125,000 base salary for the next five years, plus $125,000 per year for radio and television shows, personal appearances, endorsements and other related activities.


Professor's Own Nazi Past Accuses Her
To the Editor:
A propaganda machine that tightly controlled the minutiae of the press was as integral to Nazi totalitarianism as its killing installations.
Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann in her Dec. 14 letter describes Jewish editors happily practicing their profession on a "liberal" newspaper in wartime Germany.
This preposterous depiction shows contempt for truth and an assumption that today's Americans are ignorant and bored with the subject.


Protests Rise Over Skit By Lawyer In Blackface
The president of New Jersey's minority bar association today called a county bar association "racially insensitive" for holding a Christmas show in which a male lawyer in blackface and a curly-haired wig played Anita Hill singing "Old Man River."
"We're outraged," said Karol Corbin Walker, president of the Garden State Bar Association, which has about 400 members.
"It shows an insensitivity that we hope by showing our displeasure won't happen again."


Plans on Douglas
The Miami Heat still hopes to trade its unsigned point guard, SHERMAN DOUGLAS, but it has made plans for him to rejoin the team.
The front office must decide by today whether to match a seven-year, $17 million offer extended to Douglas by the Los Angeles Lakers.
Miami's options are to sign Douglas for the same figure, trade him or allow him to go to the Lakers.


Jail Official Is Overruled On a Work-Release Plan
The Correction Department's top legal official, who is under investigation in the awarding of a $1.9 million contract to electronically monitor released pretrial prisoners, improperly authorized another plan that would have allowed sentenced inmates to go home at night, New York City officials said yesterday.
Overruling the official, Allison Lewis-Smith, the city's Law Department said that the plan to place 250 inmates in a work-release program in which they would go home nights and weekends was illegal and could expose the city to law suits.


Soprano in Cabaret
The soprano Angelina Reaux is to perform a cabaret-style show on New Year's Eve at 10:30 P.M. at the Intar Theater, 420 West 42d Street in Manhattan.
The show, "It's Still My Party," will feature songs by Gershwin, Bernstein, Puccini, Kern and others.
Accompanying the singer at the piano will be Ricky Ian Gordon.
Proceeds will benefit Prima Artists New York (formerly the Perry Street Theater Company).
Tickets are $30 and include hors d'oeuvres and champagne in the theater lobby.
Information: (212) 691-6618.


Qaddafi Invites West to Terror Bomb Trial
Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, has invited the West to send judges to Tripoli for the trial of two men accused of taking part in the bombing of Pan Am flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988.
"They can come and participate in the hearing of the trial," Colonel Qaddafi said through an interpreter in a recorded interview with Britain's Independent Television News, which was broadcast here.


For Workers, a Winter Lull
Everything about work the last couple of days has been all wrong.
Noah Rosenblum, an engineer at J. P. Morgan &amp; Co. on Wall Street, noticed it.
The phones rang less.
He found a seat during his coffee break.
His co-worker Patrick McAleer said he felt it, too.
A lot of people had brought their kids to work.
"The funny thing," he said, sitting with Mr.
Rosenblum yesterday in the atrium of the J. P. Morgan Building, lushly decorated for the holidays, "is that they're off for a day and they bring their family into the office."


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Named James M. Kahler senior vice president of sales and marketing for Cavs-Coliseum Management Company.
Continental Basketball Association  RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Traded Ed Horton, forward, to the Tulsa Zone, for a 1992 seventh-round draft pick and the rights to Wes Matthews, guard.
Activated Morlon Wiley, guard, from the NBA reserve list.
SIOUX FALLS SKYFORCE -- Activated Kurk Lee, guard, from the injured list.
Waived Brett Szabo, forward-center.
Football  National Football League  CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Named David Shula coach.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Announced the resignation of Chuck Knox, coach.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Fired Richard Williamson, coach. Horse racing
ATLANTIC CITY RACE COURSE -- Named Edward W. Vomacka named director of racing and racing secretary for 1992 thoroughbred season.
College
MINNESOTA -- Named Jim Wacker football coach.


Relatives Inspire Gifts To Neediest Cases Fund
The notes attached to contributions to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund describe a thousand paths to charity.
But many of them show that a relative is leading the way.
"My mother, Elizabeth Leeds Weiler, died on May 24, 1991, at 86 years old," wrote Elinor W. Krach, who gave $200.
"In looking through her 1991 date book I came upon Dec. 1 and the notation, 'Remember to mail donation to the N.Y. Times Neediest.' She never forgot you and I hope I never do."


Yeltsin Curbs His Vice President And Moves Into Gorbachev Office
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia flexed his powers of office today, cutting the duties of his Vice President and moving into Mikhail S. Gorbachev's office without giving him a chance to clean it out first.
Vice President Aleksandr Rutskoi, a Yeltsin ally in their election campaign in June who has since become a voice of opposition, was removed by Mr.
Yeltsin's order from the chairmanship of five special Russian executive committees, according to news reports tonight.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Sabres Top Bruins  Dave Andreychuk had two goals and three assists last night as the host Buffalo Sabres had their biggest scoring night of the season in an 8-1 victory over the Boston Bruins.
Pat LaFontaine added two of Buffalo's five second-period goals and had two assists as the Sabres won at home for the first time in eight games. (AP) Jets 3, Blackhawks 3: Brian Noonan scored all three of Chicago's goals as the Blackhawks extended their home-ice unbeaten streak to 12 games by rallying to tie Winnipeg.
Noonan scored once in the first period and twice in the second for his second National Hockey League hat trick. (AP) U.S.
Junior Team Triumphs: Peter Ferraro scored twice to lead the United States to a 6-2 victory over Germany in Fussen, Germany, giving the Americans their best start at the world junior championships.
The United States (2-0) is tied for first place in the eight-country round-robin championship with the Soviet Union and Canada, the defending champion.
The Soviet team edged Sweden, 4-3, and the Canadians got one goal and four assists from Eric Lindros in beating Switzerland, 6-4. (AP) COLLEGE BASKETBALL B.C.
Gets First Loss  Chris Leonard scored 32 points as West Virginia (6-3) pulled away in the second half to beat Boston College, 95-80, last night in the opening round of the Cable Car Classic in Santa Clara, Calif., handing the Eagles their first loss of the season.


Correction
An article on Thursday profiling Tom Harkin and his campaign for President omitted quotation marks and attribution for material in the last paragraph.
It was Thomas E. Mann of the Brookings Institution who said: "In a sense he has already won. He has made people feel good about being a Democrat. Even if his candidacy fades, the one thing that he will pass on to the other candidates is the style: 'Don't take any guff.' "


Banks to Lend $2 Million to Bridgeport U.
A group of banks has decided to lend the University of Bridgeport $2.2 million -- enough to cover its operating costs for another semester.
After that, the financially troubled university is expected to merge with Sacred Heart University in the neighboring town of Fairfield.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
6.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
4.50
6.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.85
3.82
6.44
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.89
3.91
6.55
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.45
6.46
8.04
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.51
7.50
8.29
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.65
8.65
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.70
6.71
7.47
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Taming Japan's Trade Surplus
The Japanese trade surplus is soaring again.
It will probably hit a record $100 billion for 1991 and rise even higher in 1992.
Japan now has the only sizable surplus, with Europe as well as the United States running large deficits.
Two steps are urgently required.
First, the value of the yen should be raised substantially.
In addition, the Japanese must be encouraged to end the recent stagnation in their domestic spending, which has led to renewed reliance on exports.


VCR Have Too Many Buttons? Here's Help (Note the Buttons)
Americans love gadgets, particularly those that promise to save time.
Take the videocassette recorder.
For many people, it offers liberation from television schedules.
All one has to do, VCR advertisments declare, is push a few buttons, record a show and watch it at a time that is convienent.
Trouble is, millions of people find VCR's difficult to use and never record any programs.
Sometimes, the problem is that the instructions are confusing.
Or the obstacle might be the growing mountain of electronic devices associated with television sets: VCR's, cable boxes and countless remote control devices.


FRENCH ASK SWISS ON JAILED IRANIAN
French officials said today that they would ask for the extradition of an Iranian who was arrested in Switzerland on Monday on suspicion of involvement in the assassination of a former Iranian Prime Minister near Paris last summer.
The spokesman for Switzerland's Ministry of Justice, Jorg Kistler, identified the suspect as Zeyal Sarhadi.
He said the 25-year-old Iranian was charged with providing logistical support for the suspected assassins of Shahpour Bakhtiar, who was Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi's last prime minister before the 1979 Islamic revolution in Iran.


Action on Base Disappoints U.S.
American officials expressed disappointment today at the decision by the Philippines to require United States forces to withdraw by the end of next year, but said the military would seek to fill the void at other sites in the Pacific region.
The Bush Administration had sought to maintain the Subic Bay naval base for as long as possible.
At the same time, Washington wanted to avoid giving the impression that "we were muscling those guys," one American official said.


CHRONICLE
The National Academy of Sciences has chosen PHILIP HAUGE ABELSON, the retired editor of Science magazine, as the winner of its 1992 Public Welfare Medal, to be presented in Washington on April 25.
The award, the academy's highest honor, is given for lifetime achievements in a scientific field that contribute to the public good.


The Many Faces of Canadian Animation
Just how thoroughly the field of animated films has been revolutionized by computer technology is suggested by the fact that only half the selections in "The National Film Board of Canada's Animation Festival" could readily be described as cartoons.
Although the festival, which opened Thursday at the Angelika Film Center, includes some lively old-fashioned funnies, its most captivating works turn crayon drawings into a sweeping visual ballet (Real Berard and Andre Leduc's "Jours de Plaine") or use unusual techniques to evoke visual depth, texture and shading.


Letter: On Poverty; Growth of Mother-Centered Families
To the Editor:
New Census Bureau findings on the leap in percentages of single mothers among American teen-agers ("Larger Number of New Mothers Are Unmarried," news article, Dec. 4) brought to mind the Economist article (April 27) identifying as the least solvable of all family poverty problems "the increasing proportion of children born out of wedlock."


M.T.A. Delays Vote on Fare Increase
Transit officials yesterday postponed for the second time in a week a critical vote on raising New York City's subway and bus fare, as private talks on the fare gave way to a display of budget brinkmanship.
The board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority decided to postpone the vote until early next week so efforts to avoid raising the fare to $1.40, from the current $1.15, could continue.
But some board members suggested that if no agreement was reached by Tuesday, the M.T.A. might go into the new year without a fare increase and without a balanced budget for the Transit Authority, its subsidiary that operates the subway and buses.
Risky Strategy
Missing the budget deadline would be an extreme gambit, carrying the risk that the agency could run out of cash in three or four months.
But the board members who appear to be leaning toward such a strategy hope it would push reluctant or distracted state lawmakers to concentrate on the transit agency's problems.


Bosnia Fears It's Next in Yugoslav Civil Strife
Riven by ethnic animosities, practically landlocked and dependent on imports of food, energy and raw materials, the republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina is threatened with disaster by Yugoslavia's breakup.
But on Monday, as the clock ticked out on a six-day deadline set by the European Community, the President of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Alija Izetbegovic, reluctantly faxed to the community an application to recognize the republic as an independent country.


Arrest in Harassment Of Katarina Witt
The Federal Bureau of Investigation in Los Angeles on Thursday arrested a man and charged him with sending sexually explicit, threatening letters to the German skater KATARINA WITT.
The skater was scheduled to perform last night in Inglewood, Calif.
HARRY VELTMAN 3d was being held without bail after his arrest at his home in Westminster, Calif.
Investigators said he had sent nude photos of himself and 60 letters to Witt in Germany since July 1990.
He also went to her home in Germany, the F.B.I. said, and traveled to one of her performances in Denver, where he was arrested for allegedly throwing sexually threatening letters onto the ice.
He was not prosecuted in Denver.


Fast and Furious Coaching Changes in N.F.L.
The National Football League's wheel of coaching fortunes took three more spins yesterday when the Cincinnati Bengals named a head coach (32-year-old David Shula), the Tampa Bay Buccaneers dismissed one (Richard Williamson) and the Seattle Seahawks lost one (Chuck Knox).
Meanwhile, despite reports to the contrary, Bill Parcells remained the leading candidate at Tampa Bay and Green Bay, but his decision on whether to take either or neither job did not seem imminent.
The most surprising move of the day was Shula's three-year contract from the Bengals.
At the age of 32 years 7 months, he becomes the youngest head coach in the modern history of the N.F.L., the league office said.
In 1969, John Madden took over the Oakland Raiders at the age of 32 years 10 months.
Shula is younger than three of his players: kicker Jim Breech (35), offensive tackle Anthony Munoz (33) and running back James Brooks (33 today).


Port Authority Plans Changes At Kennedy
Eighteen months after its grandiose plans to build a mammoth central terminal at Kennedy International Airport were rejected, the Port Authority is taking more modest steps to bolster the airport's standing as the nation's busiest international gateway.
Some of the moves are crucial to relieve chronic traffic tie-ups in and around the airport.
Others are intended to make the terminals more pleasing and comfortable.


Weak Russian Economy May Use Less Oil
Experts once feared that the Soviet Union would stop exporting oil because of declining production, but now many think that economic collapse will cut internal demand as fast or faster, leaving a margin for Russian exports, a crucial factor in the world's balance between supply and demand.
For two years experts have feared that the strife in the Soviet Union, the world's largest oil producer, would turn that country from an exporter to an importer, increasing the power of Middle East suppliers and forcing up prices around the globe.
But now some experts argue that an unprecedented economic decline may push down demand in the new Commonwealth of Independent States even more than supply falls.


For Maryland Protesters, Card From the Protestee
Diane Frampton's Christmas card from Gov.
William Donald Schaefer had a little present inside: two photographs of her and her children at an anti-Schaefer rally last February.
There was no explanation, just the photographs and the Governor's signature on a card bidding her a joyous holiday, and Mrs.
Frampton is certain Governor Schaefer was trying to intimidate her for protesting a remark he had made about Maryland's rural Eastern Shore, where she lives.


Who Caused Delay on Health Commissioner
To the Editor:
"In New York, the Doctor Is Out" (editorial, Dec. 6) urges confirmation of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's nominee for Health Commissioner as soon as possible and leaves the impression that the delay is caused by the State Senate, particularly by me, chairman of the Senate Health Committee.


Remains of C.I.A. Official Are Flown to U.S. for Rites
Human remains identified as those of William Buckley, chief officer for the Central Intelligence Agency in Lebanon when he was taken hostage in March 1984, were flown to the United States this evening for funeral services.
He died in captivity, apparently after torture, the next year.
A spokesman for the C.I.A., which seldom acknowledges the identity of its clandestine operatives, dead or alive, said Mr.
Buckley "was the senior agency representative in Beirut" when he was kidnapped by an organization calling itself Islamic Holy War.
The agency also issued a brief biographical profile of Mr.
Buckley, again an usual step for the C.I.A. in dealing with members of its clandestine service, but also reflecting the agony felt in the highest ranks of the intelligence service over the loss of one of their own.


All of New York's Tumult Jammed Into a Terminal
PEOPLE have been born and people have died at Grand Central Terminal and about two years ago someone's remains even wound up there.
An urn of ashes was turned in to the Lost and Found/Parcel room and deposited among the umbrellas, wallets and other commodities forsaken by some of the 100,000 commuters on the 550 trains that stream daily into the 50 platforms of the nation's largest railroad terminal.


Religion Notes
Islamic Symbols
With Christmas trees and Hanukkah menorahs everywhere in shops, banks and some post offices in the past month, an Islamic group is hoping that the crescent and the five-pointed star will get equal time in the holy season of Ramadan.


Who Caused Delay on Health Commissioner
To the Editor:
"In New York, the Doctor Is Out" (editorial, Dec. 6) urges confirmation of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's nominee for Health Commissioner as soon as possible and leaves the impression that the delay is caused by the State Senate, particularly by me, chairman of the Senate Health Committee.


Victory Doesn't Equal Happiness
Malik Sealy was angry.
The 6-foot-8-inch forward had scored 21 points last night to lead St.
John's to a 70-53 victory over Fordham in the second game of the 40th Eastern College Athletic Conference tournament at Madison Square Garden.
There was little drama or suspense in the first half.
St.
John's methodically took the Rams apart with tough half-court defense and uncharacteristically hot shooting.


Bankruptcy Filings Up 24%
The number of personal bankruptcy filings have soared by 24 percent in the 12 months ended Sept. 30, increasing in every region of the country, Government figures show.
The East was hit hardest.
Personal bankruptcies rose by 50 percent in a region containing Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Rhode Island, and 43 percent in New York, Connecticut and Vermont.


C.I.A. Officer's Body Returned From Beirut
Remains identified as those of William Buckley, chief officer for the Central Intelligence Agency in Lebanon when he was taken hostage in March 1984, were carried from a Beirut hospital morgue yesterday, above, and flown to the United States for burial.
He died in captivity, apparently after torture, in 1985.
A spokesman for the C.I.A., which seldom acknowledges the identity of its clandestine operatives, dead or alive, said Mr.
Buckley "was the senior agency representative in Beirut" when he was kidnapped by a group calling itself Islamic Holy War.
The agency also issued a brief profile of Mr.
Buckley, again an unusual step, but one reflecting the agony felt in the highest ranks of the intelligence service over the loss of one of its own.


Woman, 76, Found Slain
A nephew and niece who dropped by last night to have dinner with their 76-year-old aunt found her stabbed to death in the bedroom of her Coney Island apartment, the police said.
The woman, Beatriz Gabriel, was stabbed a number of times with a knife, possibly from her own kitchen, Sgt.
Tina S. Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman, said.
Sergeant Mohrmann said there were no suspects and no sign of forced entry.
It was not known whether anything was stolen.


Yeltsin Curbs His Vice President And Moves Into Gorbachev Office
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia flexed his powers of office today, cutting the duties of his Vice President and moving into Mikhail S. Gorbachev's office without giving him a chance to clean it out first.
Vice President Aleksandr Rutskoi, a Yeltsin ally in their election campaign in June who has since become a voice of opposition, was removed by Mr.
Yeltsin's order from the chairmanship of five special Russian executive committees, according to news reports tonight.


Nets Beat Hornets for 3d Victory in Row
As rumors of Bill Fitch's demise as head coach of the Nets continued, so did the Nets' winning ways tonight.
New Jersey won its third game in a row, beating the Charlotte Hornets by 136-120 for its longest winning streak of the season.
A week ago, the word was out: Fitch was going and Jim Valvano, the former North Carolina State coach, was coming in.
Fitch hasn't let the talk affect his approach to coaching.


Bush in TV Spots on S. Tourism
WASHINGTON, Dec. 27 --
President Bush has made television commercials that will be broadcast in Britain to urge viewers there to visit the United States as tourists, Commerce Department officials said today.
"To my knowledge, this is the first time that a President has appeared in a television spot," said W. Donald Wynegar, deputy assistant secretary for tourism marketing.


Yanks Are Left With a Vacancy at the Top
While George Steinbrenner tries feverishly to make two lawsuits vanish so that he can return to power and run the Yankees again, Robert Nederlander is ready to disappear immediately.
His insistence on resigning as managing general partner next Tuesday is complicating Steinbrenner's efforts to clear away the legal obstacles that would block any bid for his reinstatement.
During their secretive meeting Thursday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., the team's limited partners asked Nederlander to defer his resignation for an additional month while Steinbrenner seeks reinstatement from major league baseball.
But Nederlander's adamant refusal will force Steinbrenner and Yankee management to secure a replacement before New Year's Day while Steinbrenner tries to get the lawsuits discarded.


Review/Music; P.D.Q. Bach Is Back, In Annual Farewell
It is about time we began to take P. D. Q. Bach seriously.
But still P. D. Q. Bach has seemed little more than a joke.
Of course, it didn't help that this time around, as the good professor began a series of annual farewell concerts (to be repeated tonight and Monday night), he peppered his "musicolological" discourse with jests.
In fact, because of the lack of serious attention given his work at the University of Southern North Dakota at Hoople, the professor even had to earn his keep by answering telephone calls for Dial-a-Joke throughout the evening.
He was forced to tell, again and again, the same story about the transplanted brain of a Metropolitan Opera tenor: it was so much more expensive than the brain of a nuclear physicist because it had never been used.


Dresden Journal; Quiet Airwaves? Teen-Agers Say No
On a recent night when cold wind swept off the icy Elbe River and most Dresdeners were at home, more than a thousand young people marched through the streets to support a protest movement that has spread through eastern Germany in recent weeks.
"Save our station!" they chanted.  "Power from the east side!"


Islam Wants Rushdie To Repent His Words
To the Editor:
Salman Rushdie's greatest flaw is his lack of shame.
The tragedy for Muslims was the writing and publication of "The Satanic Verses." Instead of repenting, Mr.
Rushdie is "sorrowful"; instead of admitting guilt, he becomes the grand preacher of a new order in Islam.


Mobster Sentenced in Probation Violation
In magazines and television programs about him, Michael Franzese was portrayed as a wealthy, sophisticated Mafia figure, a modern yuppie mobster who made millions of dollars in complex frauds and lived a lavish life that included producing movies and hobnobbing with celebrities.
But yesterday, in a Federal courtroom in Brooklyn, prosecutors described him as a petty con man who bounced checks, obtained bank loans with false documents and failed to pay the rent for his luxurious home in a posh Los Angeles suburb.


Harbaugh Ill
Quarterback JIM HARBAUGH was in a hospital in Lake Forest, Ill., yesterday with what the Chicago Bears said was "a touch of the flu," but he was still expected to start in Chicago's playoff game with the Dallas Cowboys tomorrow.


Rebels in Georgia Free 8 Political Prisoners
Rebel forces seeking to overthrow President Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia seized Georgia's secret police headquarters today and released eight political prisoners, including the main opposition leader.
The attack on the building, once the domain of the Soviet K.G.B., came as the rebels and troops loyal to the President traded fire for a sixth day near the capital's besieged Parliament building, where Mr.
Gamsakhurdia has taken refuge.


Professor's Own Nazi Past Accuses Her
To the Editor:
A propaganda machine that tightly controlled the minutiae of the press was as integral to Nazi totalitarianism as its killing installations.
Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann in her Dec. 14 letter describes Jewish editors happily practicing their profession on a "liberal" newspaper in wartime Germany.
This preposterous depiction shows contempt for truth and an assumption that today's Americans are ignorant and bored with the subject.


Funeral Held for Family Killed in Fire


Hoosier Suspended
Indiana center JASON MACK has been suspended for violating a team rule and will not play in the Copper Bowl against Baylor in Tucson, Arizona, on Tuesday night, Coach BILL MALLORY said.
Mallory would not disclose the violation.
"It's strictly an in-house situation," he said.


Salvadoran Leader to Join U.N. Talks
With time running out on what was expected to be the final round of peace talks to end El Salvador's 12-year-old civil war, the Salvadoran President agreed tonight to fly to New York to join the negotiations, diplomats said.
Diplomats involved in the discussions said President Alfredo Cristiani, a moderate who leads the ruling right-of-center Nationalist Republican Alliance, was joining the talks at the United Nations despite the opposition of more conservative military and political leaders in El Salvador who feared he would make concessions they considered unreasonable.


Indians' New Foe: Environmentalists
For centuries, Indian rights have routinely been superseded by more powerful interests: ranchers, miners, Federal and state governments have all claimed to know what is best for the Indian people.
Now the tribes here face a new foe: environmentalists.


Women Turn Their Statements Into Questions?; A Sign of Optimism?
To the Editor:
On two points, Lynne Sharon Schwartz's perceptions on rising intonation in the declarative sentences spoken by young Americans (Op-Ed, Dec. 15) falls short.
The declarative intonation rise stops one level below that of full English question intonation rise (two levels above monotone); therefore young America asks questions in precisely the manner that older Americans do.
What young Americans do is to raise intonation slightly at the end of a declarative, characterized in older Americans by a slight (one level below monotone) drop; perhaps a sign of optimism on the part of the youngsters?


Pilot Credits 'A Little Help' at Christmastime For Safe Landing


CBS Decides to Eject Buck From the Booth
CBS endured considerable criticism for its telecasts of the 1991 World Series, including objections to questionable angles on crucial plays, overuse of instant replays and Jack Buck's penchant for overanticipating the outcome of plays.
To no one's surprise, Buck was dismissed yesterday as the network's lead baseball announcer by Ted Shaker, executive producer of CBS Sports.
Shaker praised Buck's work and denied that the broadcaster's performance had anything to do with the dismissal.


Laid-Off Park Workers Expected Rat Upsurge
To the Editor:
So, the rats are taking over Central Park (news article, Dec. 11).
It may be news to some people.
But not to any of us who represent workers in New York City's Parks Department.


Venture Set With Du Pont On Pesticides
Crop Genetics International, a small agricultural biotechnology company, and E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, one of the world's largest agricultural chemical producers, said yesterday that they had formed an alliance to develop naturally occurring insect viruses into pesticides.
Du Pont, based in Wilmington, Del., will provide Crop Genetics with up to $3.7 million over two years to develop virus products and mass-produce them at low cost with a proprietary process.
Du Pont is expected to help formulate the products so they can be applied inexpensively to crops, to help them gain regulatory approval and to help sell them.
Profit sharing will be negotiated case by case as products are ready for market, the companies said.
In over-the-counter trading yesterday, Crop Genetics' stock shot up 72.2 percent, gaining $3.25, to $7.75.
It was that market's biggest gainer in percentage terms.
The first targets will be caterpillars that attack fruits and vegetables.
Crop Genetics, based in Hanover, Md., submitted three such viruses to the Environmental Protection Agency for registration as a new pesticide last summer.
The process normally takes up to a year for products that do not involve genetic engineering.
Like other naturally occurring insect killers, or biopesticides, the viruses have potentially important environmental benefits compared with synthetic chemical products produced by Du Pont and other chemical giants.
The viruses are deadly only to the insects in which they are found, and even then only when present in larger concentrations than are commonly found.
The viruses also tend to break down relatively quickly into environmentally harmless remains when they are outside their host insect.
Thus, farmers could spray large concentrations on crops without harming helpful insects, other animals, farmworkers or consumers.
A Major Drawback
The biggest roadblock to using viruses as pesticides is that they may take several days to kill an insect.
That has not stopped the Agriculture Department from developing Gypcheck, a virus used against the gypsy moth by the Forestry Service.
But the private sector has remained primarily committed to synthetic chemicals, and most new biopesticides are based on toxic proteins found in naturally occurring bacteria that quickly kill specific insects.
A virus manufactured in the 1970's by Sandoz Ltd. of Switzerland for use against the boll weevil failed commercially.
"Growers want to see bugs dying right away," said Fred Betz, a microbial pesticides expert at the E.P.A.
Joseph Kelly, the chairman and chief executive of Crop Genetics, said farmers were increasingly willing to be patient in using a product that was more environmentally sound.
But he stressed that the viruses would most likely be used with other biological and chemical pesticides.
For example, a virus might be applied when a vegetable was first emerging from the ground, but a chemical would be used if the plant was nearly mature to kill insects as quickly as possible and preserve its appearance.
Various Methods Urged
Frank R. Owen, the global product manager for Du Pont's $1.7 billion agricultural chemicals group, noted that rotating among different types of pesticides would make it harder for insects to develop resistance to any one product.
Du Pont's only other venture into biopesticides so far has been a two-year-old agreement to handle the marketing in the United States of Biobit, an anti-caterpillar toxin isolated from a common bacteria by Novo-Nordisk A.S. of Denmark.
The worldwide market for pesticides affecting leading crops, including insecticides, fungicides and herbicides, is thought to be about $20 billion.
Analysts figure that biopesticides account for about $100 million of it, at most, but the segment is growing rapidly.


Kerrey's Companies Provide Few With Medical Coverage
When Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska introduced a bill last summer calling for the Government to provide comprehensive health insurance for all Americans, he said the runaway costs of health care were severely hampering the nation's businesses, forcing them to choose between providing jobs and providing medical coverage for their employees.
Senator Kerrey, a candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination, knows firsthand the predicament he described.
He and his brother-in-law own a chain of nine restaurants and three health clubs here in Omaha and in Lincoln, Neb., and most of the employees cannot get health insurance through the Kerrey companies.


Soviet Files Show K.G.B. Cover-Up In the Disappearance of Wallenberg
Documents released by the Soviet Government shortly before its demise show that the K.G.B. took extensive pains to expunge from their records the name of Raoul Wallenberg, the Swedish diplomat who helped save the lives of thousands of Jews and then disappeared in Soviet captivity toward the end of World War II, and actively concealed his case even from the Kremlin.
The documents, released by the Soviet intelligence agency and the Foreign Ministry in a final burst of openness prompted by the failure of hard-line coup in August, disclose intriguing samples of spycraft, including copies of inked-out entries from old K.G.B. logs that have been restored in recent months to reveal Mr.
Wallenberg's name.


U.N. Observers Visit Croatian Town Battered by Federal Artillery


Suspense Builds for Blockbuster
As Alabama and Colorado prepare for the second Blockbuster Bowl -- "The Sequel," advertisements proclaim -- the long-range future of the event is building a greater sense of drama than anything that could happen in the football game Saturday night in Joe Robbie Stadium.
The Crimson Tide (10-1) will enter its 44th bowl game with a chance to complete the most successful Alabama season since the 1979 team won all 12 games and finished on top of both news-agency polls.
An Alabama victory would give the Crimson Tide 23 seasons with no more than one defeat.
Peek at Future
Colorado (8-2-1), the Big Eight co-champion, has won or shared the conference title for three consecutive seasons.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge receipt of or return articles unless they are accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Taming Japan's Trade Surplus
The Japanese trade surplus is soaring again.
It will probably hit a record $100 billion for 1991 and rise even higher in 1992.
Japan now has the only sizable surplus, with Europe as well as the United States running large deficits.
Two steps are urgently required.
First, the value of the yen should be raised substantially.
In addition, the Japanese must be encouraged to end the recent stagnation in their domestic spending, which has led to renewed reliance on exports.


Philippines Orders U.S. to Leave Strategic Navy Base at Subic Bay
The Philippines told the United States today that it must withdraw from the Subic Bay naval base by the end of 1992, ending a vast American military presence that began with the capture of the islands from Spain in 1898.
The decision, which resulted from an impasse in negotiations, follows a year of intense talks between the countries on the fate of American bases in the Philippines.
The announcement also comes just three days before President Bush begins a 12-day Asian tour.


Seeking Real Gains In an Era of 4% Yields
As a new year sweeps in, Americans are confronted with an unhappy choice: Whether to accept skimpy interest of 4 percent or less on their savings or, in the quest for a decent yield, to put their money into investments that entail worrisome risk.
Two years ago, certificates of deposit, money-market funds and Treasury bills offered 8 percent interest.
Even after inflation and income taxes, these investments -- known as cash equivalents because they pose little or no risk to principal -- provided a positive return on money.
But those days are past.


A Visionary Of Disunion
Secession and political disintegration have redrawn the map of Europe over the last few months.
The Baltic states declared independence, Croatia and Slovenia have struggled to withdraw from Yugoslavia and a loose commonwealth has replaced the Soviet Union.
There have even been independence movements within independence movements in areas like Abkhazia and South Ossetia in the ex-Soviet republic of Georgia.
Unnoticed amid this turmoil was the 50th anniversary of a remarkable essay that bravely declared the world would be better off if large states splintered into small pieces.


Democracy at the City Council
Some members of New York's City Council, chafing under the powerful leadership of Speaker Peter Vallone, want to change the rules to weaken him and give themselves more independence.
The proposal is a major step in the right direction.
But in some instances it goes too far.
Mr.
Vallone is currently able to use committee assignments and other perks to reward loyalty and punish dissent.
Any effective legislative leader needs to exercise firm control, but on occasion Mr.
Vallone has overdone things.
The task is to democratize the city's legislature without so weakening the Speaker that the Council's role as a strong counterweight to the Mayor is compromised.


FRENCH ASK SWISS ON JAILED IRANIAN
French officials said today that they would ask for the extradition of an Iranian who was arrested in Switzerland on Monday on suspicion of involvement in the assassination of a former Iranian Prime Minister near Paris last summer.
The spokesman for Switzerland's Ministry of Justice, Jorg Kistler, identified the suspect as Zeyal Sarhadi.
He said the 25-year-old Iranian was charged with providing logistical support for the suspected assassins of Shahpour Bakhtiar, who was Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi's last prime minister before the 1979 Islamic revolution in Iran.


A Wily Ploy in Geneva
Arthur Dunkel, head of the international organization that oversees world trade, dropped a 500-page bombshell last week in Geneva.
He proposed a radical overhaul of trade rules and instructed negotiators, deadlocked after five years of talks, to consider his proposal on an all-or-nothing basis.
It's a desperate but shrewd tactic.
By forcing negotiators to examine the benefits of an overall settlement, Mr.
Dunkel hopes to stiffen their resistance to lobbyists trying to scuttle agreement for the sake of protectionist privileges.


2 Miami Players Plead Not Guilty
Two University of Miami football players pleaded not guilty today to charges of running up more than $4,000 in illegal purchases with a credit card that was delivered to them by mistake.


I.R.A. Blast on Railroad Line
The Irish Republican Army set off a bomb today on the Dublin-Belfast railroad line, just three minutes after the end of its Christmas cease-fire.
The I.R.A., battling to oust Britain from Northern Ireland, telephoned a warning to say a bomb had been placed on the line, the police said.
The explosion, near the border station of Newry, disrupted train service.
No injuries were reported.


Laid-Off Park Workers Expected Rat Upsurge
To the Editor:
So, the rats are taking over Central Park (news article, Dec. 11).
It may be news to some people.
But not to any of us who represent workers in New York City's Parks Department.


No Reason to Open Files on Kennedy Assassination, Congressional Investigator Says
Despite the suggestion raised by the movie "J. F. K." that Government files may hide critical revelations about President John F. Kennedy's assassination in 1963, the head of the House committee that in the late 1970's looked into the killing says there is no reason to open the remaining sealed files.
Representative Louis Stokes, the Ohio Democrat who was chairman of the House committee that investigated the assassination, said in an interview today that the committee had made public "everything that we thought had any real substantive bearing on the assassination."


132 Haitian Refugees Are Granted Their Request to Return Home


Women Turn Their Statements Into Questions?; A Sign of Optimism?
To the Editor:
On two points, Lynne Sharon Schwartz's perceptions on rising intonation in the declarative sentences spoken by young Americans (Op-Ed, Dec. 15) falls short.
The declarative intonation rise stops one level below that of full English question intonation rise (two levels above monotone); therefore young America asks questions in precisely the manner that older Americans do.
What young Americans do is to raise intonation slightly at the end of a declarative, characterized in older Americans by a slight (one level below monotone) drop; perhaps a sign of optimism on the part of the youngsters?


Is the Deal Too Good? Check the Store
If the price tag looks too good to be true, it might be -- even right after Christmas.
If you are doubtful about a purchase you want to make or unhappy with one you have made, the Better Business Bureau of Metropolitan New York is one place to check on a retailer's reliability.
The bureau has a 24-hour automated Consumer Help Line and Referral Service for New York City and Long Island: (900) 463-6222. (If you do not have a touch-tone phone, call between 8:30 A.M. and 8 P.M.) The call costs 85 cents a minute.
An average call takes three to four minutes.
Have the retailer's phone number handy.
Outside New York, call the Better Business Bureau listed in the white pages.
The caller can learn, among other things, whether a business has a satisfactory rating and whether it is in the bureau's dispute-arbitration program.


Russia and Ex-Soviet States Win Recognition From China
China announced today that it was recognizing Russia and the independence of the other former Soviet republics, but it suggested that they would face grim times in the aftermath of Communism.
"Prospects for the near future are dim at best," said a long commentary issued by the official New China News Agency.
Abolishing Communist rule, it said, has resulted in "worsening political, economic and ethnic problems."


Brown Hopes One-Note Campaign Strikes a Responsive Chord
Former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California is a man of sometimes bewildering personal and political dimensions, but his current campaign for the Presidency is as one-dimensional as a straight line.
"Money," he says, "is the root of all political evil."


Black and Hispanic Groups Gain In New York Shift on Heat Grants
The Dinkins administration has quietly cut off the flow of Federal funds for heating subsidies to several Jewish and Irish community centers in Brooklyn and Queens, arguing that not enough of the money was going to black and Hispanic residents.
Facing steep cuts in funds from the Federal Government, the administration has shrunk from 17 to 11 the number of field offices citywide where the poor can apply for subsidies from the Federal Home Energy Assistance Program, which gives needy families as much as $195 each winter for utility bills.


In Special Senate Session, Still No Progress on Budget
The Republican-led State Senate today rejected a budget bill that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo had called it into special session to consider, intensifying the six-week-long standoff here over how to cure the state's tremendous fiscal ills.
The rare special session of the chamber ordered by the Governor, which Senate officials estimated cost $20,000 in per-diem payments to Senators and other expenses, may have set a record for inaction in the Capitol.
After convening to recite the Pledge of Allegiance, the Senate immediately broke for a conference of the Republican majority.


Women Turn Their Statements Into Questions?; Nothing New?
To the Editor:
Lynne Sharon Schwartz's observation that Americans are making assertions with the rising inflection that belongs to questions (Op-Ed, Dec. 15) is surely right.
But her belief that it is a new way of speaking devised in California is not.
Henry James noted the habit with dismay when he revisited his homeland in 1905.


Kerrey's Companies Provide Few With Medical Coverage
When Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska introduced a bill last summer calling for the Government to provide comprehensive health insurance for all Americans, he said the runaway costs of health care were severely hampering the nation's businesses, forcing them to choose between providing jobs and providing medical coverage for their employees.
Senator Kerrey, a candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination, knows firsthand the predicament he described.
He and his brother-in-law own a chain of nine restaurants and three health clubs here in Omaha and in Lincoln, Neb., and most of the employees cannot get health insurance through the Kerrey companies.


Say, Now You're Talking, New York
Maybe New York City isn't such a tough town after all.
Yesterday, a front-page article in The New York Times described a Ukrainian immigrant's obsession with learning English and his difficulty in finding Americans who would converse with him.
The immigrant, Sam Baraker, got what he wanted.
By mid-afternoon more than 50 people had telephoned The Times asking for his number so that they could speak with him.
Many said they knew how he felt; they had once been new immigrants themselves.


MILITANT MUSLIMS WIN ALGERIAN VOTE BY A WIDE MARGIN
A party that says it wants to turn Algeria into an Islamic republic in the Iranian mold has triumphed in the first free parliamentary elections ever held here, trouncing the ruling National Liberation Front, which has governed the country since independence 30 years ago.
Government officials said that virtually complete returns from Thursday's voting had delivered 189 seats of Algeria's 430-member parliament, or the equivalent of 44 percent, to the militant Muslim fundamentalist movement, the Islamic Salvation Front.


Classical Music in Review
'The Mikado' Symphony Space 2537 Broadway, at 95th Street Through Jan. 12
The New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players' "Mikado" at Symphony Space asks unintended questions about time, place and national identity.
Yet its well-made and often well-sung production invites holiday audiences to come and see it.
The run has been extended: Thursdays through Sundays until Jan. 12.


Quote Of The Day
"I am afraid we are entering a dark age. This is an absolutely terrifying thing, more so since it has resulted from our own voting." FARIDA LESBETH, a woman in Algiers.  [ 1:6. ]


MILITANT MUSLIMS WIN ALGERIAN VOTE BY A WIDE MARGIN
A party that says it wants to turn Algeria into an Islamic republic in the Iranian mold has triumphed in the first free parliamentary elections ever held here, trouncing the ruling National Liberation Front, which has governed the country since independence 30 years ago.
Government officials said that virtually complete returns from Thursday's voting had delivered 189 seats of Algeria's 430-member parliament, or the equivalent of 44 percent, to the militant Muslim fundamentalist movement, the Islamic Salvation Front.


INSIDE
Stock Prices Set Records With interest rates at rock bottom, stock indexes set records.
The Dow Jones industrial average, closed at 3,101.52, up 18.56 points.
Page 33.
Housing for the Affluent
Despite laws to help the poor, Government housing auctions have generally benefitted the affluent.
Page 33.
Trade Targets: Beer, Tools
The United States said it would set duties on Canadian beer and extend machine tool import limits.
Page 33.
Indians vs.
Fish Lovers
To save a rare fish, environmentalists want to block a plan by the Ute Indians to improve their lot.
Page 7.
Steinbrenner's Hurdles
George Steinbrenner faces several obstacles in his bid to regain control of the Yankees.
Page 29.


A Wily Ploy in Geneva
Arthur Dunkel, head of the international organization that oversees world trade, dropped a 500-page bombshell last week in Geneva.
He proposed a radical overhaul of trade rules and instructed negotiators, deadlocked after five years of talks, to consider his proposal on an all-or-nothing basis.
It's a desperate but shrewd tactic.
By forcing negotiators to examine the benefits of an overall settlement, Mr.
Dunkel hopes to stiffen their resistance to lobbyists trying to scuttle agreement for the sake of protectionist privileges.


Democracy at the City Council
Some members of New York's City Council, chafing under the powerful leadership of Speaker Peter Vallone, want to change the rules to weaken him and give themselves more independence.
The proposal is a major step in the right direction.
But in some instances it goes too far.
Mr.
Vallone is currently able to use committee assignments and other perks to reward loyalty and punish dissent.
Any effective legislative leader needs to exercise firm control, but on occasion Mr.
Vallone has overdone things.
The task is to democratize the city's legislature without so weakening the Speaker that the Council's role as a strong counterweight to the Mayor is compromised.


Sarah Nederlander Theater Executive, 97
Sarah Nederlander, the matriarch of the Nederlander theatrical family, died Dec. 19 at her home in Southfield, Mich.
She was 97 years old.
Mrs.
Nederlander, who was born Sarah Applebaum, married David T. Nederlander in 1916.
Together they built the Nederlander Organization, which operates a chain of theaters and other entertainment enterprises.
Mr.
Nederlander died in 1967, and she continued to work for the business.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ANOTHER DELAY FOR FARE INCREASE
Transit officials postponed for the second time in a week the critical vote on raising New York City's subway and bus fare, as private talks on the fare gave way to a display of budget brinkmanship.
The board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority decided to postpone the vote until early next week so efforts to avoid raising the fare to $1.40 from the current $1.15 could continue.
Some board members suggested that if no agreement was reached by Tuesday, the M.T.A. might go into the new year without a fare increase or a balanced budget.
Page 1.
SHIFTING GRANTS FOR HEAT
The Dinkins administration has quietly cut off the flow of Federal funds for heating subsidies to several Jewish and Irish community centers in Brooklyn and Queens, arguing that not enough of the money was going to black and Hispanic residents.
City Council members and some Jewish leaders criticized the decision.
Page 1.
MORE SCRUTINY FOR JAILS OFFICIAL
The Correction Department's top legal official, Allison Lewis-Smith, who is under investigation in connection with a lobbyist and a $1.9 million contract to electronically monitor released pretrial prisoners, improperly authorized another plan that would have allowed sentenced inmates to go home at night, city officials said.
Page 23.
YUPPIE MOBSTER AS PETTY THIEF
In magazines and on television, Michael Franzese was portrayed as a sophisticated Mafia figure, a modern mobster who made millions of dollars in complex frauds and lived a lavish life.
But at his sentencing, prosecutors described him as a con man who bounced checks, obtained bank loans with false documents and failed to pay the rent for his luxurious home.
Page 23.
NEW ENGLISH RULES FOR CABDRIVERS
New York City's cabdrivers are already supposed to be patient, courteous, honest, neat and safe, and to know the city well.
If a new taxi school curriculum is adopted, they will also be able to speak better English.
Page 22.
REGION  SENATE REJECTS ALBANY BUDGET
The Republican-led State Senate rejected a budget bill Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo had called them into special session to consider, intensifying the six-week-long standoff over how to cure the state's tremendous fiscal ills.
The rare special session, which Senate officials estimated to cost $20,000 in per-diem payments to Senators and other expenses, may have set new records for inaction in the Capitol.
Page 25.
BLACKFACE HOLIDAY SHOW DENOUNCED
A Christmas show of a county bar association in which a performer in blackface and a curly wig sang "Old Man River" as Anita Hill was denounced as "racially insensitive" by New Jersey's minority bar association.
Page 25.
FIRST STEPS FOR HOUSING NOT ENOUGH
Among Connecticut's weathly suburbs, the town of Ridgefield has made unusual progress building affordable housing.
But because it has made the effort, the town is learning sooner than some others that under state housing laws, it has not done nearly enough.
Page 25.
Banks to lend $2 million to troubled Bridgeport University.
Page 25.
Neediest Cases 23  Consumer's World 48


Bridge
The New York Winter Regional Championship, which continues today at the Vista International Hotel at the World Trade Center, will be the occasion for an important hand-over within the organizing body.
Henry Bethe, who gave strong leadership to the Greater New York Bridge Association for the past two years, will surrender his presidential office to Bill Rosenbaum.
Rosenbaum is expected to be equally successful, for he has served for four years in the demanding post of tournament chairman and knows more than anyone else about the details of the association.
He is also a skillful player, as witness the diagramed deal played at the Bergen Bridge Center in Teaneck, N.J.
He sat South, and arrived in six spades after a sophisticated bidding sequence.


Arnold Hoffmann Jr.; Art Director, 75
Arnold Hoffmann Jr., a painter, silkscreen artist and a former art director for The New York Times Magazine, died on Saturday at the Bellhaven Nursing Center in Bellport, L.I.
He was 75 years old and lived in Springs, L.I.
He died of heart failure, said his wife, Jean Kemper Hoffmann.


Read All About It: Playoff Teams to Rely on the Run  Aha! Fooled You. And the Receiver Is Open.
When the N.F.L. playoffs begin this weekend, two teams, Kansas City and the Jets, will arrive armed with an extra weapon: quarterbacks versed in the art of the play-fake.
The Chiefs' Steve DeBerg and the Jets' Ken O'Brien are among the league's best in fooling defenders into thinking run when the play is really a pass.


Iceland Plans to Withdraw From International Whaling Agreement
Yielding to pressure from its fishing industry, Iceland said today that it would withdraw in June from the International Whaling Commission, the group of 37 nations that manages whale species and sets international whaling policies.
Iceland is the first important whaling nation to withdraw from the 45-year-old commission, which established a moratorium on commercial whaling that began in 1986.


Japan Restores Old Temple Gods
The sculpture's exposed back, with its ancient cypress timbers, iron clamps and posts, looks at first glance like a building in itself.
But when this looming edifice was slowly wheeled around by a half-dozen workers, one of the most powerful visions Japanese art can offer slowly came into view: an unobstructed gaze into the glowering face and dancing figure of one of the 28-foot-tall guardian figures at Todaiji temple, which are undergoing their first restoration since they were created in 1203.
It is one of the most challenging and important art conservation projects ever undertaken in Japan, involving monumental and exceptionally expressive statues of wood.
The two figures, or Nio, in the South Gate of this great Buddhist temple are being completely dismantled, fumigated and preserved.


Women Turn Their Statements Into Questions?
To the Editor:
In "This Is an Article on Diction?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15) Lynne Sharon Schwartz reports that a major change, perhaps with roots in California, is sweeping American speech: More people are ending their utterances, including declarative sentences, with a rising inflection of the voice.
This pattern of inflection usually signals that a question is being asked.
But this usage, according to Ms.
Schwartz, conveys tentativeness, lack of self-confidence or worse.


Postwar Low For Rig Count
The number of rigs actively drilling for oil and natural gas in the United States fell this week by 27, to 770, Baker Hughes Inc., the Houston-based oilfield services company, said today.


Uncertainty Surrounds New Token
If a fare increase is approved for New York City's subway and buses, transit officials say they will begin using a new token.
But there is great uncertainty over how a new token would be introduced.
The Transit Authority, anticipating that the fare would increase on Jan. 1, said it had planned to sell the new tokens from tables set up in dozens of major subway stations during the days leading up to Jan. 1, to cut down on huge lines that often develop when a new fare goes into effect.
The agency also intended to continue selling the current tokens from token booths until Wednesday.


Bigger Award in Dictionary Suit
Nearly doubling the damages awarded by a jury in October, a Federal judge has ordered Random House to pay $4 million to Merriam-Webster for copying the jacket design of its dictionary.
The jury in Federal District Court in Manhattan had found that Random House intentionally tried to capture Merriam-Webster customers by publishing a new edition of its dictionary that resembled that of its competitor.


For Their Next Trick, Rangers Bottle Magic
They had already won four meandering overtime games this season and four supposedly rare shutouts.
They had won twice because of replay rulings.
They had won once when a puck might or might not have passed, undetected by hemp or eye, through the mesh of the Pittsburgh net.
All season, the Rangers had been winning strangely; a team of destiny, or the big tease.
But they had never won a game as they did in their remarkable 8-6 comeback victory Thursday night over Washington.


Classical Music in Review
'La Boheme' Metropolitan Opera House
It is hard to believe that Franco Zeffirelli's Metropolitan Opera production of Puccini's "Boheme," which returned to the repertory on Thursday evening, is only 10 years old.
It feels much older, not just because of the director's long prior association with the work but also because, as the prototype for his overblown Puccini stagings at the Met, it seems to come around every few months, at least by proxy.


Frances Henry Has Wedding
Frances Therese Henry, the head librarian for Gannett Suburban Newspapers in White Plains, was married yesterday to Padraic Dennis Riley, a Gannett editor in Yorktown, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert Pegnam Henry, the bride's brother, officiated at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church in Larchmont, N.Y.
Mrs.
Riley, 34 years old, graduated from New England College and has a Master of Library Science degree from Southern Connecticut State University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Henry of Greenwich, Conn.
Her father is the vice chairman of the Reynolds Organization, a real estate concern in New York.


Letter: On Poverty; Growth of Mother-Centered Families
To the Editor:
New Census Bureau findings on the leap in percentages of single mothers among American teen-agers ("Larger Number of New Mothers Are Unmarried," news article, Dec. 4) brought to mind the Economist article (April 27) identifying as the least solvable of all family poverty problems "the increasing proportion of children born out of wedlock."


Debut by Conductor
The Russian conductor Vladislav Chernushenko is to make his United States debut conducting the Manhattan Philharmonic at 8 P.M. tomorrow at Carnegie Hall.
He is to lead the orchestra, along with the Russian Chamber Chorus and five soloists from St.
Petersburg, in "Aleko," a one-act opera by Rachmaninoff.
Also on the program is Puccini's "Messa di Gloria," with the Houston Lutheran Chorale under Metford Mountford, making his New York City debut.
Tickets are $19 to $29.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


Bailout Flop: Low-Income Housing
Congress has written new laws to insure that some of the lower-priced homes seized in the savings and loan debacle are sold to low-income families.
Calling it the silver lining of the savings and loan foreclosures, Congress set up a program to accomplish this in 1989.
But so far many of the properties have gone instead to buyers with higher incomes, large corporations like the General Electric Company, or rich real estate developers.
In some cases, condos in resort towns, not college towns, have gone to college students whose parents put up the money.


Professor's Own Nazi Past Accuses Her; Apology Sought
To the Editor:
Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann's Dec. 14 letter, responding to your Nov. 28 news article, confuses the issue.


Gen. Chester Clifton Jr., 78, Dies; Was Military Aide to 2 Presidents
Chester V. Clifton Jr., a retired major general and senior military aide to Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, died Monday at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington.
He was 78 years old.
He died of pneumonia after an intestinal operation, a family member said.


A Dream Ends For Democrats In Westchester
Political power is always elusive.
But for Democrats in Westchester County, who finally won control of the Board of Legislators in November for the first time in 83 years, that power is already flickering like a mirage on a long, hot highway.
Even before the new legislature takes office on Jan. 1, the 9-to-8 majority the Democrats thought they had has reversed itself in the Republicans' favor.


Reassure North Korea on Arms
North Korea told Representative Stephen Solarz a week ago that it was prepared to sign an agreement opening its nuclear facilities to full international inspection.
Now it says it's willing to do so unconditionally, dropping its demand for American assurances that no U.S. nuclear arms remain on South Korean soil.
That's a step in the right direction.
There's no reason Washington can't soon give assurances about the withdrawal Pyongyang reasonably wants.
With the issue of U.S. nuclear arms settled, North Korea would have a clear obligation to allow international inspectors access to
all
its nuclear facilities.
That includes the worrisome reprocessing plant at Yongbyon now nearing completion, which is not on the list of sites to be inspected.
Allowing full inspections would clarify North Korea's adherence to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and end its outcast status.


Cover-Up in Wallenberg Case
The K.G.B. denied the Kremlin information about Raoul Wallenberg, the Holocaust hero captured by Soviet forces, documents show.
Page 4.


Reassure North Korea on Arms
North Korea told Representative Stephen Solarz a week ago that it was prepared to sign an agreement opening its nuclear facilities to full international inspection.
Now it says it's willing to do so unconditionally, dropping its demand for American assurances that no U.S. nuclear arms remain on South Korean soil.
That's a step in the right direction.
There's no reason Washington can't soon give assurances about the withdrawal Pyongyang reasonably wants.
With the issue of U.S. nuclear arms settled, North Korea would have a clear obligation to allow international inspectors access to
all
its nuclear facilities.
That includes the worrisome reprocessing plant at Yongbyon now nearing completion, which is not on the list of sites to be inspected.
Allowing full inspections would clarify North Korea's adherence to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and end its outcast status.


News Summary
International 2-6  ISLAMIC PARTY WINS IN ALGERIA
A party that advocates turning Algeria into an Islamic republic in the Iranian mold triumphed in the country's first free parliamentary elections, trouncing the party that has governed for 30 years.  1


M.T.A. Delays Vote on Fare Increase
Transit officials yesterday postponed for the second time in a week a critical vote on raising New York City's subway and bus fare, as private talks on the fare gave way to a display of budget brinkmanship.
The board of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority decided to postpone the vote until early next week so efforts to avoid raising the fare to $1.40, from the current $1.15, could continue.
But some board members suggested that if no agreement was reached by Tuesday, the M.T.A. might go into the new year without a fare increase and without a balanced budget for the Transit Authority, its subsidiary that operates the subway and buses.
Risky Strategy
Missing the budget deadline would be an extreme gambit, carrying the risk that the agency could run out of cash in three or four months.
But the board members who appear to be leaning toward such a strategy hope it would push reluctant or distracted state lawmakers to concentrate on the transit agency's problems.


Action on Base Disappoints U.S.
American officials expressed disappointment today at the decision by the Philippines to require United States forces to withdraw by the end of next year, but said the military would seek to fill the void at other sites in the Pacific region.
The Bush Administration had sought to maintain the Subic Bay naval base for as long as possible.
At the same time, Washington wanted to avoid giving the impression that "we were muscling those guys," one American official said.


CHRONICLE
The list of American universities wooing MIKHAIL S. GORBACHEV keeps on growing.
The University of Minnesota is issuing an invitation to the newly resigned President of the Soviet Union, joining Stanford, Boston, Johns Hopkins and George Mason Universities, which have already sent offers to Mr.
Gorbachev.
"We are trying to get the invitation off to him today," G. EDWARD SCHUH, the dean of the Hubert H. Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs at Minnesota, said yesterday.
"We are using Fritz Mondale as a point of contact. We keep hoping that the fact that Gorbachev came here during one of his trips in 1990, rather than Harvard or some place like that, gives us good contacts. We are hoping to capitalize on that visit."


Canada Beer and Asia Tools Target of U.S. Import Curbs
The Bush Administration said today that it planned to impose duties on Canadian beer to retaliate for Canada's restrictions on American beer.
And it said it would extend some restrictions on imports of tools from Taiwan and Japan used to make machinery, including military equipment.
The move against Canadian beer could result in a doubling of the price of imported brands like Molson, Labatt and Moosehead next April, when the duties are scheduled to go into effect, although continuing negotiations could lead to smaller duties or no duties at all.


Women Turn Their Statements Into Questions?; My Client Is Not Guilty?
To the Editor:
As an under-35, now and then unwitting perpetrator of the declarative utterances that end in a question mark, to which Lynne Sharon Schwartz refers in "This Is an Article on Diction?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15) and a law student, I found Ms.
Schwartz's comments of special interest.
The issue is of particular significance in the law, an area Ms.
Schwartz does not mention, where words are the practitioner's most important tool.
Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes cautioned that "A word is not a crystal, transparent and unchanged, it is the skin of a living thought and may vary greatly in color and content according to the circumstances and the time in which it is used."


Ann J. Casey, Lawyer, Weds
Ann Jennifer Casey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur F. Casey of Schenectady, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert Edward Bullock, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Bullock of Saratoga Springs, N.Y., and Boca Raton, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
J.
Dean Dykstra officiated at the First Reformed Church in Schenectady, with Bishop David S. Ball, the Episcopal Bishop of Albany, giving the blessing.
The bride, 31 years old, is a partner with her father in the law firm of Hayes &amp; Casey in Clifton Park, N.Y.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and has a law degree from Albany Law School.


Grand Central Terminal: A Microcosm of the City It Serves


Guidepost; Categorizing Bubblies
For toasting the New Year there's nothing like Champagne.
In the strictest sense, Champagne refers only to sparkling wine made in the Champagne district of France, northeast of Paris.
All other bubblies, from elsewhere in France as well as from Spain, Italy, Germany, California, Washington state and New York, are properly known as sparkling wines.
But regardless of where the wine originates, there are a number of terms commonly used on all sparkling wine labels that give some indication of how the wine will taste.
Here's a glossary to help you choose the right one for your palate.
Usually the least expensive in the line.
Rose: Pink, usually made by adding some red wine


On Edmund G. Brown Jr.
After 20 years in public life raising and spending a full measure of political money, the former California Governor is running for President as an insurgent who will take no campaign gift larger than $100.
Strategies: The Democrats and '92.
Page 8.


Black and Hispanic Groups Gain In New York Shift on Heat Grants
The Dinkins administration has quietly cut off the flow of Federal funds for heating subsidies to several Jewish and Irish community centers in Brooklyn and Queens, arguing that not enough of the money was going to black and Hispanic residents.
Facing steep cuts in funds from the Federal Government, the administration has shrunk from 17 to 11 the number of field offices citywide where the poor can apply for subsidies from the Federal Home Energy Assistance Program, which gives needy families as much as $195 each winter for utility bills.


Study Finds Enrollment Is Up At Colleges Despite Recession
College enrollment in public and private institutions increased this fall despite the recession, a new survey shows.
The survey, which covers both four-year and two-year institutions, found that total enrollment outstripped the totals for 1990 in 12 of 15 states it monitored and that two-year colleges grew faster.


State Monitors Ridgefield's Efforts To Build More Affordable Housing
Everything has its place in this picture-book community.
Churches and inns and grand old houses line Route 35 below the center of town.
Gas stations and shopping strips line Route 35 above.
Condominiums are clustered on the edge of the center.
The winding, hilly roads beyond belong to the old farmhouses and new colonials that are typical of upper Fairfield County.


Women Turn Their Statements Into Questions?
To the Editor:
In "This Is an Article on Diction?" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15) Lynne Sharon Schwartz reports that a major change, perhaps with roots in California, is sweeping American speech: More people are ending their utterances, including declarative sentences, with a rising inflection of the voice.
This pattern of inflection usually signals that a question is being asked.
But this usage, according to Ms.
Schwartz, conveys tentativeness, lack of self-confidence or worse.


Philippines Orders U.S. to Leave Strategic Navy Base at Subic Bay
The Philippines told the United States today that it must withdraw from the Subic Bay naval base by the end of 1992, ending a vast American military presence that began with the capture of the islands from Spain in 1898.
The decision, which resulted from an impasse in negotiations, follows a year of intense talks between the countries on the fate of American bases in the Philippines.
The announcement also comes just three days before President Bush begins a 12-day Asian tour.


Future Cabbies May Face Tougher Language Exam
New York City's cabdrivers are already supposed to be patient, courteous, honest, neat, safe knowledgable about the city and tolerant of bicyclists and pedestrians.
To that Boy-Scout-like creed, the head of the taxi commission would like to add, "able to speak adequate English."
Fidel Del Valle, the chairman of the Taxi and Limousine Commission, estimates that about 85 percent of the city's 38,000 licensed medallion drivers are foreign-born.
"What does a phrase like 'uptown' mean to somebody from Bangladesh?" Mr.
Del Valle asked.


Women Turn Their Statements Into Questions?; Nothing New?
To the Editor:
Lynne Sharon Schwartz's observation that Americans are making assertions with the rising inflection that belongs to questions (Op-Ed, Dec. 15) is surely right.
But her belief that it is a new way of speaking devised in California is not.
Henry James noted the habit with dismay when he revisited his homeland in 1905.


Professor's Own Nazi Past Accuses Her
To the Editor:
A propaganda machine that tightly controlled the minutiae of the press was as integral to Nazi totalitarianism as its killing installations.
Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann in her Dec. 14 letter describes Jewish editors happily practicing their profession on a "liberal" newspaper in wartime Germany.
This preposterous depiction shows contempt for truth and an assumption that today's Americans are ignorant and bored with the subject.


Relief in Texas as 2 Rivers Crest Below Levels Expected
The Colorado River was beginning to creep up Thelma Allen's driveway about noon today when word began to spread through her neighborhood that the river would crest a foot and a half lower than earlier estimates.
"Praise the Lord!" shouted Mrs.
Allen, a refrain that was picked up by her friend Patricia Coleman, who had been standing with her in a front yard covered with soggy Christmas decorations.
Then both cried out, "We've been saved!"


BRIEFS
*
Community First Bankshares Inc., Fargo, N.D., signed a letter to buy Worthington Bancshares Inc.
It will also buy a related insurer, First Worthington Agency Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.


Review/Pop; Soft and Sensitive Songs, About Life's Little Dramas
Like a college-radio James Taylor, Lloyd Cole is a very talented songwriter who can be a big snooze.
At the Academy last Saturday night, Mr.
Cole performed a set of songs with characteristics that, after five albums, are becoming his trademark: soft, sleepy, sensitive.
His lulling rhythms and guitar-strumming were as regular as a ticking clock; his deep, slightly crooning voice seldom strayed from its comfortable lower range.
Songs from his new album, "Don't Get Weird on Me, Babe" (Capitol), blended in seamlessly with material by the Commotions, the band he led from 1984 to 1989, as though the whole set were actually just one song with different little emotional peaks and valleys.
When, every now and then, Mr.
Cole's voice climbed a few notches from its somnolent depths, the effect was like being jolted awake; when bright white stage lights suddenly flashed on, it was like being given an electric shock.
Mr.
Cole's songs are about daily melodramas: moments that occur between lovers, details about a person that catch the eye.
But he creates no sense of melodrama.
Even his songs about heartbreak seem to drift from verse to chorus to verse to chorus, as if the words were written on clouds floating by.
At the Academy, even his stage presence was built on stasis: he didn't move around much, didn't visibly emote.
"We're about to enter what I like to think of as the mellow part of the set," he announced halfway through the show.
But the song he played was pretty much the same as the one before it.


Islam Wants Rushdie To Repent His Words
To the Editor:
Salman Rushdie's greatest flaw is his lack of shame.
The tragedy for Muslims was the writing and publication of "The Satanic Verses." Instead of repenting, Mr.
Rushdie is "sorrowful"; instead of admitting guilt, he becomes the grand preacher of a new order in Islam.


Honor for Gorbachev
MIKHAIL GORBACHEV may have lost his clout in politics, but the World Boxing Council has decided to honor him in its sport.
The W.B.C. has awarded Gorbachev, who resigned Wednesday as president of the Soviet Union, the title of "benefactor of boxing," for opening the doors to professional boxing in his country.


Mount Pleasant, N.Y., Lives Up to Its Name


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stocks reached record levels for a second straight day, again propelled by lower interest rates and hopes for the economy.
The Dow industrials vaulted past another barrier, closing above 3,100 for the first time.
It ended at 3,101.52, up 18.56 for the day and 167.04 for the week, its biggest weekly point gain ever.  [ Page 33. ]


Knicks' Loss To Spurs? Forget About It
After watching videotapes of the Knicks' humbling 118-89 loss to San Antonio on Thursday night, Pat Riley didn't need Siskel and Ebert to rate New York's performance.
It was two thumbs down.
It was so bad, in fact, that Riley said he decided against showing the videotape to the players at today's practice.
The Knicks' coach saw no point in making the team suffer more.
And with a Saturday afternoon home game against the Indiana Pacers on the horizon, the Knicks had no time to wallow in defeat.


Holiday Brass Concert
The New York Cornet and Sacbut Ensemble, an early-music brass group, is to present its eighth annual holiday concert at 8 P.M. tomorrow at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
The program includes seasonal music by Praetorius, Byrd, Schutz and others.
Joining the ensemble will be the vocal quintet Zephyrus and the alto Peter Becker.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 362-8719.


Jets' Hector Is Savoring Some Fresher Memories
In the last season in which the Jets went to the playoffs, Johnny Hector had some truly memorable moments.
Today, the running back could not remember them.
Hector played in 13 games that 1986 season, started 6, finished second on the team in rushing with 605 yards on 164 carries, and scored 8 touchdowns.
In Game 5, against Buffalo, he ran for 117 yards on 18 carries and added 100 yards on 9 catches, the first double-triple in Jets' history.


Professor's Own Nazi Past Accuses Her; Apology Sought
To the Editor:
Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann's Dec. 14 letter, responding to your Nov. 28 news article, confuses the issue.


Treasury Securities Narrowly Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were narrowly mixed in extremely slow trading yesterday.
"What little activity there has been is related to year-end book balancing," one Government securities trader said.


Turning Off Body's Bad Reactions
ONE of the busiest areas of pharmaceutical research is in cellular "receptors," proteins on the surfaces of cells that act like on-off switches for a wide range of the body's biochemical activities.
By identifying compounds that either block or stimulate particular receptors, drug companies have in recent years developed products that combat some mental disorders, prevent peptic ulcers and even relieve migraine headaches.


Haitian Talks Are Near Crucial Point
Diplomats involved in negotiations for the return to power of Haiti's deposed president, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, say they are nearing a critical juncture that will produce either a breakthrough or the effort's collapse amid diplomatic rivalries and the shroud of distrust that separates the Haitian parties.
The negotiations, led by the Organization of American States, which has actively sought Father Aristide's return since the violent Sept. 30 military coup that overthrew him, are now focused on the delicate task of naming a new prime minister in a reconstituted Aristide Government.


Dow Gains 18.56 to End Above 3,100
Stocks climbed to record levels yesterday for the second consecutive day, again propelled by lower interest rates and hopes for the economy.
The Dow Jones industrial average vaulted past another barrier, closing above 3,100 for the first time.
It ended at 3,101.52, up 18.56 points for the day and 167.04 for the four-day week, its biggest weekly point gain ever.


Sports of The Times; Gorbachev Should Run The Yankees
WHY not Mikhail Gorbachev to run the Yankees?
The Yankees are in chaos -- it is a different strain of chaos from the days when George Steinbrenner was running the team, but chaos nonetheless -- and only a man experienced in chaos can handle the job.
And who knows more about crumbling empires than Gorbachev?
Unless it's George himself, of course.
But it would be disastrous to have George back.
It would simply mean returning an old order of chaos to Yankee Stadium.
This is unacceptable to most fans.
They want new chaos; it offers hope.


Church Robbed of Icon Gets Prank Calls
The Queens church robbed of an icon that has drawn thousands of worshipers since it was said to have miraculously begun weeping has been flooded with prank phone calls from people claiming to know the icon's whereabouts, the bishop at the church said yesterday.
The police said that on Thursday they arrested one of those callers -- a 14-year-old boy who lives near the church.


Your Taxes; Making It Easier To File Returns
THE Internal Revenue Service, freed for the time being from carrying out major changes in the tax law, is pressing efforts to make it easier for taxpayers to file returns -- at least simple ones.
More than 110 million packages of forms are to start reaching taxpayers on Jan. 2.
In Ohio, 1.2 million taxpayers eligible to use Form 1040EZ -- single people with income under $50,000 -- will be able to file by telephone.
They must fill out a five-line Form 1040-TEL, entering wages, interest and tax withheld.
They then call a toll-free number and punch in the information.
The I.R.S. takes over from there, figuring the tax and refund or amount due while the taxpayer remains on the phone.


Bombardier Returns to Earth
Much like Japanese companies, Bombardier Inc. -- the Canadian developer of snowmobiles that made itself into one of the world's biggest makers of planes and trains -- has a knack for getting innovative technology cheaply and turning it into gold.
That strategy has worked particularly well with the company's aeronautics and military products division, which consists of Canadair of Quebec, Learjet of Kansas and Short Brothers of Northern Ireland.
The companies cost just $250 million to acquire, yet they produced sales last year of $1.5 billion (Canadian) and pretax income of $130 million.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Cranbury
RESIDENTS of the 13-square-mile Township of Cranbury in New Jersey's Middlesex County like to brag that it is an anachronism or a "Brigadoon" because it wears its age so well.
More than 20 percent it its approximately 1,000 homes are on the National Register of Historic Places and almost 90 percent of its land is still farmed for corn, soya and wheat.


Cuts Threaten Charities of Last Resort
Shivering in the morning chill, as they wait for a graffiti-covered storefront to open, are a woman who has lost her food stamps, a family that has become homeless, aliens who fear deportation.
For almost 20 years the Citizens Advice Bureau, in the Tremont area of the Bronx, has provided assistance so its easily intimidated clients need not look for help outside their neighborhood.
Now the bureau and thousands of other neighborhood organizations around New York City are grappling with their own crisis: how to help when cuts in government contracts threaten the programs that serve one million New Yorkers -- the children, the aging, the physically disabled, the mentally ill and the growing homeless population.


Ms. Adelson to Wed
Janet A. Hays of New York has announced May wedding plans for her daughter Nancy Robin Adelson and Kenneth Ray Allison, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray L. Allison of Columbus, Ga.
Ms.
Adelson, a graduate of Yale University, received a master's degree in architecture from Harvard University.
She is an architect at MBT Associates in San Francisco.
She is also a daughter of the late Dr.
William J. Adelson.
Mr.
Allison, a graduate of Vanderbilt University, received a master's degree in computer science from the Georgia Institute of Technology.
He is a computer scientist at Advanced Decision Systems in Mountain View, Calif.


Janet A. Payne Weds
Janet Anne Payne, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Payne of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thomas Paul Herbold, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Herbold of Queensbury, N.Y.
The Rev.
William V. Reynolds officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Augustine in Larchmont.
Mrs.
Herbold, 28 years old, is a physical therapist at the Physical Therapy Center of Danbury, Conn.
She graduated from the State University of New York Upstate Medical Center and is a candidate for a master's degree in physical therapy from Columbia University.
Mr.
Herbold, 35, graduated from Colorado State University and is the estimates supervisor of Scarlet Oak Landscaping in Bedford Hills, N.Y.


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine on Dec. 8 about Tom Zutaut, an artists and repertoire man for Geffen Records, referred incompletely to Elektra Records' signing of the heavy-metal band Metallica.
While Mr.
Zutaut, who formerly worked for Elektra, claims some credit for bringing the band to the label, it was signed to a contract by Michael Alago.


Officer Is Killed While Trying to Foil a Robbery
An off-duty police officer was killed early yesterday in a shootout with a robber he had spotted holding up a man at an automatic teller machine in midtown Manhattan.
The officer, 27-year-old Sgt.
Keith R. Levine, was driving home with friends when he saw a man and a woman staging a robbery inside a Manufacturers Hanover Bank branch at Eighth Avenue and 57th Street at 2 A.M., department officials said.


More Layoffs at Stake if State Makes Cuts in Aid
LAYOFFS of county government workers mandated by passage of the 1992 budget could exceed the hundreds expected if the state seeks to solve its fiscal problem as it did a year ago, by reducing aid to local communities, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke said last week.
Mr.
O'Rourke, pleased with the few changes imposed by the Board of Legislators on his $1.18 billion no-tax- increase spending plan, said in an interview that the Westchester budget "was based on us not getting hit by Albany any more than we were last June" when state support for schools and local government was slashed.


Recent Sales
Glastonbury, Conn. $139,000
44 Main Street
3-bedroom, 1-bath, 200-year-old farmhouse; beehive oven and fireplace in kitchen, formal dining room, 1 acre; taxes $2,735.
Westport, Conn. $1.3 million
66 Bermuda Road
4-bedroom, 5-bath, 15-year-old contemporary; tennis court, private dock on Long Island Sound, 0.5 acre; taxes $13,838.
Wilton, Conn. $930,000
11 Crosswicks Ridge
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; marble fireplace, intricate moldings, 2 acres; taxes $8,755.
Chappaqua, N.Y. $482,500
5 Ludlow Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 60-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, den, greenhouse, playroom; taxes $7,281.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. $354,500
Tatomuck Road East
4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; stone fireplace, den, family room, living/dining room, 2 acres; taxes $5,183.
Scarsdale, N.Y. $1.04 million
57 Butler Road
8-bedroom, 6 1/2-bath, 56-year-old Norman Tudor; 2 fireplaces, library, sun room, eat-in kitchen, play room, sauna; taxes $23,783.
OTHER AREAS
Glen Cove, L.I. $263,000
57 Dosoris Way
4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old center-hall Dutch colonial; dining room, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $4,100.
Hauppauge, L.I. $217,000
15 Dexter Court
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 20-year-old splanch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, partial basement; taxes $4,000.
Freehold, N.J. $182,500
81 Eagle Nest Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; fireplace, patio, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $4,425.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Dec. 15 about the visit of the Chinese Prime Minister, Li Peng, to India misstated his departure date.
He left India on Monday, Dec. 16, not Friday, Dec. 13, the day he concluded his talks with the Indian Prime Minister, P. V. Narasimha Rao.


Miss Turnes To Be Married
Dr. and Mrs.
Ignatius J. Turnes of North Great River, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Catherine Irene Turnes, to Dr.
Stephen Michael Bravo, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Bravo of Fairfield, Conn.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Turnes is the trauma nurse coordinator at North Shore University Hospital-Cornell University Medical College in Manhasset, L.I.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Albany.
Her father, who is retired, was a chiropractor.


Care Can Keep Holiday Gift Plants Alive
POTS of dwarf conifers and evergreens are often given as gifts.
The little plants are usually decorated with colorful ribbons, tiny bows and packages.
And what is more these gifts are alive and may be planted in the garden.
But the trick now is to keep them alive.
Until the planting season does come -- and it is best to set the young plant out in spring -- keep it cold, that is dormant.
Growth is not to be encouraged at this time of year.
If the garage is unheated and it has a window, this would be a good place to keep the plant.


BUSH'S ASIAN TRIP RECAST TO STRESS JOBS AND EXPORTS
As President Bush departs Monday for Australia and Asia, the trip he had originally scheduled as a good-will tour has changed under political pressures into a blunt sales pitch for American exports and jobs, bringing anger and dismay in Japan.
Mr.
Bush's decision to take with him a group of American business executives to help insist on freer access to Asian markets is born in part of domestic concerns.
Those concerns, his advisers say, include the fear that his decision to travel 26,000 miles overseas amid what some are calling the longest recession since the 1930's will only add fuel to Democrats' criticism that the President prefers tackling problems abroad rather than those in his back yard.


Cuttings; Resolution: Next Year, Super Gardener
You have three days before the New Year to get your act together and turn into a totally new gardener.
The kind who cleans every weed out of the fall garden, tests the soil in a dozen different places, takes notes on the deficiencies, adds a three-inch layer of manure and compost, and mulches as soon as the ground freezes. (This, as it turns out, is the simple stuff.)


Baseball Cards, Blobs and Bauble It Was That Kind of a Year In the Art Market
Score One for Reunification -- The manuscript of most of Gustav Mahler's unfinished Symphony No. 10 escaped the auction block when the Austrian National Library bought it just one day before it was to be sold by Sotheby's.
The library has long owned the rest of the manuscript.
Recession-Proof Silver -- A sterling rococo dish by the 18th-century silversmith Paul de Lamerie was sold for $2.6 million at Christie's, defying the downward trend in prices for most antiques.


'Mame' Returns With Patrice Munsel
THERE are musicals that demand a star but could live without one.
And, of course, there are musicals with no such requirement.
And then there is a musical like "Mame," a terminal case of star dependency.
Connecticut's Broadway Theater in Darien is lucky to have Patrice Munsel to hold up and maneuver the show.
She gives it class, charm, pizazz and glamour.


Astoria Sings Joyful Praises As a Lost Symbol Is Found
The bells rang all day in the cathedral and so did the phones in the office as the good news spread through Astoria yesterday that the weeping icon had come home.
And parishioners gathered outside St.
Irene Chrysovalantou Greek Orthodox Cathedral or entered it, lighting candles, crossing themselves, kissing a picture of Jesus and embracing one another.


Are Americans Really So Bad at Science?
EVER since Sputnik, Americans have been browbeaten with stories of how dull their students are when it comes to the technological cutting edge.
It's true that year after year, high school students in the United States score much lower on science and mathematics tests than students in other countries.
But some educators are starting to complain that the comparisons are unfair.
In many countries outside the United States, only the best students make it into the schools and programs where the tests are administered, they say.
As a result, a large majority of the American student population is being compared with other countries' elites.


ADVOCATES FIGHT GROUP HOME CUTS
Lawyers for the New York Civil Liberties Union and representatives of other advocacy groups vowed yesterday to conduct a vigorous campaign against a proposal by state leaders to end or curtail spending for new group homes for the mentally ill.
"We cannot allow New York State once again to back away from its promise to provide an effective, humane and least restrictive treatment for the mentally ill," said Norman Siegel, the executive director of the NYCLU.


Women and Depression
To the Editor:
In her letter of Dec. 1, Colette Dowling uses Deborah Tannen's review of my book "Silencing the Self: Women and Depression" as a platform to announce a series of misconceptions about depression and about my book (which she apparently has not read).
Ms.
Dowling creates a false dichotomy between biology and psychology when she says, "Mood disorders are largely biological and genetic in origin." Researchers and theorists agree that depression is caused by multiple factors -- biology, society, psychology and culture -- and that no one factor explains depression or gender differences in rates of depression.
I share that point of view.
My book uses theory on the psychology of women and depressed women's own voices to offer new ideas about depression.
These ideas are based not only on intensive interviews with 12 women, but also on research involving 378 women from three groups: college students, cocaine abusers from a large city and residents of battered women's shelters.


It's a Fine Design and All, But That's Sure a Funny Name For a Building
Longest-Running Preview on Broadway (Architectural Division) -- The four post-modern office towers by Philip Johnson and John Burgee for the Times Square redevelopment project, designed a decade ago and still unbuilt.
But since every show needs to be kept fresh, a new, trendy version of the design in Deconstructivist style was unveiled last year.
Best Nearly Empty Building of the Year Charles Gwathmey and Robert Siegel's 1585 Broadway, a sleek metal skyscraper that possesses an exceptionally elegant lobby and, so far, just one major tenant.


Invulnerable To Hype
To the Editor:
Yes, packaging, marketing and hype -- the rank commercialism of culture -- are certainly behind the gesture we have made to Mozart's music, presenting it in its entirety over 19 months.
Encyclopedic completeness has perhaps been overkill.
But the tone of Mr.
Rothstein's essay, beginning with Glenn Gould's tasteless comment on Mozart's having died too late and ending with another of Mr.
Rothstein himself on how "alien" Mozart is to us, is less than acceptable.


What Business Leaders Predict for 1992
IN assessing the county's economic prospects for the new year, the mood of Westchester business leaders is somber.
In interviews with eight people across a spectrum of the business community, there was no expectation that the economy would show much improvement in 1992.
Although they cited a few reasons for optimism, they suggested that the tools for ending the recession were woefully inadequate.
S. J. Schulman, president of the Westchester County Association:


A Quilt, Not a Tapestry
SISTER'S CHOICE
Tradition and Change in American Women's Writing.
By Elaine Showalter.
Illustrated. 198 pp.
New York: Clarendon Press/ Oxford University Press. $21.95.


All About: Silicone Products; A War Baby, Versatile Silicone Now Shows Up Everywhere
ALTHOUGH they only occasionally grab headlines, and then only when used in their most exotic applications, such as breast implants or the O-rings of the space shuttle, silicone compounds have become blue-collar mainstays of the chemical world.
Silicone compounds are so widely used in construction, industrial applications, textile production and service sector support businesses like printing and labeling that the earnings growth of the Dow Corning Corporation (negative in 1982, slipping since 1987), the largest silicone producer, can be used as an indicator for the health of the economy.
Few worldwide markets the size of silicone's -- some estimates run as high as $6 billion -- are made up of so many niches.
Dow Corning estimates that it sells more than 5,000 silicone products to 105 different segments of industry, none accounting for more than 3 percent of the company's total sales of silicone products.
The General Electric Company, the No. 2 producer, figures it has more than 4,000 silicone products.


John O'Hara Jr. to Wed Jo Ann Dagy
May wedding plans for Jo Ann Dagy and John O'Hara Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Hara of Northfield, Ill., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
William Dagy of Shawnee, Okla.
Ms.
Dagy, 31 years old, is a senior account executive at Perry Ellis in New York.
She graduated from Oklahoma State University.
Her father is a senior engineer for General Motors in Oklahoma City.
Her mother, Melba Dagy, teaches English at Shawnee Junior High School.


Matching Wints With Duck and Geese
"WE try to look like a clump of grass," explained Joe Damiano, as he and his 12-year-old son, Christopher, matched wits with the winter ducks and geese in Croton Bay from their floating blind on the Hudson River.
Water fowling is a waiting game.
For hours they waited, hunkered down in their hunting skiff, a 17-foot aluminum boat draped in camouflage curtains.
The father-and-son team was armed with shotguns, Federal duck stamps, hunting licenses and a plan.


Troupes in Transition With an Air of Promise
IT has been a year of beginnings, of disappointment, of transition.
The choice depends on one's outlook -- bullish, negative or charitable.
However it is perceived, 1991 can be recorded as unexceptional in New Jersey theater annals.
But not uneventful.
Although it is futile to search for a best play and wearying to sift through several contenders for the worst, interesting reproductions, noteworthy performances and, most of all, an air of promise rescued the year from the edge of disaster.


Jets Overmatched? Yes. But Overwhelmed? No.
Throw out the records.
Throw out the point spread.
Throw out the playoff experience.
Throw out the number of Pro Bowl players on each team.
Throw out the comparisons between quarterbacks Ken O'Brien and Warren Moon.
But whatever you do, don't throw in the towel for the Jets, who appear to be overmatched in just about every one of those categories for their wild-card playoff game today in Houston.
"It's 0 and 0, 0 and 0," Jets Coach Bruce Coslet said of the game, which will take place at 4 P.M. in the Astrodome, between the 8-8 Jets and the 11-5 Oilers (Channel 4, WCBS Radio, 880 AM).
Both teams had 4-4 records in the second half of the season.


Amy R. Dilsheimer to Wed in May
Richard H. Dilsheimer of Philadelphia and Marjorie S. Dilsheimer of Narberth, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Rose Dilsheimer, to James Lees Currie Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Currie of Kenilworth, Ill.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Dilsheimer, 28 years old, is an advertising manager for Redbook magazine in New York.
She graduated from Lake Forest College.
Her father is the president of the General Development Corporation, a real-estate company in Philadelphia.
Her mother is the vice president of the Bio Gas Energy Corporation in Narberth.


Betsy Briceland Has a Wedding
Betsy Ann Briceland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald James Briceland of Williamsville, N.Y., and Michael Joseph Curran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Nicholas Curran of West Islip, L.I., were married yesterday in Niagara Falls, N.Y.
Msgr.
Lawrence D. Costello officiated at Niagara University Chapel.
Mrs.
Curran, 26 years old, is an associate at the Briceland Insurance Agency in Amherst, N.Y.
She graduated from Niagara, as did the bridegroom.
Her father is president of Briceland, and her mother, Nancy A. Briceland, is its controller.


Glenn Harrell To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Parker Harrell Jr. of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Adele Glenn Harrell to John Byron Helmers, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gordon B. Helmers of Spartanburg, S.C.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Harrell, who is 26 years old and known as Glenn, is a freelance writer and a contributing editor to House &amp; Garden magazine.
She graduated from Princeton University, as did her fiance.
Her father is a partner in the Washington office of Korn/Ferry International, an executive recruiting firm with headquarters in Los Angeles.
Her mother, Dr.
Adele V. Harrell, a sociologist, is a senior research analyst at the Urban Institute, a public policy organization in Washington.


CAMPUS LIFE: Bard; For This Class, Political Theory Happens at Home
When Karen Greenberg, professor of history, asked Radu Meculau, "Why did John Stuart Mill think that free speech was important?" in a recent class, it was more than an abstract question to him.
Mr.
Meculau is from Jassy, Romania, one of eight students from Eastern Europe participating in a program teaching the principles of human rights and liberties both to students from countries emerging from totalitarianism and a similar number of American students.


Knicks Squander a Lot But Salvage a Victory
The Knicks finished the 1991 portion of their schedule yesterday with a performance that typified their entire year: turbulent but ending better than they had a right to expect.
They were missing Mark Jackson, whose wife, Desiree Coleman Jackson, gave birth yesterday to a baby boy.
They suffered through what Patrick Ewing called one of the worst games he could remember, 6 points in 29 foul-plagued minutes.


Bhutan Eases Tourist Controls
The tiny kingdom of Bhutan, which lies between India and Tibet in the Himalayas, has privatized its travel industry.
Private travel companies now handle all travel arrangements, while the Tourist Authority of Bhutan authorizes visas.
Tourists in Bhutan are permitted to attend certain Buddhist festivals and watch the ritual masked dances performed by monks and villagers.
Upcoming events include the festival at Punakha in February and the largest festival of the year at Paro in March.
"Because of privatization, we have much more leeway," said Brent Olson, the Bhutan manager of InnerAsia Expeditions, one of the few United States companies that provide tours of the country.
"We have more control over where people can go, what they can see and what they can do."


Topics of The Times; Seasonal Maladjustment
It happens every 5 or 6 years -- or 11.
Two Wednesday holidays in two weeks.
While the Christmas-New Year's season is always a slack time for most lines of work, it's even more so when the holidays break two consecutive normal weeks into four discombobulating two-day weeks.
The last time was six years ago, Christmas 1985 and New Year's Day 1986, and the time before that was 11 years ago.
The next occurrence will be in five years, 1996-97, and then not until 2002-03.


Georgia in New York
In 1916, Georgia O'Keeffe (1887-1986) made her New York debut with an exhibition at Alfred Stieglitz's gallery.
In 1932, she made her break with the city after she failed to finish a mural that had been commissioned for Radio City Music Hall.
What she painted and drew in the 16 intervening years -- notably in New York City and at her summer house in Lake George, N.Y. -- is the subject of GEORGIA O'KEEFFE: THE NEW YORK YEARS (Callaway/Knopf, $100), a gigantic and sumptuous book of 91 of the artist's works in watercolor, charcoal and oils.
These are not the usual nude flowers and dry bones but O'Keeffe's abstractions, stylized cityscapes, luminous still lifes and cool renderings of barns and shells.
While one can read O'Keeffe's coming obsession with flower anatomy even into the blue cracks of sky between black skyscrapers and into her peculiar view of split-open clamshells, what is most striking about these works is that abstraction was not something O'Keeffe worked into but something she worked out of.
Bram Dijkstra, a professor of comparative literature at the University of California, San Diego, who has written a pompous essay to accompany the paintings, thinks he knows why.


Seven Sculptors Construct a Show at Norwalk Community College
LAST August, Norwalk Community College acquired a new building.
It is a good-looking pile, by Ames &amp; Whitaker of Waterbury, that is red brick inside and out and has a brut interior with lots of exposed pipes and a sloping white ceiling.
This is the scene for "Seven Sculptors," the college's first show, which was organized by Joseph Fucigna.
Mr.
Fucigna heads the college's art department, with the painter Ann Chernow, and he happens to be one of the show's seven sculptors.
The others are Mary Bailey, David Boyajian, James Jackson Burt, Thomas Fertig, Niki Ketchman and Jean Woodham.
Most have reputations in Connecticut, and a few have established themselves in Manhattan.
But a word of warning: the building is large, and the works are spread out over three floors -- in the library and open spaces, along corridors and walkways.
The map I had was not easy to read, and, always, the people I asked for directions were strangers to the place, too.
No doubt the situation has improved by now, but the public may still have difficulty estimating the various bodies of work, their relationship to each other and, hence, the overall quality of the display.


Ms. Wales Wed To Scott Blaze
Jane Wales, a senior program officer for the Carnegie Corporation in New York, and Scott Blaze, a Justice Department lawyer in Washington, were married yesterday at Trinity Episcopal Church in Washington, Va.
The Rev.
Jennings Hobson 3d performed the ceremony.
The bride, 43 years old, is the daughter of Mrs.
Harry Hall of New York and the late Wellington Wales.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
Her stepfather, who is retired, was a vice president for engineering of the Domino sugar company in New York.
Her mother, Helen Woolsey Hall, is an associate professor of English at the College of Insurance in New York.


Susan Boehm to Marry Eric A. Smith in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Hans G. Boehm of Rhinebeck, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Boehm to Eric Anthony Smith, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Smith of Cohasset, Mass.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Boehm is a fiscal analyst at the Massachusetts Budget Bureau in Boston.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degee in public policy from Harvard University.
Mr.
Smith is an assistant attorney general of Massachusetts in Boston.
He graduated from Harvard and received a law degree from Stanford University.


City Building Delays
To the Editor:
The Perspectives column on Oct. 20 about New York City's construction of a police station on East 67th Street  [ "6-Year Construction Nears the End" ]  accepts the same old excuses from the city for the delay in finishing this project.


Poor Seekers of Good Life Flock to California, as Middle Class Moves Away; Sun, Safety and State Aid Lure One Family
Like generations of westward migrants before them, Say Vann, his wife and six children piled into a truck five years ago and headed sight-unseen for California, looking for warmer weather, cleaner air, less crime, fresher vegetables and, most important of all, higher welfare payments than they found in Pennsylvania, their first American home.
What the Vanns found here was just what they had hoped for, just what fellow Cambodian refugees promised.


Sunday Outing; For Book Lovers, Paradise in a Rural Setting
Three miles up a winding country road, out of the usual paths of commerce, the Rodgers Book Barn stands in isolation.
Surrounded by trees, it is an oasis of used books.
Inside the weathered two-story barn, a pot of apples, spiced with nutmeg, cloves and cinnamon, sits bubbling on a cast-iron wood stove.
The pleasant aroma is an invitation to stay and browse.
"I like to have people enjoy themselves," said Maureen Rodgers, who has operated the Book Barn for the last 19 years.
"I like the idea that you can come in here, spend two or three hours browsing, and leave with some books, spending only $10."


Finland Opens Its First Casino
The first casino in Finland opened this month in the Ramada Presidentti Hotel in Helsinki.
It has 10 roulette tables, blackjack and 100 slot machines.
The maximum bet is $5,000.
Finland and Denmark are the only countries in Scandinavia to allow casino gambling.
All proceeds from the new casino, says a spokesman for the Finnish Tourist Board, will go to charities that help the handicapped and the mentally ill.


Some Drawbacks to the 403(b)
THERE are a number of negatives -- at least from the employer's point of view -- to the type of 403(b) plan installed by the Challenger Center.
To begin with, it is more expensive to set up than a traditional 403(b) plan, particularly for a group as small as the 25-person Challenger Center.


New &amp; Noteworthy
THE RUNAWAY BRIDE: Hollywood Romantic Comedy of the 1930's, by Elizabeth Kendall. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.) During the Depression actresses like Barbara Stanwyck, Claudette Colbert and Katharine Hepburn worked with directors like Frank Capra and Gregory La Cava to produce romantic comedies that captured and helped promote the emerging feminist spirit of the age.
Last year our reviewer, Diane Jacobs, said that in her "intriguing analysis of some of the era's most fruitful director-actress collaborations," Elizabeth Kendall "writes with flair and intelligence."
THE GHOST FROM THE GRAND BANKS, by Arthur C. Clarke. (Bantam, $5.99.) In the year 2012, two cutthroat corporations compete to find the perfect technology to raise the sunken corpse of the Titanic.
"The pleasure the author takes in tracking the Titanic rivalry to its unexpected conclusion lends a warm glow to his precisely crafted sentences," Gerald Jonas said here in February.
"But other things intrigue him as well. The shock-absorbing qualities of loose tea, the daunting problem that computers will face when their calendars turn from 1999 to 2000, the fecundity of fractal mathematics, the dangerous vagaries of the weather, the invention of a really satisfactory windshield wiper -- each of these topics prompts Mr. Clarke to add a new twist to the unfolding drama."


A Bustling Bistro Turns 100% Italian
GOODBYE, Fabio's.
Hello, Pomodoro.
The Brazilian-Italian hybrid at 62 Stewart Avenue in Huntington Village is no more.
In its place is a 100 percent Italian restaurant under the same ownership.
Gone are the black beans and the white baby-grand piano, along with the parrots and the aquamarine-tropical decor.
Now, the red, white and green of the Italian flag color Pomodoro Ristorante Italiano, leaving no doubt about this newcomer's lineage.
Helping make a bold Italian statement are the center-stage antipasto display, the red-and-white checked tablecloths, murals of Italy and wall hangings depicting bountiful Italian feasts.


LaFontaine Is Back, and So Are Sabres
A quick glance at Buffalo's results with and without Pat LaFontaine after he was injured on Nov. 16 shows the tremendous impact the former Islanders star is having with the Sabres.
In the 13 games LaFontaine missed because of a broken jaw suffered that night in Calgary, the Sabres had only two victories.
They entered tonight's game against the Devils here with a 2-1-1 record in the four games since LaFontaine's return.


Job Seekers Keep Beating a Path To Town Agencies
THE personnel administrator in Waterbury, John S. Schlosser, expected a lot of interest when the town placed advertisements for police officers recently.
He thought he might see as many applications as he did last year, when more than 700 people answered a similar advertisement, he said.
But this time he was deluged with more than 1,700 applications.
The same thing happened when he advertised for a clerk-typist, he said.
He expected 40 applications; he received 170.


Dr. Lisa Anne Capra to Be Married
The engagement of Dr.
Lisa Anne Capra, a resident in pediatrics at the Boston Floating Hospital, to Dr.
Timothy Powell Davis, a resident in psychiatry at McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Peter M. Capra of Boston.
A June wedding is planned.
Dr.
Capra graduated from Yale University.
She and her fiance, a Harvard University graduate, both have medical degrees from the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston.
Her father is the director of planned giving at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass.
Her mother is a taxpayer service specialist with the Treasury Department in Boston.


No Free Ride for Credit Services
To the Editor:
I disagree with the view that free credit reports will cost credit bureaus and creditors too much ("In Credit Reports, 'Free' Isn't The Issue," Forum, Dec. 8).
Free credit reports are the touchstone of a credit reporting system that is fair to the three parties in the system's three-way transaction -- creditors, the bureaus
and
consumers.
Free reports offer a shortcut -- what economists call a "second-best solution" -- to a clearly impossible task: building an error-free, but reasonably priced credit bureau computer.


Winners of 1991 Individual and Team Championships
ARCHERY World Champions
Men - Simon Fairweather, Australia.
Men's team - South Korea.
Women - Soo-nyung Kim, South Korea.
Women's team - South Korea.  World Indoor Champions
Men's indoor freestyle - Sebastian Flute, France.
Women's indoor freestyle - Natalya Valeyeva, Soviet Union.
Men's indoor compound bow - Joe Asay, Sandy, Utah.
Women's indoor compound bow - Lucia Panico, Italy. U.S. Champions
Men - Ed Eliason, Stansbury Park, Utah.
Women - Denise Parker, South Jordan, Utah. AUTO RACING
Formula One - Ayrton Senna, Brazil, McLaren-Honda.
CART PPG-Indy Car - Michael Andretti, Nazareth, Pa.
Nascar Winston Cup - Dale Earnhardt, Mooresville, N.C.
S.C.C.A. Trans-Am - Scott Sharp, Camaro, East Norwalk, Conn.
World of Outlaws Sprint Cars - Steve Kinser, Bloomington, Ind.
Indianapolis 500 - Rick Mears, Jupiter, Fla.
Daytona 500 - Ernie Irvan, Concord, N.C.
LeMans 24 Hours - Bertrand Gachot, Belgium; Johnny Herbert, England, and Volker Weidler, Germany, Mazda.
IMSA Camel G.T. - Geoff Brabham, Electramotive Nissan.
N.H.R.A. Top Fuel - Joe Amato, Old Forge, Pa.
N.H.R.A. Funny Car - John Force, Yorba Linda, Calif.
N.H.R.A. Pro Stock - Darrell Alderman, Morehead, Ky. BADMINTON U.S. Champions
Men's singles - Chris Jogis, Palo Alto, Calif.
Men's doubles - Tom Reidy, Mesa, Ariz., and John Britton, Manhattan Beach, Calif.
Women's singles - Liz Aronsohn, Tempe, Ariz.
Women's doubles - Ann French, La Jolla, Calif., and Joy Kitzmiller, Manhattan Beach, Calif.
Mixed doubles - Trici Britton, Manhattan Beach, Calif., and Tariq Wadood, Los Angeles.
U.S. Open men's singles - Steve Butler, England.
U.S. Open men's doubles - Razif Sidek and Jalani Sidek, Malaysia.
Women's singles - Shim Eun Jung, South Korea.
Women's doubles - Shim Eun Jung and Kang Bok Seung, South Korea.
Mixed doubles - Shim Eun Jung and Lee Sang Bok, South Korea. Collegiate Champions
Men's singles - Tom Reidy, Arizona State.
Women's singles - Jenny Chan, Arizona State.
Men's doubles - Tom Reidy and Martin Flores, Arizona State.
Women's doubles - Jenny Chan and Andrea Andersson, Arizona State.
Mixed doubles - Tom Reidy and Jenny Chan, Arizona State. World Champions
Men - Jianhua Zhhao, China.
Women - Jiuhong Tang, China.
Men's doubles - Joo Bong Park and Moon Soo Kim, South Korea.
Women's doubles - Weizhen Guan and Qunhua Nong, China.
World mixed doubles - Joo Bong Park and Myeong Hee Chung, South Korea.
Sudirman Cup (world team) - South Korea.  BANDY
World - Sweden. BASEBALL World Series
Minnesota Twins defeated Atlanta Braves, 4 games to 3.
American League - East: Toronto Blue Jays; West: Minnesota.
National League - East: Pittsburgh Pirates; West: Atlanta.
All-Star Game - A.L. d. N.L., 4-2.
M.V.P.'s - A.L. - Cal Ripken, Baltimore Orioles.
N.L. - Terry Pendleton, Atlanta.
Leading Batters, A.L. - Julio Franco, Texas, .341; N.L. - Terry Pendleton, .319
Runs Batted In, A.L. - Cecil Fielder, Detroit, 133; N.L. - Howard Johnson, Mets, 117.
Home Runs, A.L. - Jose Canseco, Oakland, and Cecil Fielder, Detroit, 44; N.L. - Howard Johnson, Mets, 38.
Stolen Bases, A.L. - Rickey Henderson, Oakland, 58; N.L. - Marquis Grissom, Montreal, 76.
E.R.A., A.L. - Roger Clemens, Boston, 2.62; Dennis Martinez, Montreal, 2.39.
Saves, A.L. - Bryan Harvey, California, 46; Lee Smith, St. Louis, 47.
Cy Young, A.L. - Roger Clemens, Boston.
N.L. - Tom Glavine, Atlanta.
A.L. Rookie - Chuck Knoblauch, Minnesota.
N.L. Rookie - Jeff Bagwell, Houston.
N.C.A.A. Division I - Louisiana State.
N.C.A.A. Division II - Jacksonville State.
N.C.A.A. Division III - Southern Maine.
N.A.I.A. - Lewis Clark St., Idaho.
Little League - Taiwan. BASKETBALL N.B.A.
Team - Chicago Bulls.
Playoff M.V.P. - Michael Jordan, Chicago.
Regular Season M.V.P. - Michael Jordan.
Rookie of the Year - Derrick Coleman, New Jersey Nets.
Scoring - Michael Jordan, Chicago, 31.5.
Rebounds - David Robinson, San Antonio, 13.0.
Assists - John Stockton, Utah, 14.2.
Blocked Shots - Hakeem Olajuwon, Houston, 3.95.
Coach of the Year - Don Chaney, Houston Rockets.  N.C.A.A.
Men's Division I - Duke.
Division II - North Alabama.
Division III - University of Wisconsin (Platteville).
Women's Division I - Tennessee.
Division II - North Dakota State.
Division III - St. Thomas (Minnesota).  Other College Champions
N.A.I.A. - Oklahoma City.
N.A.I.A. Women - Fort Hayes State, Kan.
N.I.T. - Stanford.
National Jr. College - Aquinas (Nashville).
Women's N.J.C.A.A. - Odessa College, Odessa, Tex. BIATHLON U.S. Champions
Men's 10k - Curtis Schreiner, Day, N.Y.
Men's 20k - Curtis Schreiner.
Women's 7.5k - Patrice Anderson, Eden, Utah.
Women's 15k - Anna Sonnerup, Hanover, N.H.  World Champions
Men's 10k - Marc Kirchner, Germany.
Men's 20k - Marc Kirchner.
Women's 7.5k - Grete Ingeborg, Nykkelmo, Norway.
Women's 15k - Petra Schaaf, Germany.  BILLIARDS World Champions
Men's 9-ball: Earl Strickland, Greensboro, N.C.
Women's 9-ball - Robin Bell, U.S.
3-cushion - Raymond Ceulemans, Belgium.
Snooker - John Parrott, England.  BOBSLEDDING World Champions
World 2-man driver - Rudi Lochner, Germany.
World 4-man driver - Wolfang Hoppe, Germany.
World Cup 4-man driver - Gustav Weder, Switzerland.  U.S. Champions
2-Man driver, - Brian Shimer, Naples, Fla.
4-Man driver - Chuck Leonowicz, Clifton Park, N.Y. BOWLING P.B.A. Tour
BPAA U.S. Open - Pete Weber, Florissant, Mo.
Firestone Tournament of Champions - David Ozio, Vidor, Tex.
P.B.A. National Championship - Mike Miller, Albuquerque, N.M.
Bud Light Touring Players Championship - Dave Ferraro, Kingston, N.Y.- Ebonite P.B.A.
Senior Championship
Gene Stus, Allen Park, Mich. L.P.B.T.
BPAA U.S. Open -Anne Marie Duggan, La Habra, Calif.
Sam's Town Invitational - Lorri Nichols, Algonquin, Ill.
Women's International Bowling Congress Queens - Dede Davidson, San Jose, Calif.
Cambridge Mixed Doubles - Nikki Gianulias, Vallajo, Calif., and Del Ballard Jr., Richardson, Tex.
National Doubles - Lisa Wagner, Palmetto, Fla., and Carolyn Dorin, Linden, N.J.  A.B.C.
Singles - Ed Deines, LaPorte, Colo.
Doubles - Jimmy Johnson, Columbus, Ohio, and Dan Nadeau, Las Vegas, Nev.
All events - Tom Howery, Madison, Wis.
Regular team - Tri-State Lane No. 1, Chattanooga, Tenn.
Booster team - Lewis Marine Supply Inc., Ft. Lauderdale, Fla.
Team All Events - Nadeau's Pro Shop, Las Vegas, Nev.
Masters Tournament - Doug Kent, Canandaigua, N.Y.  W.I.B.C
Championship Tournaments
Open singles - Debbie Kuhn, Baltimore.
Open doubles - Lucy Giovinco, Norcross, Ga., and Cindy Coburn-Carroll, Tonawanda, N.Y.
Open team event - Clear-Vu Window Cleaning, Milwaukee.
Open all-events - Debbie Kuhn.
Queen's Tournament - DeDe Davidson.
Division one singles - Kelly Smith, Faribault, Minn.
Division one doubles - Lina Rincon, San Antonio, Tex., and Bonnie Van Steenburg, Universal City, Tex.
Division one team - Jolly Ladies, Philadelphia.
Division one all-events - Chris Crowe, Prospect, Ky.
Division two singles - Darlene Schoon, Freeman, S.D.
Division two doubles - Shirley Piper, Waynesboro, Pa., and Rhonda Custer, Waynesboro, Pa.
Division two team - Lindberg Shelter Insurance, Albia, Iowa
Division two all-events - Ruth Reimer, Saint Catharine, Ont. BOXING
Heavyweight - Evander Holyfield, Atlanta, Ga., undisputed.
Cruiserweight - Bobby Czyz, Totowa, N.J., W.B.A.; Anaclet Wamba, France, W.B.C.; James Warring, Miami, I.B.F.
Light heavyweight - Thomas Hearns, Detroit, W.B.A.; Jeff Harding, Australia, W.B.C.; Charles Williams, Grand Rapids, Mich., I.B.F.
Super middleweight - Victor Cordova, Panama, W.B.A.; Mauro Galvano, Italy W.B.C.; Darren Van Horn, Lexington, Ky., I.B.F.
Middleweight - W.B.A. title is vacant; Julian Jackson, Virgin Islands, W.B.C.; James Toney, Detroit, I.B.F.
Junior middleweight - Vinny Pazienza, Cranston, R.I., W.B.A.; Terry Norris, San Diego, W.B.C.; Gianfranco Rossi, Italy, I.B.F.
Welterweight - Meldrick Taylor, Philadelphia, W.B.A.; James McGirt, Brentwood, L.I., W.B.C.; Maurice Blocker, Germantown, Maryland, I.B.F.
Junior welterweight - Edwin Rosario, Puerto Rico, W.B.A.; Julio Cesar Chavez, Mexico, W.B.C.; Rafael Pineda, Colombia, I.B.F.
Lightweight - Pernell Whitaker, Norfolk, Va., undisputed.
Junior lightweight - Ganaro Hernandez, Los Angeles, W.B.A.; Azumah Nelson, Ghana, W.B.C.; Brian Mitchell, South Africa, I.B.F.
Featherweight - Yungkyun Park, South Korea, W.B.A.; Paul Hodkinson, Great Britain, W.B.C; Manuel Medina, Mexico I.B.F.
Junior featherweight - Raul Perez, Mexico, W.B.A.; Daniel Zaragoza, Mexico, W.B.C., Welcome Ncita, South Africa, I.B.F.
Bantamweight - Israel Contreras, Venezeuala, W.B.A.; Joichiro Tatsuyoshi, Japan, W.B.C.; Orlando Canizales, Houston, Texas, I.B.F.
Junior bantamweight - Khaosai Galaxy, Thailand, W.B.A.; Sungkil Moon, South Korea, W.B.C.; Robert Quiroga, San Antonio, I.B.F.
Flyweight - Yongkang Kim, South Korea, W.B.A.; Muangchai Kittikasem, Thailand, W.B.C.; Dave McCauley, Great Britain, I.B.F.
Junior flyweight - Myung Woo Yuh, South Korea, W.B.A.; Humberto Gonzalez, Mexico, W.B.C.; Michael Carbajal, Phoenix, I.B.F.
Mini-flyweight - Hiyong Choi, South Korea, W.B.A.; Ricardo Lopez, Mexico, W.B.C; Fah-Lan Lookmingkwan, Thailand, I.B.F.
World Amateur Championships
106 lbs. - Eric Griffin, United States.
112 lbs. - Istvan Kovacs, Hungary.
119 lbs. - Serafim Todorov, Bulgaria.
125 lbs. - Kirkor Kikorov, Bulgaria.
132 lbs. - Marco Rudolph, Germany.
139 lbs. - Konstantin Tszyu, Soviet Union.
147 lbs. - Juan Hernandez, Cuba.
156 lbs. - Juan Lemus, Cuba.
165 lbs. - Tommaso Russo, Italy.
178 lbs. - Torsten May, Germany.
201 lbs. - Felix Savon, Cuba.
Heavyweight - Roberto Balado, Cuba. CANOEING United States Champions
Canoe: 500 meters - Greg Steward, Williamsburg, Ohio.
1,000 - Wyatt Jones, Honolulu.
10,000 - James Ross, Bethesda, Md.
Men's kayak: 500 - Terry Kent, Tacoma, Wash.
1,000 - Patrick Richardson, Newport Beach, Calif.
10,000 - Terry Kent, Tacoma, Wash.
Women's kayak: 500 - Sheila Conover, Newport Beach, Calif.
5,000 - DeAnne Hemmens, Newport Beach, Calif. World Champions
Canoe: 500 meters - Mikhail Slivinsky, Soviet Union.
Canoe: 1,000 - Ivan Klementiev, Soviet Union.
Men's kayak: 500M - Renn Crichlow, Canada.
1,000M - Knut Holmann, Norway.
10,000M - Greg Barton, Bellingham, Wash.
Women's kayak: 500M - Katrin Borchert, Germany.
Slalom canoe - Martin Lang, Germany.
Men's slalom kayak - Shaun Pearce, Britain.
Women's slalom kayak - Elisabeth Micheler, Germany.
Wildwater canoe - Tomislav Crnkovic, Yugoslavia.
Men's wildwater kayak - Markus Gickler, Germany.
Women's wildwater kayak - Karin Wahl, Germany CASTING United States Champions
Men's all-around - Steve Rajeff, Poulsbo, Wash.
Men's all-distance - Steve Rajeff.
Men's all-accuracy - Steve Rajeff.
Women's all-accuracy - Brenda Banks, Toronto.  World Champion
European all-around - Henri Ostertag, Sweden. COURT TENNIS
World- Wayne Davies, New York City.
U.S. open - Lockland Deuchar, Australia.
U.S. open doubles - Wayne Davies and Lockland Deuchar.
U.S. amateur - Morris Clothier, New York City.
U.S. amateur doubles - Morris Clothier and Randolph Jones, New York City.
British amateur - Julian Snow, England.  CROQUET
World - John Walters, England.
U.S. singles - John C. Osborn, New York City.
U.S. doubles - Debbie Cornelius, England, and Reid Fleming, Boston.
U.S. international rules - David Openshaw, England.
National Amateur Singles Championship - Tom Huhn, Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
CROSS-COUNTRY
Men's world champions - Khalid Skah, Morocco.
Women - Lynn Jennings, Newmarket, N.H.
World men's junior - Andrew Sambu, Tanzania.
World women's junior - Lydia Cheromei, Kenya. United States Champions
Men - Todd Williams, Knoxville, Tenn.
Women - Lynn Jennings. N.C.A.A. Men
Division I - University of Arkansas.
Division II - University of Massachusetts at Lowell.
Division III - University of Rochester. Individual
Division I - Sean Dollman, Western Kentucky University.
Division II - Martin Lyons, Edinboro University.
Division III - Sandu Rubenciuc, Augustana College. N.C.A.A. Women
Division I team - Villanova.
Division II team - California Poly State, San Louis Obispo.
Division III team - University of Wisconsin (Oshkosh). Individual
Division I - Sonia O'Sullivan, Villanova.
Division II - Christie Allen, Pittsburg State Univ.
Division III - Laura Horejs, Univ. of Wisconsin (Oshkosh).
CURLING United States Champions
U.S. men - Steve Brown, Madison, Wis.
U.S. women - Maymar Gemmell, Houston.  World Champions
Men - David Smith, Scotland.
Women - Dordi Nordby, Norway.  CYCLING
Men's pro road - Gianni Bugno, Italy.
Men's amateur road - Viktor Pyaksinsky, Soviet Union.
Junior men's road - Jeff Evanshine, Placentia, Calif.
Women's road - Leontien Van Moorsel, Netherlands.
Men's pro sprint - None (Carey Hall, Australia, disqualified after positive drug test).
Men's amateur sprint - Jens Fiedler, Germany.
Women's sprint - Ingrid Haringa, Netherlands.
Men's pro pursuit - Francis Moreau, France.
Men's amateur pursuit - Jens Lehmann, Germany.
Women's pursuit - Petra Rossner, Germany.
Men's pro points race - Vyacheslav Ekimov, Soviet Union.
Men's amateur points race - Bruno Risi, Switzerland.
Women's points race - Ingrid Haringa, Netherlands.
Men's amateur 1K time trial - Jose Moreno, Spain.
Men's keirin - Michael Hue, Britain.
Men's pro motor paced - Danny Clark, Australia.
Men's amateur motor paced - Roland Konigshoffer, Austria. World Mountain Bike
Men's cross-country - John Tomac, Durango, Colo.
Women's cross-country - Ruthie Matthes, Ketchum, Idaho.
Men's downhill - Albert Iten, Switzerland. Other Professional
World Cup - Maurizio Fondriest, Italy.
Tour de France Men - Miguel Indurain, Spain.
Tour of Italy - Franco Chioccoli, Italy.
Tour of Switzerland - Luc Roosen, Belgium.
U.S. Pro Road - Davis Phinney, Boulder, Colo.
Tour Du Pont - Erik Breukink, Netherlands. United States Nationals
Men's sprint - Marty Nothstein, Trexlertown, Pa.
Women's match sprint - Renee Duprel, Bellevue, Wash.
Men's road - Lance Armstrong, Plano, Tex.
Women's road - Inga Thompson, Reno, Nev.
Men's points race - J-Me Carney, Annandale, N.J.
Women's points race - Karen Bliss, Quakertown, Pa.
Men's pursuit - Dirk Copeland, San Diego.
Women's pursuit - Janie Eickhoff, Los Alamitos, Calif.
Men's time trial - Kent Bostick, Corrales, N.M.
Women's time trial - Inga Thompson, Reno, Nev.
Men's criterium - Jonas Carney, Annandale, N.J.
Women's criterium - Shari Rodgers, Los Altos Hills, Calif.
Men's overall mountain bike - Ned Overend, Durango, Colo.
Women's overall mountain bike - Juliana Furtado, Boulder, Colo.
Men's mountain bike finals - John Tomac, Durango, Colo.
Women's mountain bike finals - Juliana Furtado, Boulder, Colo.
DIVING United States Indoor Champions
Men's 1 meter - Pat Evans, Cincinnati.
Men's 3M - Mark Lenzi, Fredericksburg, Va.
Men's 10M - Pat Evans.
Women's 1M - Wendy Lucero, Denver.
Women's 3M - Wendy Lucero.
Women's 10M - Cokey Smith, Ann Arbor, Mich. United States Outdoor Champions
Men's 1M - Mark Lenzi, Fredericksburg, Va.
Men's 3M - Patrick Jeffrey, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Men's 10M - Scott Donie, Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Women's 1M - Wendy Lucero, Denver.
Women's 3M - Krista Wilson Klein, Dallas.
Women's 10M - Ellen McGrath, Bellevue, Wash.  World Champions
Men's 1M - Edwin Jongejans, Netherlands.
Men's 3M - Kent Ferguson, Boca Raton, Fla.
Men's 10M - Sun Shuwei, China.
Women's 1M - Gao Min, China.
Women's 3M - Gao Min.
Women's 10M - Fu Mingixia, China. World Cup Champions
Men's 1M - Yijie Wang, China.
Men's 3M - Mark Lenzi, Fredericksburg, Va.
Men's 10M - Sun Shuwei, China.
Women's 1M - Yu Xiaoling, China.
Women's 3M - Brita Baldus, Germany.
Women's 10M - Elena Miroshina, Soviet Union.  DOG SHOWS
Westminster, New York City - Ch.
Whisperwind on a Carousel, Standard Poodle, owned by Joan and Dr.
Frederick Hartsock, Potomac, Md.
Westchester, Tarrytown, N.Y. - Ch.
Registry's Lonesome Dove, wire fox terrier, owned by Marion and Samuel Lawrence, Orlando, Fla.
Houston K.C., Houston, Tex. - Ch. Registry's Lonesome Dove.
Louisville K.C., Louisville - Ch.
Bramblewood's Custom-Made, German Shepherd, owned by Jane Firestone and Betsy Carpenter, Roswell, Ga.
EQUESTRIAN World Champions
Team Jumping - United States.
Team Pairs Driving - United States.
World Cup Jumping - Jon Whitaker, Britain.
World Cup Dressage - Kyra Kyrklund, Finland.
U.S. Jumping - Lisa Jacquin, Collegeville, Pa.
U.S. Dressage - Carol Lavell, Fairfax, Vt. FENCING Men's World Champions
Foil - Ingo Weissenborn, Germany.
Saber - Gregory Kirienko, Soviet Union.
Epee - Andrei Chouvalov, Soviet Union.
Team Foil - Cuba.
Team Saber - Hungary.
Team Epee - Soviet Union.  Women
Foil - Giovanna Trillini, Italy.
Epee - Mariann Horvath, Hungary.
Team Foil - Italy.
Team Epee - Hungary.  U.S.F.A. Champions
Foil - Nick Bravin, Los Angeles, Calif.
Epee - John Normile, New York City.
Saber - Michael Lofton, New York City.
Women's Foil - Mary Jane O'Neill, New England.
Epee - Margo Miller, South California.  Under 19
Men's Foil - Marc Pavese, New York City.
Epee - Ben Millett, Central Penn.
Saber - Ian M. Keller, New Jersey.
Women's Foil - Julianna Sikes, New York.
Epee - Carin Wolf, Illinois.  Team
Men's Foil - New York Fencers Club.
Epee - New York Athletic Club.
Saber - New York Fencers Club.
Women's Foil - New York Fencers Club.
Epee - Salle Auriol, Portland. College Champions Men
Foil - Ben Atkins, Columbia.
Epee - Marc Oshima, Columbia.
Saber - Vitali Nazlimov, Penn State.
Team Epee - Columbia.
Team Sabre - Penn State.
Team overall - Penn State.  Women
Foil - Heidi Piper, Notre Dame.
Team Foil - Penn State.  FIELD HOCKEY N.C.A.A. Women
Division I - Old Dominion.
Division III - Trenton State. FIGURE SKATING World Champions
Men - Kurt Browning, Canada.
Women - Kristi Yamaguchi, Freemont, Calif.
Pairs - Natalia Mishkuteniok and Artur Dmitriev, Soviet Union.
Dance - Isabelle Duchesnay and Paul Duchesnay, France. United States Champions
Men - Todd Eldredge, South Chatham, Mass.
Women - Tonya Harding, Portland, Ore.
Pairs - Natasha Kuchiki, Thousand Oaks, Calif., and Todd Sand, Costa Mesa, Calif.
Dance - Elizabeth Punsalan, Sheffield Lake, Ohio and Jerod Swallow, Northville, Mich.
European Championships
Men - Viktor Petrenko, Soviet Union.
Women - Surya Bonaly, France.
Pairs - Natasha Mishkutinok and Artur Dmitriev, Soviet Union.
Dance - Marina Klimova and Sergei Ponomarenko, Soviet Union.
FOOTBALL National Football League
Super Bowl - New York Giants d. Buffalo Bills.
Super Bowl M.V.P. - Ottis Anderson, N.Y. Giants.
A.F.C. champion - Buffalo Bills.
N.F.C. champion - New York Giants.
M.V.P. - Joe Montana, San Francisco.
Offensive player of the year - Warren Moon, Houston.
Defensive player of the year - Bruce Smith, Buffalo.
Offensive rookie of the year - Emmitt Smith, Dallas.
Defensive rookie of the year - Mark Carrier, Chicago.
Coach of the year - Jimmy Johnson, Dallas. Canadien Football League
Grey Cup - Toronto Argonauts d. Calgary Stampeders.
M.V.P. - Raghib Ismail, Toronto. N.C.A.A.
Heisman Trophy - Desmond Howard, Michigan.
Lombardi Trophy - Steve Emtman, Washington.
Outland Trophy - Steve Emtman.
Division I-AA - Youngstown State.
Division II - Pittsburg State (Kansas).
Division III - Ithaca.
N.A.I.A. Division I - Central Arkansas. FRISBEE World Open
Men's Overall - Snapper Pierson, San Diego.
Women's Overall - Amy Bekken, San Diego. Ultimate Players Association
Men's Open - New York Ultimate.
Women's Open - Lady Godiva (Boston).
Men's Masters - Red Menace (Boston).
Women's Masters - Hot Flashes (Missouri).
Men's college - Univ. of California, Santa Cruz.
Women's college - Univ. of California, Santa Barbara.
Men's World Club - New York Ultimate.
Women's World Club - Bay Area Maine-iacs.
Masters - Seven Sages (N.J.). GOLF Men
U.S. Open - Payne Stewart, Orlando, Fla.
Masters - Ian Woosnam, England.
P.G.A. Championship - John Daly, Memphis.
British Open - Ian Baker Finch, Australia.
Vardon Trophy - Corey Pavin, Oxnard, Calif.
Leading money winner - Corey Pavin, Oxnard, Calif.
P.G.A. player of the year - Fred Couples, West Palm Beach, Fla.
P.G.A Senior Championship - Jack Nicklaus, Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
The Players Championship - Steve Elkington, Australia.
Senior Player's Championship - Jim Albus, New York.
U.S.G.A. Public Links - David Berganio Jr., Sylmar, Calif.
U.S.G.A. Senior Open - Jack Nicklaus, Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
U.S.G.A. Amateur - Mitch Voges, Simi Valley, Calif.
U.S.G.A. Senior Amateur - Bill Bosshard, Copley, Ohio.
U.S.G.A. Mid-Amateur - Jim Stuart, Macon, Ga.
U.S.G.A. Junior - Eldrick Woods, Cypress, Calif. N.C.A.A.
Division I individual - Warren Schutte, U.N.L.V.
Team - Oklahoma State.
Division II - Clete Cole, Columbus.
Team - Florida Southern.
Division III - Lee Palms, Emory.
Team - Methodist.  Women
U.S. Open - Meg Mallon, Ramona, Calif.
L.P.G.A. Championship - Meg Mallon.
U.S.G.A. Public Links - Tracy Hanson, Rathdrum, Idaho.
U.S.G.A. Amateur - Amy Fruhwirth, Phoenix.
U.S.G.A. Senior - Phyllis Preuss, Colorado Springs, Colo.
U.S.G.A. mid-amateur - Sarah LaBrun Ingram, Nashville, Tenn.
U.S.G.A. Junior - Emilee Klein, Studio City, Calif.  N.C.A.A.
Division I Individual - Annika Sorenstam, Arizona.
Team - U.C.L.A.  GYMNASTICS World Champions
Men's team - Soviet Union.
Women's team - Soviet Union.
Men's all-around - Grigory Misutin, Soviet Union.
Women's all-around - Kim Zmeskal, Houston.
Men's floor exercise - Igor Korobchinsky, Soviet Union.
Men's parallel bars - Jing Li, China.
Men's pommel horse - Valery Belenki, Soviet Union.
Men's still rings - Grigory Misutin.
Men's vault - Ok Youl You, South Korea.
Men's high bar - Chunyang Li, China, and Ralf Buechner, Germany.
Women's floor excercise - Christina Bontas, Romania, and Oksana Tchusovitina, Soviet Union.
Women's uneven bars - Kim Gwang Suk, South Korea.
Women's balance beam - Svetlana Boguinskaya, Soviet Union.
Women's vault - Lavinia Milosovici, Romania.  U.S. Champions
U.S. men's all-around - Chris Waller, Los Angeles.
U.S. women's all-around - Kim Zmeskal, Houston.
McDonald's American Cup, Men - Trent Dimas, Lincoln, Neb.
McDonald's American Cup, Women - Betty Okino, Houston. N.C.A.A. Champions
Men's Division I - Oklahoma.
All-around - John Roethlisberger, Minnesota.
Women - Alabama.
All-around - Hope Spivey, Georgia. HANDBALL U.S. Handball Association One Wall
Men - Joe Durso, Brooklyn.
Women - Rosemary Bellini, Brooklyn.  Three-Wall
Men - John Bike, Fairfield, Conn.
Women - Rosemary Bellini.  Four-Wall
Men - John Bike.
Women - Anna Engele, St. Paul, Minn.  World
Men's four-wall - Pancho Monreal, Mexico.
Women's four-wall - Anna Engele, St. Paul. HANG GLIDING
World Championship
World - Thomas Suchanek, Czechoslovakia.
World Team - Britain.
U.S. - Tony Barton, Tucson, Ariz. HARNESS RACING Triple Crown Race Winners Trotters
Yonkers Trot - Crown's Invitation.
Hambletonian - Giant Victory.
Kentucky Futurity - Whiteland Janice.  Pacers
Cane Pace - Silky Stallone.
Little Brown Jug - Precious Bunny.
Messenger Stakes - Die Laughing.  HOCKEY National Hockey League
Stanley Cup - Pittsburgh Penguins d. Minnesota North Stars.
M.V.P. - Brett Hull, St. Louis.
Stanley Cup M.V.P. - Mario Lemieux, Pittsburgh.
Top defenseman - Ray Bourque, Boston.
Rookie of the year - Ed Belfour, Chicago.
Scoring champion - Wayne Gretzky, Los Angeles.
Vezina Trophy - Ed Belfour, Chicago.
Goals against average - Ed Belfour.
Lady Bing - Wayne Gretzky.
Coach of the year - Brian Sutter, St. Louis.  College
Division I- Northern Michigan.
N.C.A.A. Division III - University of Wisconsin at Stevens Point.
E.C.A.C. Division I - Clarkson University (Potsdam, N.Y.).
E.C.A.C. women - University of New Hampshire.
E.C.A.C. Division III Women - St. Lawrence, Canton, N.Y. HORSE RACING Race Winners
Breeders' Cup Juvenile - Arazi.
B.C. Juvenile Fillies - Pleasant Stage.
B.C. Mile - Opening Verse.
B.C. Distaff - Dance Smartly.
B.C. Turf - Miss Alleged.
B.C. Classic - Black Tie Affair.
B.C. Sprint - Sheikh Albadou.
Florida Derby - Fly So Free.
Santa Anita Handicap - Farma Way.
Santa Anita Derby - Dinard.
Wood Memorial - Cahill Road.
Kentucky Derby - Strike the Gold.
Preakness Stakes - Hansel.
Epsom Derby - Generous.
Belmont Stakes - Hansel.
Irish Derby - Generous.
Haskill Invitational - Lost Mountain.
Travers Stakes - Corporate Report.
Arlington Million - Tight Spot.  HORSESHOE PITCHING World Champions
Men - Walter Ray Williams Jr., Stockton, Calif.
Women - Tari Powell, Rantoul, Ill.  HORSE SHOWS
U.S.E.T. show jumping championship - Lisa Jacquin, Collegeville, Pa., riding For the Moment.
HCS Nations' Trophy team world championship - U.S Equestrian Team: Leslie Lenehan, Westport, Conn., riding Pressurized; Debbie Shaffner, Ambler, Penn., riding Volan; Joan Scharffenberger, New York, riding Victor; Greg Best, Flemington, N.J., riding Gem Twist.
U.S.E.T. national dressage championship - Carol Lavell, Fairfax, Vt., riding Gifted.
U.S. League Volvo World Cup - Carol Lavell, riding Gifted.
U.S.E.T. three-day event championship - Karen Lende, Upperville, Va., riding Mr.
Maxwell.
Pairs driving world championship (Austria) - Lana Wright, Chesapeake City, Maryland; Tucker Johnson, Oldwick, N.J.; James Fairclough, Newton, N.J.
A.G.A. rider of the year - Margie Goldstein, Miami.
Leading horse of the year - For the Moment.
Leading rookie of the year - McLain Ward, Bruster, N.Y. ICEBOATING World Champions
World D.N. class - Jan Gougeon, Bay City, Mich.
European D.N. class - Mati Kuulmann, Estonia.
U.S. D.N. class - Ron Sherry, Mount Clemens, Mich.  JUDO World Champions
Men's Open - Naoya Ogawa, Japan.
Women's Open - Yiaoyan Zhuang, China.
Men's heavyweight - Sergei Kosorotov, Soviet Union.
Women's heavyweight - Ji Yoon Moon, South Korea. U.S. Champions
Men's Open - Johnny Walker, Colorado Springs.
Women's Open - Grace Jividen, Colorado Springs.
Men's heavyweight - John Serbin, San Jose, Calif.
Women's heavyweight - Cheryl Stephens, Los Angeles. KARATE Men's U.S. Champions
Advanced WUKO Kata - Ferdie Allas, San Diego.
Advanced Open Kata - Kengo Inazu, Mobile, Ala.
17-year-old Advanced Open Kata - Shane Mata, Neptune, N.J.
35 and Over Advanced Open Kata - Michael Cain, Bellingham, Wash.
45 and Over Advanced Open Kata - William Damon, Tucson, Ariz.
Advanced Weapons Kata - Brian Hobson, Virginia.
35 and over Advanced Weapons Kata - Jimmy Blann, Southhaven, Mass.
45 and over Advanced Weapons Kata - James Keahan, Hamilton Sq., N.J.
Women's U.S.
Champions
Advanced WUKO Mandatory - Melanie Genung, Seattle.
Advanced open kata - Gwen Hoffman, Freehold, N.J.
35 and over advanced open kata - Elaine Rhodes, Warren, Pa.
45 and over advanced open kata - Pat Wright, Newark, Ohio.
Advanced weapons kata - Carolyn Giardina, Westwood, N.J.
35 and over advanced weapons kata - Norma Kaiser, Tucson, Ariz.
45 and over advanced weapons kata - Pat Wright. SPARRING (KUMITE) Men's Champions
60 Kgs - Scott Rosak, Lockport, Ill.
65 - William Chadrow, Redmond, Wash.
70 - Angel Allas, San Diego.
75 - Chris Nickolas, Akron, Ohio.
80-plus - John Linebarger, Tucson, Ariz.
80 - Doug Selchan, N. Huntingdon, Pa.
Open - Quintin Williams, Cleveland.
17-year-old - Charles Burrows, St. Albans, W.Va.
35 and over - Doug Dennis, Springfield, Ill.
45 and over - Robert Nenow, Lehighton, Pa. Women's Champions
60-plus - Edna Loeber, Brooklyn.
60 - Tracey Day, Selden, N.Y.
Open - Edna Loeber.
17-year-old - Susan Woods, Emerson, N.J.
35 and over - Vickie Rosenberger, Akron, Ohio.
45 and over - Pat Wright, Newark, Ohio. LACROSSE N.C.A.A.
Division I - North Carolina.
Division III - Hobart.
Women Division I - Virginia.
Women Division III - Trenton State.
N.J.C.A.A. - Essex Community College, Baltimore.
Major Indoor League - Detroit Turbos.  LUGE U.S. Champions
Men - Duncan Kennedy, Lake Placid, N.Y.
Women - Cammy Myler, Lake Placid, N.Y.
Men's doubles - Chris Thorpe and Gordy Sheer, Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.  World Champions
Men - Arnold Huber, Italy.
Women - Susi Erdmann, Germany.
Men's doubles - Stefan Krausse and Jon Behrendt, Germany.
World Cup men - Markus Prock, Austria.
World Cup women - Susi Erdmann.
World Cup men's doubles - Hansjoerg Raffl and Norbert Huber, Italy.
North American men - Harington Telford, Canada.
North American women - Bonny Warner, Palo Alto, Calif.
North American doubles - Chris Trorpe, Marquette, Mich., and Gordy Sheer.  MARATHON
New York, men - Salvador Garcia, Mexico.
New York, women - Liz McColgan, Scotland.
Boston, men - Ibrahim Hussein, Kenya.
Boston, women - Wanda Panfil, Poland.
World Cup/London, men - Yakov Tolstikov, Soviet Union.
World Cup/London, women - Rosa Mota, Portugal. MODERN PENTATHLON United States
Men - Stull, Austin, Tex.
Women - Kim Arata, Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif.
Junior men - Skip Connors, San Antonio.
Junior women - Lauren Riester, San Antonio. World Champions
Men - Arkad Skrzypaszek, Poland.
Women - Eva Fjellerup, Denmark.
Women's team - Poland. MOTORCYCLE RACING World Champions Road Race
125 cc - Loris Capirossi, Italy.
250 cc - Luca Cadalora, Italy.
500 cc - Wayne Rainey, Downey, Calif.
Motocross - Trampas Parker, United States.  U.S. Champions
U.S. pro - Scott Parker, Swartz Creek, Mich.
Daytona 200 - Miguel DuHamel, Verdun, Quebec.
Camel Supercross - Jean-Michel Bayle.  ORIENTEERING
World men - Jorgen Martensson, Sweden.
World women - Katalin Olah, Hungary.
World Cup men's ski - Anssi Juutilainen, Finland.
World Cup women's ski - Arja Hannus, Sweden.
U.S. men - Mikell Platt, Boston.
U.S. women - Kristin Federer, Boston. Paddle Tennis U.S. Champions
Men's singles - Scott Freedman, Culver City, Calif.
Women's singles - Kelly Chase, Los Angeles.
Men's doubles - Sol Hauptman, Venice Beach, Calif., and Scott Freedman.
Women's doubles - Ingrid Fields, Westchester, Calif., and Alex Chistolini, Culver City, Calif.
PARACHUTE JUMPING
World men's paraski - Roman Pogacar, Yugoslavia.
Women's paraski - Claudia Bratzer, Czechoslovakia.
Paraski-team - Switzerland.
8-Way - United States.
4-Way - France. PLATFORM TENNIS
U.S. men's singles - Scott Staniar, Greenwich, Conn.
U.S. women's singles - none.
U.S. men's doubles - Steve Baird, Harrison, N.Y., and Rich Maier, Scarsdale, N.Y.
U.S. women's doubles - Robin Fulton, Stamford, Conn., and Diane Tucker, Bedford, N.Y.
U.S. mixed doubles - David Ohlmuller, Montclair, N.J., and Patty Hogan, Summit, N.J.
POLO
Rolex Gold Cup - Cellular One, Greenwich, Conn.
International Gold Cup - JM Lexus, Boca Raton, Fla.
International Open - Michelob Dry, St. Louis.
World Cup - Michelob, St. Louis. POWERBOATING
World offshore superboats - Gentry Eagle, Tom Gentry, Honolulu.
U.S. offshore superboats - Spirit of the Amazon, Eike Batista, Brazil.
Unlimited hydroplane series - Miss Budweiser, Scott Pierce, Everett, Wash.
Gold Cup unlimited hydroplanes - Winston Eagle, Mark Tate, Wayne, Mich.
POWER LIFTING W.N.P.F.
Lifters of the Year
N.A.S.A. Superbowl - Ted Sobel, New York.
U.S.P.F. women's nationals - Mary Jeffry, West Virginia.
Drug-Free nationals - Ted Sobel.
International Special Olympics - Andrew Leonard, Pa.
European championships - Olivier Denis, Armentieres, France
Pan Pacific/Australasian championships - Victor Male, Jakarta, Indonesia.
World PL classic - Ted Sobel.
Women's world championship - Cathy Millen, Auckland, New Zealand.
Lifter of the year - Ted Sobel. QUARTER HORSE RACING
All-American Futurity - Royal Quick Dash.
All-American Derby - See Me Gone.
Rainbow Futurity - Steppin for the Moon.
Rainbow Derby - See Me Gone.
Kansas Futurity - Magic Dozen.
Kansas Derby - Refrigerator. RACQUETBALL United States Champions
Men - Andy Rogers, Memphis, Tenn.
Women - Michelle Gilman, Ontario, Ore.
Men's pro series - Mike Ray, Marietta, Ga.
Amateur men - Tim Sweeney, Chicago.
Amateur women - Michelle Gilman. RACQUETS Unites States and World
U.S. open - Neil Smith, England.
U.S. pro - Wayne Davies, New York.
U.S. amateur - William Boone, England.
World - James Male, England.  RHYTHMIC GYMNASTICS
U.S. all-around - Jennifer Lovell, Miami.
U.S. junior all-around - Caroline Hunt, Winnetka, Ill.
World all-around - Oksana Skaldina, Soviet Union.
World rope - Alexandra Timochenko, Soviet Union.
World hoop - Oksana, Skaldina.
World ball - Oksana, Skaldina.
World clubs - Maria Petrova, Bulgaria. RODEO
U.S. college - Shawn Vant, Montana State.
World all-around - Ty Murray, Stephenville, Tex. ROLLER HOCKEY
World - Portugal.
U.S. - Fort Neches (Tex.) Champions.  ROLLER SKATING U.S. Champions
Men freestyle - Scott Cohen, North Brunswick, N.J.
Women's freestyle - Brenda Storbeck, San Antonio.
Men's figures - Justin Bates, Flint, Mich.
Women's figures - April Dayney, Ann Arbor, Mich.
Pairs - Larry McGrew and Tina Jerue, Santa Ana, Calif.
Dance - Gregory Goody and Jodee Viola, Taunton, Mass.
Men's speed - Dante Muse, West Des Moines, Iowa.
Women's speed - Darlene Kessinger, Fremont, Calif.  World Champions
Men's speed - Tony Muse, West Des Moines, Iowa.
Men's freestyle - Scott Cohen.
Women's freestyle - Raffaella Del Vinaccio, Italy.
Men's figures - Justin Bates.
Women's figures - Raffaella Del Vinaccio.
Pairs - Larry McGrew and Tina Jerue.
Dance - Gregory Goody and Jodee Viola.
Women's speed - Maria Eva Richardson, Argentina. ROWING World Champions
Men's eights - Germany.
Women's eights - Canada.
Men's lightweight eights - Italy.
Men's single sculls- Thomas Lange, Germany.
Women's single sculls - Silken Laumann, Canada.
Men's lightweight single sculls - Niall O'Toole, Ireland.
World women's lightweight single sculls - Phillipa Baker, New Zealand.
Thames Challenge Cup - Pennsylvania Junior Varsity.
Diamond sculls - Win van Delleghem, Belgium. U.S. Champions
College men - Pennsylvania.
College women - Boston University.
Intercollegiate Rowing Association - Northeastern.
Eastern sprint - Pennsylvania.
Dad Vail Regatta - Temple.  RUGBY United States Champions
Club- Old Mission Beach, San Diego.
Women's club - Beantown, Boston.
Men's college - California.
Women's college - Air Force Academy.
Seven-a-side - Old Puget Sound Beach, Seattle.
Military - Pensacola, Fla.
Schoolboy - Highlands H.S., Salt Lake City. World
Men's World Cup - Australia.
Women's World Cup - United States.
Five Nations - England. SHOOTING World Cup
Men's small bore rifle, 3 position - Jean-Pierre Amat, France.
Women's small-bore rifle - Valentina Cherkasova, Soviet Union.
Free rifle, prone - Bill Beard, Danville, Ind.
Rapid-fire pistol - Krzysztof Kucharczyk, Poland.
Trap - Russell Mark, Australia. United States International
Men's free rifle, 3 position - Tamas, Fort Benning, Ga.
Men's air rifle - Matt Suggs, Roanoke, Va.
Women's air rifle - Ann-Marie Pfiffner, Dubuque, Iowa.
Women's standard rifle, 3 Position - Launi Meili, Cheney, Wash.
Women's standard rifle, Prone - Robin McCall, Tryon, N.C.
Men's air pistol - Don Nygord, LaCrescenta, Calif.
Women's air pistol - Connie Petracek, Nashville, Tenn.
Men's free pistol - Ben Amonette, Radford, Va.
Men's rapid-fire pistol - John McNally, Columbus, Ga.
Men's center-fire pistol - Ed Suarez, San Jose, Calif.
Men's standard pistol - Jimmie McCoy, Columbus, Ga.
Women's sport pistol - Connie Patracek.
Men's skeet - Mike Schmidt, Eagan, Minn.
Women's skeet - Connie Fluker, College Station, Tex.
Men's trap - Bret Erickson, Bennington, Neb.
Women's trap - Sharee Waldron, Boise, Idaho.
U.S. men's high-power rifle - David Tubb, Canadian, Tex.
SKIING Alpine World Cup Champions
Over All
Men - Marc Girardelli, Luxembourg.
Women - Petra Kronberger, Austria. Individual Champions
Men's downhill - Franz Heinzer, Switzerland.
Slalom - Marc Girardelli.
Giant slalom - Alberto Tomba, Italy.
Super G. - Franz Heinzer.
Women's downhill - Chantal Bournissen, Switzerland.
Slalom - Petra Kronberger.
Giant slalom - Vreni Schneider, Switzerland.
Super G. - Carole Merle, France. World Champions Men
Combined - Stefan Eberharter, Austria.
Downhill - Franz Heinzer.
Slalom - Marc Girardelli.
Giant slalom - Rudolph Nierlich, Austria.
Super G. - Stefan Eberharter.  Women
Combined - Chantal Bournissen.
Downhill - Petra Kronberger.
Slalom - Vreni Schneider.
Giant slalom - Pernilla Wiberg, Sweden.
Super G. - Ulrike Maier, Austria. Collegiate Champions N.C.A.A.
Team - Colorado.
Men's slalom - Einar Boehmer, Vermont.
Women's slalom - Heather Flood, Middlebury.
Men's giant slalom - Toni Standteiner, Colorado.
Women's giant slalom - Keri Schlopy, Vermont.  SLED DOG RACING
Iditarod (Anchorage to Nome) - Rick Swenson, Two Rivers, Alaska. SNOWMOBILE RACING
World - Greg Goodwin, Zion, Ill. SOAP BOX DERBY
Masters - Danny Garland, Studio City, Calif.
Kit Car - Paul Greenwald, Saginaw, Mich. SOCCER Nations
America Cup (South American Championship) - Argentina.
CONCACAF Gold Cup -United States.
North American Nations Cup - Mexico.
Caribbean Cup - Jamaica.
Central American Cup - Costa Rica.
Pan American Games (under 23) - United States.
FIFA world youth championship (under 20) - Portugal.
FIFA under-17 championship - Ghana.
FIFA women's championship - United States. Clubs
A.P.S.L. - San Francisco Bay.
M.I.S.L. - San Diego.
U.S. Open Cup - Brooklyn Italians.
U.S. Amateur Cup - Scott Gallagher, Mo.
U.S. Women's Amateur Cup - Texas Challenge, North Texas. International Champions
Intercontinental Cup (world club championship) - Red Star Belgrade (Yugoslavia).
European Cahmpions Cup - Red Star Belgrade (Yugoslavia).
European Cup Winners Cup - Manchester United (England).
U.E.F.A. Cup - Internazionale of Milan (Italy).
European SuperCup - Manchester United (England).
Liberators Cup - Colo Colo (Chile).
South American Super Cup - Cruzeiro (Brazil).
CONCACAF Champions Cup - Puebla (Mexico).
Interamerican Cup - Club America (Mexico). Collegiate
N.C.A.A. Division I - Virginia.
N.C.A.A. Division II - Florida Tech.
N.C.A.A. Divison III - University of California at San Diego.
N.C.A.A. Division I Women - North Carolina.
N.C.A.A. Division II Women - California State University at Dominguez Hills.
N.C.A.A. Division III Women - Ithaca, N.Y.
N.A.I.A. - Lynn, Fla.
N.A.I.A women - Pacific Lutheran.  International Leagues and Cups
Albanian League - Flamurtari Vlora.
Albanian Cup - Partizani Tirana.
Austrian League - Austria Vienna.
Austrian Cup - SV Stockerau.
Belgian League - RSC Anderlecht.
Belgian Cup - RSC Anderlecht.
Bulgarian League - Etar Veliko Tarnovo.
Bulgarian Cup - Levsky Sofia.
Cyprus League - Apollon Limassol.
Cyprus Cup - Omonia Nikosia.
Czechoslovak League - Sparta Prague.
Czechoslovak Cup - Banik Ostrau.
Danish Cup - Aalborg BK.
English League - Arsenal.
English Football Association Cup - Tottenham Hotspur.
Faroe Islands League - HB Thoorshavn.
Faroe Islands Cup - Kl Klakksvik.
Finnish Cup - Ilves Tampere.
French League - Olympique Marseille.
French Cup - AS Monaco.
German League - FC Kaiserslautern.
German Cup - Werder Bremen.
Greek League - Panathinaikos.
Greek Cup - Panathinaikos.
Hungarian League - Honved Budapest.
Hungarian Cup - Ferencvaros Budapest.
Iceland League - Fram Reykjavik.
Iceland Cup - FC Valur.
Irish League - FC Dundalk.
Irish Cup - Galway United.
Israeli Cup - Maccabi Haifa.
Italian League - Sampdoria of Genoa.
Italian Cup - AS Roma.
Luxembourg League - Union Luxemburg.
Luxembourg Cup - Union Luxemburg.
Malta League - Hamrun Spartans.
Malta Cup - FC Valletta.
Netherlands League - PSV Eindhoven.
Netherlands Cup - Feyenoord of Rotterdam.
Northern Ireland League - FC Portadown.
Northern Ireland Cup - FC Portadown.
Norwegian Cup - Rosenborg Trondheim.
Polish League - Zaglebie Lubin.
Polish Cup - GKS Kattowitz.
Portugese League - Benfica of Lisbon.
Portugese Cup - FC Porto.
Romanian League - Universitatea Craiova.
Romanian Cup - Universitatea Craiova.
Scottish League - Glasgow Rangers.
Scottish Football Association Cup - FC Motherwell.
Soviet Cup - CSKA Moscow.
Spanish League - Barcelona.
Spanish Cup - Atletico Madrid.
Swedish Cup - IFK Norrkoeping.
Swiss League - Grasshoppers.
Swiss Cup - FC Sion.
Turkish League - Besiktas.
Turkish Cup - Galatasaray Istanbul.
Welsh Cup - Swansea City.
Yugoslavian League - Red Star Belgrade.
Yugoslavian Cup - Hajduk Split. SOFTBALL
U.S. men's fast pitch - Guanella Brothers, Rohnert Park, Calif.
U.S. women's fast pitch - Raybeston Brak Ettes, Stratford, Conn.
U.S. men's super-slow pitch - Worth, Centerville, Ga.
U.S. men's major-slow pitch - Riverside, Louisville, Ky.
U.S. women's major-slow pitch - Cannan's Illusion, San Antonio, Tex.
U.S. college women - Arizona. SPEED SKATING U.S. Long-Track Champions
Women's sprint champion - Bonnie Blair, Champaign, Ill.
Men - Dan Jansen, Milwaukee.
All-around, women - Michelle Kline, Circle Pines, Minn.
All-around men - Nate Mills, Northfield, Ill. U.S. SHORT-TRACK CHAMPIONS
Women's All-Around - Amy Peterson, Maplewood, Minn.
Men's All-Around - Andy Gabel, Franklin, Wisconsin.  SQUASH RACQUETS U.S. Champions
Open softball - Jansher Khan, Pakistan.
Open hardball - Rodney Martin, Australia.
Men's softball - Mark Talbott.
Women's softball - Joyce Maycock, Toronto.
Men's handball - Hector Berragen, Mexico.
Women's hardball - Demer Holleran, Rye, N.Y.
Men's college - Adrian Ezra, Harvard.
Women's college - Berkeley Belknap, Yale. SQUASH TENNIS U.S. Champion
Men - Gary Squires, Darien, Conn. SURFING
Ocean Pacific Men's Pro - Barton Lynch, Australia.
Ocean Pacific Women's Pro - Frieda Zamba, Flagler Beach, Fla.
SWIMMING Pan Pacific Championships Men
50-meter free - Tom Jager, United States.
100 free - Matt Biondi, United States.
200 free - Ian Brown, Australia.
400 free - Kieren Perkins, Australia.
800 free - Kieren Perkins.
1,500 free - Kieren Perkins.
100 back - Jeff Rouse, United States.
200 back - Jeff Rouse.
100 breast - Mike Barrowman, United States.
200 breast - Mike Barrowman.
100 butterfly - Matt Biondi.
200 butterfly - Melvin Stewart, United States
200 ind. medley - Gary Anderson, Canada.
400 ind. medley - Eric Namesnik, United States.
400 free relay (Team) - United States.
800 free relay (Team) - United States.
400 medley relay (Team) - United States.  Women
50-meter free - Jenny Thompson, United States.
100 free - Angel Martino, United States.
200 free - Nicole Haislett, United States.
400 free - Janet Evans, United States.
800 free - Janet Evans.
1,500 - Janelle Elford, Australia.
100 back - Janie Wagstaff, United States.
200 back - Anna Simcic, New Zealand.
100 breast - Linley Frame, Australia.
200 breast - Kristine Quance, United States.
100 butterfly - Susan O'Neill, Australia.
200 butterfly - Summer Sanders, United States.
200 ind. medley - Summer Sanders.
400 ind. medley - Summer Sanders.
400 free relay - United States.
800 free relay - United States.
400 medley relay - United States.  N.C.A.A. Men
50-yard free - Shaun Jordan, Texas.
100 free - Shaun Jordan.
200 free - Artur Wojdat, Iowa.
500 free - Artur Wojdat.
1,650 free - Artur Wojdat.
100 back - Jeff Rouse, Stanford.
200 back - Martin Zubero, Florida.
100 breast - Andrea Cecchi, U.C.L.A.
200 breast - Mike Barrowman, Michigan.
100 butterfly - Anthony Nesty, Florida.
200 butterfly - Melvin Stewart, Tennessee.
200 ind. medley - Martin Zubero.
400 ind. medley - David Wharton, Southern Cal.
One-meter diving - Dean Panaro, Miami (Fla.).
Three-meter diving - Jason Rhodes, Texas.
200-medley relay - Texas.
400-medley relay - Florida.
200-freestyle relay - Texas.
400-freestyle relay - Texas.
800-freestyle relay - Texas.
Division 1 team - Texas.
Division II team - Cal. State Bakersfield.
Division III Team - Kenyon, Ohio.
Women
50-yard free - Leigh Ann Fetter, Texas.
100-free - Leigh Ann Fetter.
200-free - Nicole Haislett, Florida.
500-free - Janet Evans, Stanford.
1,650 free - Janet Evans.
100 back - Jodi Wilson, Texas.
200 back - Beth Barr, Texas.
100 breast - Lori Heisick, Stanford.
200 breast - Dorsey Tierney, Texas.
100 butterfly - Cris Ahmann-Leighton, Arizona.
200 butterfly - Summer Sanders, Stanford.
200-yard ind. medley - Summer Sanders.
400-yard ind. - Summer Sanders.
One-meter diving - Krista Wilson, Southern Methodist.
Three-meter diving - Julie Farrell-Ovenhouse, Michigan St.
200-medley relay - Texas.
400-medley relay - Stanford.
200-freestyle relay - Texas.
400-freestyle relay - Texas.
800-freestyle relay - Stanford.
Division I team - Texas.
Division II team - Oakland.
Division III team - Kenyon, Ohio.  SYNCHRONIZED SWIMMING
World solo - Sylvie Frechette, Montreal.
World duet - Karen and Sarah Josephson, Walnut Creek, Calif.
World team - United States.
Pan pacific - Kristen Babb-Sprague, Walnut Creek, Calif.
European solo - Olga Sedakova, Soviet Union.
U.S. solo - Kristen Babb-Sprague.
World duet - Karen and Sarah Josephson.
U.S. team - Walnut Creek, Calif.  TABLE TENNIS
World men's singles - Jorgen Persson, Sweden.
World women's singles - Deng Yaping, China.
World men's doubles - Peter Karlsson and Thomas Von Scheele, Sweden.
World women's doubles - Chen Zihe and Gao Ju, China.
World men's team - Sweden.
World women's team - Korea.  TAEKWONDO
U.S. men's heavyweight - Scott Miranti, Bozeman, Montana.
U.S. women's heavyweight - Lynette Love, Detroit.  TEAM HANDBALL
U.S. men - Garden City, L.I.
U.S. women - Colorado Springs Stars.
Men's U.S.A. Cup - Croatia.
College men - Army.
College women - Army. TENNIS U.S. Open Champions
Singles - Stefan Edberg, Sweden
Women's singles - Monica Seles, Sarasota, Fla.
Men's doubles - John Fitzgerald, Australia, and Anders Jarryd, Sweden.
Women's doubles - Pam Shriver, Baltimore, and Natalya Zvereva, Soviet Union.
Mixed doubles - Manon Bollegraf, Netherlands, and Tom Nijssen, Netherlands.
Senior men's singles - Hank Pfister, Bakersfield, Calif.
Senior men's doubles - Peter Fleming, New York, and Hank Pfister.
Senior women's doubles - Rosie Casals, and Billy Jean King, Chicago.
Senior mixed doubles - Wendy Turnbull, Australia, and Bob Hewitt, South Africa.
Boys' junior singles - Leander Paes, India.
Girls' junior singles - Karina Habsudova, Czechoslovakia.
Boys' doubles - Karim Alami, Morocco, and John DeJager, South Africa.
Girls' doubles - Kristin Godridge, Australia, and Nicole Pratt, Australia.  N.C.A.A.
Men's Division I - Jared Palmer, Stanford.
Men's Division I team - Southern Cal.
Women's Division I - Sandra Birch, Stanford.
Women's Division I team - Stanford.
Men's Division II - Pradeep Raman, Armstrong State.
Men's Division II Team - Rollins.
Women's Division II - Laura Simmons, Air Force.
Women's Division II Team - Cal Poly-Pomona.
Men's Division III - Lew Miller, Kalamazoo.
Men's Division III Team - Kalamazoo.
Women's Division III - Karyn Cooper, Wellesley.
Women's Division III Team - Mary Washington.
N.A.I.A. men's champion - Yue Wang, BYU-Hawaii.
N.A.I.A. men's team - Lander.
N.A.I.A. women's champion - Helena Dahlstrom, Flagler.
N.A.I.A. women's team - Flagler. Foreign Opens
Wimbledon men - Michael Stich, Germany.
Wimbledon Women - Steffi Graf, Germany.
French Open - Jim Courier, Dade City, Fla.
Women - Monica Seles.
Australia Men - Boris Becker, Germany.
Women - Monica Seles.  Virginia Slims Championship
Singles - Monica Seles.
Doubles - Pam Shriver, and Martina Navratilova, Aspen, Colo.
TRACK AND FIELD U.S.
Champions Mobil Outdoor Championships Men
100-meter - Leroy Burrell, Houston.
200 - Michael Johnson, Waco, Tex.
400 - Antonio Pettigrew, Macon, Ga.
800 - Mark Everett, Milton, Fla.
1,500 - Terrance Herrington, Hartsville, S.C.
3,000 Steeplechase - Mark Croghan, Greensburg, Ohio.
5,000 - John Trautmann, Morristown, N.J.
10,000 - Shannon Butler, S. Lake Tahoe, Ca.
110 hurdles - Greg Foster, Chino Hills, Calif.
440 hurdles - Danny Harris, Torrance, Calif.
20K walk - Tim Lewis, Schenectady, N.Y.
High jump - Hollis Conway, Shreveport, La.
Pole vault - Tim Bright, Taft, Calif.
Long jump - Carl Lewis, Houston.
Triple jump - Kenny Harrison, Milwaukee.
Shot-put - Ron Backes, St. Cloud, Minn.
Discus - Anthony Washington, Glasgow, Mt.
Hammer throw - Jud Logan, North Canton, Ohio.
Javelin - Mike Barnett, Montabello, Calif.
Decathlon - Dan O'Brien, Portland, Ore.  Mobil Indoor Championships
60-meter hurdles - Greg Foster, Chino Hills, Calif.
400 - Michael Johnson, Waco, Tex.
500 - Andrew Valmon, Lakehurst, N.J.
800 - Ray Brown, Sherman, Tex.
Mile - Noureddine Morceli, Algeria.
3,000 - Terry Brahm, Meinard, In.
60-meter dash - Andres Simon, Cuba.
5,000M walk - Doug Fournier, Huntington, N.Y.
High jump - Javier Sotomayer, Cuba.
Pole vault - Kory Tarpenning, Portland, Ore.
Long jump - Llewellyn Starks, Jonesboro, La.
Triple jump - Frank Rutherford, Bahamas.
Shot put - Ron Backes, St. Cloud, Minn.
35-lb. weight throw - Lance Deal, Casper, Wyo.
Men's 4x800M relay - NY Athl. Club, Manhattan
Men's 4x400M relay - Shore Athl. Club Women's Mobil Outdoor
100-meter - Carlette Guidry, Houston.
200 - Gwen Torrence, Atlanta.
400 - Lillie Leatherwood, Tuscaloosa, Ala.
800 - Delisa Floyd, Chicago.
1,500 - Patti Sue Plumer, Covina, Calif.
3,000 - Shelly Steely, Reading, Pa.
10,000 - Lynn Jennings, Princeton, N.J.
100 hurdles - Gail Devers-Roberts, Seattle.
400 hurdles - Kim Batten, Rochester, N.Y.
10K walk - Debbi Lawrence, Columbus.
High jump - Yolanda Henry, Houston.
Long jump - Jackie Joyner-Kersee, E. St. Louis, Ill.
Shot put - Ramona Pagel, Los Angeles.
Discus - Lacy Barnes, Ridgecrest, Ca.
Javelin - Karin Smith, Germany.
Heptathlon - Jackie Joyner-Kersee.  Women's Mobil Indoor
60M hurdles - Kim McKenzie, Birmingham, Ala.
200M dash - Rochelle Stevens, Memphis, Tenn.
400M run - Diane Dixon, Brooklyn.
800M run - Meredith Rainey, Brooklyn.
Mile - Suzy Favor, Stevens Pt., Wis.
3,000M walk - Teresa Vaill, Torrington, CT.
60M dash - Michelle Finn, Orlando, Fla.
3,000M run - Margareta Keszeg, Romania.
High jump - Yolanda Henry, Houston.
Long jump - Carol Lewis, Houston.
Triple jump - Juliana Yendork, Walnut, Calif.
Shot put - Connie Price-Smith, St. Charles, .
20lb weight-throw - Sonja Fitts, Rochester, N.Y. N.C.A.A. Men's Outdoor
100 meters - Frank Fredericks, Brigham Young.
200 - Frank Fredericks.
400 - Gabriel Luke, Rice.
800 - George Kersh, Mississippi.
1,500 - Samuel Kibiri, Washington St.
3,000 steeplechase - Mark Croghan, Ohio State.
5,000 run - Shannon Butler, Montana St.
10,000 run - Terry Thornton, Louisiana St.
110 high hurdles - Greg Williams, Texas A&amp;M.
400 hurdles - Samuel Matete, Auburn.
4 x 100 m. relay team - Texas Christian.
4 x 400 m. relay team - Baylor.
High jump - Darrin Plab, Southern Illinois.
Pole vault - Istvan Bagyula, George Mason.
Long jump - George Ogbeide, Washington State.
Triple jump - Brian Wellman, Arkansas.
Shot-put - Simon Williams, Louisiana St.
Discus - Kamy Keshmiri, Nevada-Reno.
Javelin - Patrik Boden, Texas.
Hammer throw - Christophe Epalle, Southern Methodist.
Decathlon - Aric Long, Tennessee.
Team champion - Tennessee. Men's Indoor
55 meter dash - Augustin Olobia, Washington St.
55 hurdles - Tony Li, Washington St.
200 dash - Frank Fredericks.
400 dash - Gabriel Luke.
800 run - George Kersh.
Mile run - Bob Kennedy, Indiana.
3,000 run - Reuben Reina, Arkansas.
5,000 run - Jonah Koech, Iowa St.
1,600 relay - Baylor.
3,200 relay - Georgetown.
High jump - Tony Barton, George Mason.
Long jump - Alan Turner, Indiana.
Triple jump - Eugene Greene, Boise St.
Pole vault - Istvan Bagyula, George Mason.
Shot put - Eric Bergreen, U.C.L.A.
35-pound weight throw - Christophe Epalle, Southern Methodist.
Team champion - Arkansas.  Women's Outdoor
100 meter dash - Carlette Guidry, Texas.
200 dash - Carlette Guidry.
400 dash - Ximena Restrepo, Nebraska.
800 run - Nekita Beasley, Florida.
1,500 run - Darcy Arreola, Cal. St.-Northridge.
3,000 run - Sonia O'Sullivan, Villanova.
5,000 run - Lauri Gomez, North Carolina St.
10,000 run - Jamie Park, Arkansas.
100 hurdles - Dawn Bowles, Louisiana St.
400 hurdles - Janeene Vickers, U.C.L.A.
400 relay team - Texas.
1,600 relay team - Nebraska.
High jump - Tanya Hughes, Arizona.
Long jump - Diane Guthrie, George Mason.
Triple jump - Donna Crumety, St. Joseph's.
Shot put - Eileen Vanisi, Texas.
Discus throw - Anna Mosdell, Brigham Young.
Javelin throw - Paula Berry, Oregon.
Heptathlon - Sharon Jaklofsky, Louisiana State.
Team champion - Louisiana State. Women's Indoor
55-meter dash - Carlette Guidry.
55 hurdles - Mary Cobb, Louisiana St.
200 dash - Carlette Guidry.
400 dash - Maicel Malone, Arizona St.
800 run - Edith Nakiyingi, Iowa St.
Mile run - Jennifer Lanctot, Boston U.
3,000 run - Patty Wiegand, Tennessee.
5,000 run - Sonia O'Sullivan, Villanova.
1,600 relay team - Arizona St.
3,200 relay team - Tennessee.
High jump - Tanya Hughes, Arizona.
Long jump - Diane Guthrie, George Mason.
Triple jump - Leah Kirklin, Florida.
Shot put - Tracie Millett, U.C.L.A.
Team champion - Louisiana State.  TRIATHLON
Ironman men - Mark Allen, Cardiff, Calif.
Ironman women - Paula Newby-Fraser, Encinitas, Calif.  TUMBLING
U.S. men's tumbling - Rashaan Sampson, Newark, N.J.
U.S. women's tumbling - Megan Cunningham, Pecatonica, Ill.
U.S. men's trampoline - Karl Heger, Kansas City, Mo.
U.S. women's trampoline - Melissa Larson, Minneapolis. VOLLEYBALL
World Cup Men - Soviet Union.
World Cup Women - Cuba.
World Club - Il Messagiero, Italy.
World men - Sinjin Smith and Randy Stoklos, Pacific Palisades, Calif.
World women - Liz Masakayan and Linda Chisholm-Carillo, United States.
N.C.A.A. Division I men - Long Beach State.
N.C.A.A. Division I women - U.C.L.A.
N.C.A.A. Division II women - West Texas State.
N.C.A.A. Division III women - U.C. San Diego.
N.A.I.A. - Hawaii Pacific. WATER POLO U.S. Champions
U.S. men's outdoor - Newport A (Calif.).
U.S. women's outdoor - Cal-Berkeley.
U.S. men's indoor - Harvard WP Foundation, Los Angeles.
U.S. women's indoor - Cal Open.
N.C.A.A. - California.
World Champions
World men - Yugoslavia.
World women - The Netherlands.
F.I.N.A. Cup men - United States.
F.I.N.A. Cup women - The Netherlands.
European women - Hungary. WATER SKIING
World men's over all - Patrice Martin, France.
World Women's over all - Karen Neville, Australia.
U.S. Men's open over all - Sammy Duvall, Windermere, Fla.
U.S.
Women's open over all - Karen Neville.
WEIGHT LIFTING U.S.
Weightlifting Federation Men
52 Kgs. - Chad Ikel, Honolulu.
56 - Robert "Gene" Gilsdon, Onaga, Kansas.
60 - Bryan Jacob, Norcross, Ga.
67.5 - Tim McRae, Daytona Beach, Fla.
75 - Jeff Macy, Nokomis, Fla.
82.5 - Roberto Tony Urrutia, Hollywood, Fla.
90 - Bret Brian, Baton Rouge, La.
100 - Dave Langon, Castro Valley, Calif.
110 - Rich Schutz, Mt. Prospect, Ill.
Plus 110 - Mario Martinez, South San Francisco, Calif.  Women
44 - Andrea Tibeau, Sumner, Wash.
48 - Victoria Futch, Longwood, Fla.
52 - Robin Byrd, Newnan, Ga.
56 - Melanie Getz, Brentwood, Mo.
60 - Giselle Shepatin, San Francisco.
67.5 - Dianna Fuhrman, Simi Valley, Calif.
75 - Jackie Mah, Simi Valley, Calif.
82.5 - Stephanie Armitage-Johnson, Auburn, Wash.
Plus 82.5 - Carla Garrett, Tucson, Ariz.  Men's World Champions
52 Kgs. - Ivan Ivanov, Bulgaria.
56 - Byung-Kwan Chun - Korea.
60 - Naim Suleymanoglu, Turkey.
67.5 - Yoto Yotov, Bulgaria.
75 - Pablo Lara, Cuba.
82.5 - Ibrahim Samadov, Soviet Union.
90 - Sergei Syrtsov, Soviet Union.
100 - Igor Sadykov, Soviet Union.
110 - Artur Akoev, Soviet Union.
Men's heavyweight - Alexandr Kurlovich, Soviet Union.
Men's team - Soviet Union.
European men's super heavyweight - Leonid Taranenko, Soviet Union.
Women's World Champions
44 Kgs. - Fen Xing, China.
48 - Izabela Rifatova, Bulgaria.
52 - Liping Peng, China.
56 - Caiyan Sun, China.
60 - Lixia Han, China.
67.5 - Le Lei, China.
75 - Xiaoli Zhang, China.
82.5 - Hongling Li, China.
Women's heavyweight - Li Yajuan, China.
Women's team - China. WRESTLING World Champions Freestyle
105.5 lbs - Vugar Orudzhev, Soviet Union.
114.5 - Zeke Jones, Bloomsburg, Pa.
125.5 - Sergei Smai, Soviet Union.
136.5 - John Smith, Stillwater, Okla.
149.5 - Arsen Fadzaev, Soviet Union.
163 - Amir Khadem, Iran.
180.5 - Kevin Jackson, Ames, Iowa.
198 - Maharbek Khadartsev, Soviet Union.
220 - Leri Khabelov, Soviet Union.
286 - Andreas Schroder, Germany.
Team - Soviet Union. Greco-Roman
105.5 lbs. - Duk-Yong Gooun, Korea.
114.5 - Raul Martinez, Cuba.
125.5 - Rifat Yildiz, Germany.
136.5 - Sergei Martynov, Soviet Union.
149.5 - Islam Duguchiev, Soviet Union.
163 - Mnatsakan Iskandarian, Soviet Union.
180.5 - Peter Farkus, Hungary.
198 - Maik Bullman, Germany.
220 - Hector Millian, Cuba.
286 - Alexander Karelin, Soviet Union.
Team - Soviet Union.  Women's World Championships
97 lbs. - Xlue Zhong, China.
103.5 - Miyu Yamamoto, Japan.
110 - Martine Poupon, France.
116.5 - Xia Zhang, China.
125.5 - Olga Lugo, Venezuela.
134 - Brigette Sieffert, France.
143 - Akiki lijima, Japan.
154 - Yayi Urano, Japan.
165 - Dongfen Liu, China.
Team - Japan.
Outstanding Wrestler - Xiue Zhong, China.
Most Falls Trophy - Xiue Zhong, China.
Fastest Fall - Young Ku Jee. Korea. N.C.A.A. Champions
118 lbs. - Jeff Prescott, Penn State.
126 - Jason Kelber, Nebraska.
134 - Tom Brands, Iowa.
142 - Scott Collins, West Va.
150 - Matt Demaray, Wisconsin.
158 - Pat Smith, Oklahoma St.
167 - Mark Reiland, Iowa.
177 - Marty Morgan, Minnesota.
190 - Paul Keysaw, Cal State Bakersfield.
Heavyweight - Jon Llewellyn, Illinois.
Team - Iowa. YACHTING
World Championships
Tornado - Giorgio Zuccoli and Angelo Glisoni, Italy.
Lechner-men - M. Quintin, France.
Lechner-women - P. Way, Britain.
Europe - Carole Reitzer, France.
Finn - Mark David Lammens, Canada.
Star - Roberto Benennati and Mario Salani, Italy.
Soling - Larry Klein, Ron Rosenberg and Chris Redman, United States.


Dressing Up for That Big Step From '91 to '92
There's a wide choice this year in New Year's Eve wear.
Short, knee-baring hems fit almost all occasions; they were seen at fall dinner dances, auctions and theater parties.
The evening suit in satin or velvet, often multicolored, is back.
Short dresses were worn to the most formal parties.
Some of the newest dresses were separates, such as a cashmere sweater with a short pointed-hem skirt, great for dancing.


What Axl Rose Lost, What Madonna Loves And What the Future Holds for Rock-and-Roll
Large Hint to Radio Programmers -- The Lollapalooza Tour, headlined by Jane's Addiction, packed arenas by presenting an assortment of art-rock, psychedelia, rap, hard-core and collegiate rock.
Most of the groups had rarely been heard on commercial radio stations; some, never.
Suffering Artiste -- W. Axl Rose can't bear to start a concert on time or end it without lengthy tirades about the press -- except in St.
Louis where he grew so upset about someone taking his picture that he stopped the show, sparking a riot that injured 60 people and caused $200,000 in damages.
Rose said afterward he couldn't go back on stage because he had lost a contact lens.


Biloxi's Tale of Murder, Extortion and Racy Photos
When a judge and his wife were found slain in gangland fashion in their home here four years ago, suspicion immediately fell on a loosely knit criminal group the authorities call the "Dixie Mafia" or the "Cornbread Cosa Nostra."
But members of the organization, which operates mainly in the states that once made up the Confederacy, were adhering to a code of silence like that of the actual Mafia, with which they have no formal ties.
Thus, as promising leads turned into dead ends, it appeared the slayings would become yet another unsolved crime in this coastal city that is sometimes called "Byzantium by the Sea."


Cut Social Security Tax to Boost Spending
To the Editor:
Recent economic columns disdain tax cutting as a counter to the recession.
The Federal Government, according to this view, would poorly select and tardily deploy the tax-cut weapon.
While the blundering of politicians during a Presidential election year is surely to be feared, one must nevertheless respect the ability of Congress to implement certain economic policy options.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
CAMELS ARE EASY, COMEDY'S HARD By Roy Blount Jr. Villard, $21.


DON'T TELL
I was concerned to hear Mansnerus say now, 18 years later, that she "did the right thing" by keeping quiet.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 gives women (and men) the legal right to be free not only from sexual harassment and sexual discrimination in the work place, but also from retaliation.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the courts have vigorously enforced these rights.
R.
GAULL SILBERMAN Vice Chairman, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Washington


Q and A
To France's Wine Regions
Q.
Could you give names of agencies that offer tours of wine-growing areas of France? -- Mary Flanagan, Port Washington, L.I.


From the Safety Of the Press Box
To the Sports Editor:
George Vecsey closes ranks with his fellow columnists in attacking Giant Coach Ray Handley ("Every Coach Needs a Lift Sometimes," The Times, Dec. 1).


Denser, Faster, Cheaper: The Microchip in the 21st Century
THEOLOGIANS once debated how many angels could dance on the head of a pin.
Today, designers of semiconductor chips are facing their own vexing question: just how many transistors can fit on a tiny flake of silicon?
No one knows for sure, nor is likely to until well into the 21st century.
But it is clear that the number, already huge, is continuing to grow and at a geometric rate with no end in sight.
It now stands at 4 million for the typical commercially available silicon memory chip and is almost guaranteed to reach 256 million by the turn of the century.


Claudia Siegel To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard S. Brenner of Wayne, N.J., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Brenner's daughter Claudia Siegel to Edward John Figelman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard J. Figelman of Setauket, L.I.
The prospective bride is also a daughter of the late Richard D. Siegel.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Siegel and her fiance both graduated from Dickinson College.
Ms.
Siegel, 28 years old, is a senior marketing representative with Shaw Data Services in New York.
Mr.
Figelman, 28, has an M.B.A. from Hofstra University and is a regional sales manager for Fabric Resources International in Great Neck, L.I.


Dr. Nicole Kafka to Wed R. S. Foote
Dr. and Mrs.
Ernest Kafka of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Dr.
Nicole Jeanne Kafka to Richard Stuart Foote, a son of Col.
Edward P. Foote of the Air Force, retired, and Mrs.
Foote of Carmel Valley, Calif.
A September wedding is planned.
Dr.
Kafka, 29 years old, graduated cum laude from Harvard University and has an M.D. from Cornell University.
She is a surgical resident at New York University Hospital.
Her father, the past president of the New York Psychoanalytic Society, is in private practice in New York.
Her mother, Barbara Kafka, is the cookbook author.


Miss Bequary To Wed in June
Victor and Sandra Bequary of Litchfield, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Christine Ann Bequary to Brian Richard McGovern, a son of Richard and Adrienne McGovern of Oyster Bay Cove, L.I.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Bequary, 23 years old, is an teacher at the Center School in Litchfield.
She graduated from Fordham University.
Her father is the general manager of Stephen's Auto Mall Center, a car dealership in Bristol, Conn.
Her mother is an administrative assistant at Litchfield High School.


Making a Differnce; Playing Rough With G.M.
STEPHEN P. YOKICH is a man on the spot.
Vice president of the United Auto Workers in charge of relations with the General Motors Corporation, he must decide whether to negotiate changes in the union's contract with a struggling G.M. or sit things out.
For the moment, Mr.
Yokich seems unwilling to help G.M. cut costs in the wake of its Dec. 18 announcement of a three-year plan to close 21 plants and eliminate about 50,000 union jobs.
Indeed, he fired off an angry response, blaming management for caving in to Wall Street.
And he specifically said in an interview Friday that he is abiding by the contract and expects G.M. to do the same.


Amy Liebowitz To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Liebowitz of Great Neck, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Amy Liebowitz, to Stephen Ross Glaser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Glaser of Potomac, Md.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Liebowitz, 23 years old, is studying for a doctorate in psychology at American University.
She graduated from Columbia University.
Her father retired as the president of Overseas Associates, an import-export concern in New York.


Ellen Shulman, Student, Is Wed
Ellen Deborah Shulman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David A. Shulman of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Andrew Lowell Judson, a son of Betty Judson of Scarsdale and the late Morris Judson.
Rabbi Arnold Turetsky officiated at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Judson, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and is studying for an M.B.A. degree at Columbia University.
Her father is a partner in the accounting firm of Bennett Kielson Storch &amp; Kremer in White Plains.
Her mother, Louise Shulman, is an assistant manager at the Citibank branch in Eastchester, N.Y.


The Essence of 'Kafkaesque'
SO just what does this adjective "Kafkaesque" mean?
And why does Frederick R. Karl, author of an exhaustive critical biography of Franz Kafka, believe that the word is as misused as it is used?
Kafka is the only 20th-century literary figure whose name "has entered the language in a way no other writer's has," Mr.
Karl says.
But "what I'm against is someone going to catch a bus and finding that all the buses have stopped running and saying that's Kafkaesque. That's not."


Name That Disease
FROM PARALYSIS TO FATIGUE
A History of Psychosomatic Illness in the Modern Era.
By Edward Shorter. 419 pp.
New York: The Free Press. $24.95.


A Show That Asks, Must Jewelry Be Wearable?
IN the current show at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center on Staten Island, metal artists from nine countries were each invited to make one piece of jewelry based on the theme "virgin." Louis Mueller, curator of the show, defined virgin as "something unexplored, fresh, concise and absolute."
The finished pieces could not be categorized as religious or sensual.
Well, maybe there are one or two.


Care Can Keep Holiday Gift Plants Alive
POTS of dwarf conifers and evergreens are often given as gifts.
The little plants are usually decorated with colorful ribbons, tiny bows and packages.
And what is more these gifts are alive and may be planted in the garden.
But the trick now is to keep them alive.
Until the planting season does come -- and it is best to set the young plant out in spring -- keep it cold, that is dormant.
Growth is not to be encouraged at this time of year.
If the garage is unheated and it has a window, this would be a good place to keep the plant.


CAMPUS LIFE: Texas; A Course That Explores Fantasy Lands
The debauchery in the city of Clus rivals that of any college party.
As the pleasure capital of the land of High Thefarie, seven owls preside over unbridled gambling, drinking and sex.
High Thefarie and Clus, of course, are fantasy lands.
But to University of Texas students enrolled in the school's "Introduction to Parageography" course, such make-believe places come vividly alive.


There's a Big Job That Gorbachev Can Still Do; A Positive Development
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 11 report on the lack of a union of minds in the former Soviet Union asks the right questions and reaches many of the right conclusions.
"Yes, there is a Constitution," you write, referring to the heavily amended Brezhnev constitution of 1977.
You say that is hardly the point.


Melissa Russell To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen Russell of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Melissa Beth Russell, to Matthew Evan Rubel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Rubel of Pompano Beach, Fl.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Russell, 28 years old, is the managing director of Bristol Plaza, a residential hotel in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is the chairman of the Celadon Group Inc., a cargo transportation company based in New York.


Miss Hersch to Wed Daniel Meron
Mr. and Mrs.
Ira Hersch of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Rachel Hersch to Daniel Meron, a son of Theodor Meron and Roxandra Meron, both of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Both Miss Hersch, 24 years old, and Mr.
Meron, 26, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and are in their third year of law school there.
Her father is the president of the Fourteen Research Corporation, an institutional investment research concern in New York.


Senior Rates
To the Editor: Having just returned from a seven-week tour of Italy, including a week in Florence, I would like to add some information to Sue Cullinan's interesting article ("What's Doing in Florence," Dec. 1).
She mentions that admission is free for people over 60 at the Galleria dell'Accademia and the Uffizi.
My experience was different; there is no discount or free admission to any of the museums in Italy for American seniors.
There is usually a sign, in Italian, of course, that states that any discount applies either to seniors from European Community countries with corresponding privileges for Italian seniors or, as it was in most places, for Italian seniors only.
This seemed to be strictly enforced; identity cards were always requested and my passport or Medicare card was of no value in this instance.


World Markets; Beware the Fickle Prediction
THE news from many stock markets has been bad lately.
So predictions of rising earnings for companies around the world in 1992 may sound encouraging for investors eager to buy stocks.
But recent history shows that there is good reason to beware of these earnings estimates.
Predictions have a distinct tendency to change, and if they drop, stocks become much less attractive because anticipated price-to-earnings ratios rise as earnings fall.


INSIDE
Tearing Down to Build Up
The 11 survivors of the old Soviet Union are good at destroying the old, but can they cooperate to build something new?
News analysis, page 10.
Legacy of a Chemical Spill
A riverside California town is gripped by arguments over health issues and its own future because of a devastating chemical spill last July.
Page 12.
Evictions at Christmastime
Milwaukee judges, who long declined to evict tenants at Christmas, abandoned the policy this year on constitutional grounds.
Page 12.
Officer Slain Chasing Robber
An off-duty police officer was killed yesterday in a shootout with a robber he spotted holding up a man at a bank cash machine in Manhattan.
Page 21.
News Summary, Page 2 Obituaries, Page 28 Weather, Page 29 Radio, Late TV, Page 43


Ms. Schindler, Student, Is Wed
Sophie Hood Schindler, the daughter of Dr.
Frederick J. Schindler of Fort Washington, Pa., and Sheila Bodine Schindler of Chester Springs, Pa., was married yesterday to Curtis Alba Glovier, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold A. Glovier of McLean, Va.
The Rev.
James Ransom performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in the Chestnut Hill section of Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Glovier, 26 years old, graduated from Princeton University and is studying for an M.B.A. degree at Columbia University.
Her father is a senior research fellow at Rohm &amp; Haas in Fort Washington, the industrial chemicals and plastics company.


There's a Big Job That Gorbachev Can Still Do
To the Editor:
What will Mikhail S. Gorbachev do now that he has stepped aside as President of what was once the Soviet Union and handed over the central ministries to the new Commonwealth of Independent States?


'Weeping Icon' Returned to New York City Church
Five days after it was stolen in an iniquitous holiday season robbery, the Icon of St.
Irene was returned by mail yesterday to a Greek Orthodox church in Queens.
Its jewel-encrusted gold frame was gone, but the renowned "weeping icon" was intact, and to the faithful it was an answer to fervent prayers.
The icon, a Greek monk's 1919 portrait of St.
Irene that gained worldwide notice a year ago when some worshipers saw it weep tears of grief on the eve of the Persian Gulf War, was hand-delivered in plain brown paper about 9 A.M. by a postal worker to Bishop Vikentios of Avlon, the spiritual leader of St.
Irene Chrysovalantou Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Astoria.


To Each His Own
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein speaks of "how little our understanding of  [ Mozart ]  has grown" in the bicentennial year.
How does Mr.
Rothstein know this, given the fact that each listener trying to understand Mozart has different experiences and varying original levels of knowledge?
He himself has come through the year bored and finding what many of us had thought to be beautiful and profound "pious expressions of deep feeling." But this tells us only about Mr.
Rothstein, not about "us."  EDWARD S. HERMAN Penn Valley, Pa.


Dishes to Serve a New Year's Gathering
BEFORE the countdown to 1992 begins, the countdown for that New Year's Eve party or New Year's Day open house has been under way.
What to serve?
New Year's Eve demands elegance and a touch of luxury perhaps.
On New Year's Day, on the other hand, there can be greater informality -- yet a feeling of abundance should prevail.
By making slight adjustments, similar menus can be tailored to fit both occasions.


Schubertiade Taught a Lesson
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein may have had it right when he analyzed his motivation for his article about the Mozart bicentennial: "This may just be a petulant reaction to so much festive sincerity."


In the New Era, a New Realism; As Germany Flexes Its Muscles, The New Europe Goes Along
THAT a shiver would go down the spine of Europe when a reunified Germany started exercising its new political and economic muscle was not surprising.
What is surprising, perhaps, is how the other nations of Europe seem to have accepted German clout as a natural part of the new order of things.
That the Germans can pursue what they see as their own national interests just as vigorously as the French or the British, despite their frequent professions of loyal support for European unity, became clear when Bonn charged ahead with long-delayed plans to give diplomatic recognition to Croatia and Slovenia, leaving the rest of the Europeans scrambling to catch up.
This came only a few days after French and German leaders had tried to persuade the rest of their European Community partners to make more foreign policy decisions together, by consensus.


Volunteers of America Assisting in AIDS Care
CARRYING on a 95-year tradition of addressing contemporary social concerns, the Mid-Hudson division of the Volunteers of America is initiating a respite program for people who care for AIDS and H.I.V. victims.
In a three-pronged effort, the nonprofit organization will recruit and train volunteers, inform other service providers in Westchester, Putnam and Rockland Counties of the new program and "make AIDS victims and their care givers aware that we exist," said Catherine J. Marsh, director of the local Volunteers of America office.


St. John's Dogged by Lethargy
For all of the talk about St.
John's great potential this season -- the nucleus of returning starters, the overwhelming depth at virtually every position and virtuosity of Malik Sealy -- if the Redmen's season ended today, it would be declared a bust.
Despite a 70-53 victory over Fordham on Friday, St.
John's has not convinced anyone -- and is not convinced itself -- that it can hold its own against the nation's elite teams.


David E. Evins, 85, A Designer of Shoes For Ex-First Ladies
David E. Evins, the New York shoe designer whose understated pumps and other shoes have been worn by celebrities and First Ladies since the early 1950's, died early yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 85 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of congestive heart failure, his son, Mathew, said.


A Dog at the End of Its Rope (No, Not That One)
Best Performance by an Animal -- Rusty -- part spitz, pure daredevil -- stands on his hind paws on a rope in "The Will Rogers Follies."
Anticlimax of the Year -- Three years after it was first announced for Broadway, 61 days after it began previews, "Nick and Nora," having canceled its out-of-town tryout and delayed its opening night twice, finally opened and then closed after nine performances.


Wit and Experimentation (Plus Smoke and Metronomes)
Hardest False Nose to Fill -- Shaun O'Brien retired this year from the New York City Ballet, where he had performed for 48 years, most notably as the mad Drosselmeyer and even madder Dr.
Coppelius.
"The Nutcracker" won't be the same without him.
Best (and Possibly Only) Mooner of the Year -- The experimentalist dancer and choreographer Amy Pivar, repeatedly, in her "Not a Confession (a True Story)."


Experiencing the Spirit of Zen
PASS through the weathered wooden gate of Kyoto's huge Daitokuji temple complex, walk along the mud and stone walls of hidden gardens, past the schoolchildren taking a short cut through the old cedars, and at the north end of this neatly manicured realm, turn up a narrow walled path and, to the left, enter the nondescript little gate marked with a faded wooden sign that reads "Zazen."
Inside lies a Japan that few foreigners -- or Japanese, for that matter -- come in contact with these days.
It is not just an entry to an exquisite Zen Buddhist temple and handsome garden, of which there are many in Kyoto, but to a place where zazen -- sitting meditation -- is a way of life and not a cultural curiosity.


Currency; Dollar Mixed In Light Trading
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen125.92
127.53
134.85
per Dollar
German Mark1.5188
1.5365
1.4936
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.1605
1.1563
1.1598
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.8742
1.8580
1.9275
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$353.75
$358.50
$393.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Funds Pared, Civil Courts Fight Rise In Backlog
THE axiom that justice delayed is justice denied is being put to the test on Long Island as backlogs pile up in civil courts at a time of state budget cutbacks.
Some lawyers in Nassau and Suffolk estimate that a civil case filed in State Supreme Court may now take up to six years to be heard, mostly because of state-imposed reductions in court personnel.


A Meditation; History's Being Written, But It's Lives That Matter
THE rides are closed, guarded by snappish dogs.
The broad boardwalk is almost deserted, gulls scream their elemental hunger, the air smells of briny decay.
This narrow, desolate sand bar at the foot of Brooklyn, five miles long and nine eternal miles from Manhattan, feels like the end of the world.
I have come to Coney Island to walk in the winter wind and try to make sense of this remarkable year.


Animal League Called Self-Serving
After reading "Rescuing Stray Pets From Other Regions With Long Island Adoptions"  [ Dec. 8 ] , one can only conclude that the North Shore Animal League is engaged in a cynical, self-serving and counterproductive exercise which is the antithesis of everything that responsible people have been striving for years to achieve.
As anyone who cares about animals and has the slightest acquaintance with the situation well knows, the No. 1 pet problem on Long Island is overpopulation.
Simply put, there are too many animals and too few homes to go around.
Nine out of 10 animals born here are destined to be destroyed as surplus and unwanted.
Importing more into our area does nothing to solve the problem; on the contrary, it only exacerbates it.


Wall Street; Clouded Vision and Purple Hearts
IT is a Wall Street tradition for outstanding analysts to be honored each year by inclusion in the "All-American" team named each year by Institutional Investor magazine.
But prestigious as they are, those awards do not seem to do justice to the marvelous three-ring circus that is the world of Wall Street research.
There is no category, for example, for "the best solo performance by a battered bear in a bull market" -- a prize that should go, hands down, to Michael Murphy, editor of the Overpriced Stock Service newsletter in Half Moon Bay, Calif.
Mr.
Murphy was wrong about the market's overall direction -- in August, his newsletter advised: "Short Everything!" He was dead right, though, about Cascade International, the little Florida-based retailing chain whose chief, Victor Incendy, vanished before a public meeting on Nov. 20 at which he was to answer Mr.
Murphy's complaints that the company's financial reports were inaccurate. (Cascade filed for bankruptcy court protection on Dec. 16, still unable to determine its assets and liabilities, and still unable to locate Mr. Incendy.)


Recalling a Year of Mostly Pluses
EVEN as we prepare to greet the New Year, it might be useful to look back at some of the cultural events that brightened (or dampened) the Westchester music scene in 1991.
Among other happenings, for instance, the county gained a shiny new chamber orchestra: the Hutchinson River Chamber Players.
Founded and directed by Jeffrey Levine, a Pelham resident, the ensemble made its debut a month ago.


Real Life Riveted Viewers, From the Gulf to Palm Beach
Fatal Attractions -- The most compelling television of the year owed nothing to programming geniuses.
Present Shock -- The ability of a picture to shock millions and influence policy was powerfully demonstrated by the outraged reaction to the scene, run over and over on all-news programs, of white Los Angeles police officers beating a black man.
Similarly, the pictures of Kurdish refugees in Iraq, shown night after night on the networks, moved Americans and forced Washington to come belatedly to the Kurds' aid.


'Annie Get Your Gun' Revived in Elmsford
IT begins invitingly.
"There's No Business Like Show Business" is played as a harmonica solo.
Members of the orchestra, wearing flannel shirts and vests, fit right in, taking their places on stage left.
The up-tempo music sounds terrific.
Dropcloths on the furniture arouse curiosity.
Then a pianist gets up when a rooster that has been shot lands on his head.
Before long, it's all too clear that Scott Harris, the director of the Westchester Broadway Theater production of "Annie Get Your Gun" is going to have to keep coming up with visual notions to spruce up, or divert attention from the archaic presumptions of a book that offends modern sensibilities.


Allstate Seeks Big Rate Increase in New Jersey
Opening another round in what has become the most sustained battle of Gov.
Jim Florio's two-year-old administration, the state's leading insurer, Allstate, has gone to court to seek a 42 percent increase in the insurance rates for nearly one million high-risk drivers.
Lawyers for Allstate and the Chubb insurance companies filed papers on Friday asking the state Appellate Division of Superior Court to approve the rate adjustment.
A three-judge panel is expected to hear arguments on Monday in New Brunswick.


It's Not Who You Know, It's What You Know: A Culture Quiz
You don't have to endow a wing at the Met or be a Broadway angel to prove your love of the arts anymore; just measure your connoisseurship with this quiz on the milestones and millstones of 1991.
No. 2 pencils ready?
1. What bird laid Hollywood's biggest egg this year?


Doing Business
In preparation for her nomination last week as a Secretary of Commerce, Barbara Franklin has done all the right stuff.
Ms.
Franklin, who in 1964 became one of the first women to earn a Harvard M.B.A., got her first White House job in 1971, when President Richard M. Nixon made her the woman in charge of recruiting more women.
After that, Mr.
Nixon appointed her to the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
In 1984, she opened her own business -- as a consultant to consumer products companies.
She now sits on the boards of seven big corporations.
But not least among the talents that seemed to catch Mr.
Bush's eye is her fund-raising ability -- last month she was co-chairman of a dinner that raised almost $1.2 million for Mr.
Bush's re-election campaign, and in recent years, she has given various Republican organizations and candidates around $60,000 from her own pocket.
All in all, said President Bush, she is "a leader and a role model for many women in business."


How Chinese Artists Express Themselves
Reading "Chinese Emigre Influences," I was appalled by the author'a audacity to comment on a subject about which she was basically ignorant.
The organizer of the art exhibition was apparently very experienced, for the eight artists he/she selected were indeed among the best from the mainland, Taiwan and Hong Kong, and their subject matters and styles were quite representative.


Stamps
Noncollectors often wish to sell stamp collections that they have inherited or that they may have abandoned years ago.
Indeed, so many letters and calls have come in from them lately that some advice needs to be repeated.
Collectors should resolve to leave in a prominent place, with their stamps or other important papers, specific instructions to their survivors on how a collection can be disposed of.


Yeltsin Signs Law on Land Reform as Part of Wider Economic Plan
Pushing economic reform further, President Boris N. Yeltsin signed an executive order today to begin agricultural land reform next month across Russia that would give collective farm workers greater rights to buy and sell individual plots and give nonfarmers smaller patches as country gardens.
The new law represents the best compromise that Mr.
Yeltsin could get from the Russian Parliament, which is wary about the unknowns of private ownership inherent in his own far more radical plan for dismantling the state's farm collectivism with sweeping market freedoms.


Measuring What You're Missing
MUTUAL fund total return figures assume that all distributions by the fund are reinvested in additional fund shares.
What happens if you don't?
You'll be very, very disappointed, according to a recent study by Merrill Lynch in conjunction with CDA Investment Technologies Inc., in Rockville, Md.


A Bad Time for Men
MEN WHO WOULD BE GOOD
A Novella and Six Stories.
By Gordon Weaver. 246 pp.
Chicago: TriQuarterly Books.
Cloth, $18.95.
Paper, $9.95.


Falcons Frustrate Saints
The Saints came onto the field here this afternoon as the only team in the National Football League that had never won a playoff game.
The Falcons made sure that New Orleans kept that distinction.
With 2 minutes 41 seconds to play, Atlanta receiver Michael Haynes ran a short slant pattern and caught a pass in front of Saints cornerback Milton Mack, then outran the rest of the New Orleans secondary to score on a 61-yard pass play, breaking a 20-20 tie and giving Atlanta a 27-20 victory before 68,794 fans at the Louisiana Superdome.
The Falcons will play the Redskins at Washington next week in the second round of the National Conference playoffs.


A May Wedding For Jill A. Peklo
Jill Ashley Peklo, a daughter of Jaye C. Peklo of Atlanta and Douglas A. Peklo of Bethesda, Md., and Philip Starr Lawrence, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Lawrence of Mount Kisco, N.Y., are engaged to be married in May.
Miss Peklo, 26 years old, is an associate at J.P.
Morgan Securities Inc. in New York and a graduate of Duke University.
Her father is president of his own management consulting firm in Bethesda and her mother is a technical librarian at Kimberly-Clark Corporation in Roswell, Ga.


Lisa Eyles Wed To Gary Beeson
Lisa Aina Eyles, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David L. Eyles of Pittsburgh, Pa., was married yesterday to William Garrett Beeson, a son of Willard H. Beeson of Mexico City and Yvonne Beeson of Coconut Creek, Fla.
The Rev.
David Gleason, a Lutheran minister, officiated at Heinz Memorial Chapel at the University of Pittsburgh.
Mrs.
Eyles Beeson, 26 years old, is an associate at Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company in San Francisco and a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a former vice chairman of the Mellon Bank Corporation and is now a banking consultant in Pittsburgh.


McCaskill Cashes In
KIRK McCASKILL agreed to a three-year contract with the Chicago White Sox yesterday worth between $6 million and $7 million.
McCaskill, a 30-year-old right-hander, was 10-19 with a 4.26 earned run average in 30 starts for the California Angels last season.
However, the Angels scored just 16 runs in his 19 losses.


Quantify the Impact of a Name
To the Editor:
"Guarding the Power of a Brand Name" (Forum, Dec. 1), was interesting, and the author, David Aaker, certainly raised an important question when he asked why some companies treasure brand equity and others disregard it.
In seeking to answer that question, Mr.
Aaker omitted perhaps the most significant reason why so many companies fail to properly manage brand equity.


Miss Towt Affianced
Alexander Towt of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., and Mrs.
F.
Andrew Foord of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kimberly Alison Towt to Louis Andrew Gautier, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis J. Gautier of Ridgewood, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Towt, 29 years old, is a district sales manager for the Ilford Photo Corporation, which makes professional photographic products in Paramus, N.J.
She graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University.
Mr.
Gautier, 27, is an associate in securities trust and information services at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.
He graduated from Bucknell University.


Boy Makes Way to Radio City Stage
LAST summer, when 9-year-old Christopher Boyce of Rutherford was still 8, he danced his way onto the scorecards of the Dance Educators of America and was declared national winner of the organization's Mr.
Smallfry, U.S.A. competition.
A few months later, on a day off from school, Christopher auditioned for his first major role.
Now, the reigning Mr.
Smallfry spends his time cavorting with a well-known troupe of long-legged dancers, two ice skaters, a covey of elves and a small menagerie of camels, donkeys and miniature horses before an audience of thousands of other youngsters and their parents.


Connecticut Guide
'LYSISTRATA'
"Lysistrata," the classic comedy by Aristophanes, is to be presented by the Danbury Actors Repertory Theater Friday through Jan. 25.
The 20-member company will perform a 1964 translation by Douglas Parker, with some contemporary innovations.
The traditional Greek chorus will be replaced by an original score that contains musical styles of the past 40 years.
Stan Wietrzychowski, former composer for the Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport, has set the lyrics of the translation to doo wop, rap, calypso, country and other popular forms, recorded on multitrack tape that simulates an orchestral background for the singers.


Audrey S. Weg To Wed in May
May wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth E. Weg of Princeton, N.J., for their daughter, Audrey Suzanne Weg, and Michael N. Schaus, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Schaus of Farmington, Conn., and Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Miss Weg, 24 years old, is a first-year law student at New York University.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is the president of the Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceutical Group in Lawrenceville, N.J.


Perkins Takes Post
RAY PERKINS, the former coach of the New York Giants, the University of Alabama and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, agreed Saturday to become head coach at Arkansas State.
Perkins, 50 years old, replaces AL KINCAID, who was fired after a 1-10 season and a 4-17-1 two-year record.


Rating New York
To the Editor:
The report on our survey "The Busines America Real Estate Monitor" (Dec. 15) gave the damaging impression that we had something to hide because we would not reveal the identity of the companies we had surveyed.


Poor Seekers of Good Life Flock to California, as Middle Class Moves Away; Dream Gone Sour: Pollution and High Costs
The Southern California of Guy Falconer's youth was a playland of orange groves, open beaches and suburban adventures.
The air in Fullerton, southeast of Los Angeles, had a sun-washed glow.
He was born at about the same time as neighboring Disneyland, spent weekends at the beach, was student-body president in high school and went to college at California State University at Fullerton.
He wanted to coach high school sports, rear a family and buy a house.


Islanders Beat Clock and Rangers
It was a battle between two comeback-minded squads, and there was probable cause, once the Rangers began a third-period browbeating of the Islanders at Nassau Coliseum, that the hosts would be fortunate to emerge with a tie.
Given the disparate stature of the two teams involved, the fact that the Rangers repaired a 4-2 third-period deficit seemed almost preordained.
But a blundering, off-speed shot by Tom Fitzgerald with just under three seconds left in regulation time earned the Islanders a stunning, and sudden, 5-4 victory.


Bigger Than Life, Yet Buffeted by Life
Two cartoon characters who might have sprung from the Saturday morning boys' TV ghetto, Tragic Magic and Irony Mike, not only dominated sports-chat this year, but crossed over the boundary lines of their games into our everyday lives.
One character was a smiling hero, the other a sullen villain.
Pick your dichotomies: Good and Evil, Beauty and the Brute, victim and perpetrator.
Just for once, can't it be that simple?


A Suicide in Amherst?
THIS BRIEF TRAGEDY
Unraveling the Todd-Dickinson Affair.
By John Evangelist Walsh.
Illustrated. 230 pp.
New York: Grove Weidenfeld. $19.95.


Nintendo Is The Only Choice
To the Sports Editor:
The Knicks have bought the services of Patrick Ewing and the Mets have bought Bobby Bonilla.
But has either team thought about "buying" the next generation of fans?


Anne Towe to Marry George Egan
Mr. and Mrs.
Rolf H. Towe of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Neely Anne Towe, to George MacAllister Egan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Brennan Egan of Fox Chapel, Pa.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Towe is 26 years old and is known as Anne.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and expects to receive an M.D. from Yale University in May.
Her father is a managing partner of the Clipper Group, a merchant banking management concern, in New York.
Her mother, the Rev.
Neely Towe, is the pastor of the Stanwich Congregational Church in Greenwich.


POSTINGS: A Cast of 100; 34th Street In '92 Uplift
Over 100 people will be starting new jobs on Jan. 1, when the 34th Street Partnership, one of the nation's largest business improvement districts, comes into existence in mid-Manhattan.
The employees -- private security guards, sanitation workers and tourist information personnel -- have been hired and trained in the last few months to work in the area from Park Avenue to 10th Avenue from 31st Street to 35th Street and encompassing Herald Square, Penn Station and the Empire State Building.


Harbaugh Takes Off Pajamas and Puts on the Pads
Jim Harbaugh climbed out of a hospital bed today and said he had no intention of allowing the flu to keep him out of Sunday's playoff game between the Chicago Bears and the Dallas Cowboys.
Bears trainer Fred Cato sent Harbaugh to Lake Forest Hospital on Friday after the quarterback showed up for practice with a fever and dehydration and weariness from lack of sleep.


Visas Continue For One-Time Soviet Republics
Now that the Soviet Union has come to an end, where do travelers apply for a visa?
And do you need two visas to travel from one independent republic to another?
So far arrangements for obtaining visas have not been altered, according to travel officials who have been fielding such questions recently.
"The political changes are not really disturbing tourism," said Betty Vaughan, a spokeswoman for Intourist.
"Visitors can get a visa from the former Soviet Embassy in Washington or Soviet consulates and visit anywhere, with just one visa -- except the Baltic states -- provided they have reserved a hotel room." Visas for Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia can be obtained at their borders.
Bhavani Chandramouli of General Tours, a specialist in Soviet travel, said her company had not encountered visa problems, despite a perception of confusion among people calling in.
Most current General Tours trips are to Moscow and St.
Petersburg, both in the Russian republic.
Travel officials believe that visas will still be relatively easy to obtain now that the new Commonwealth of Independent States has taken power from the old Soviet Union.


Technology; Loping Toward the Death Star, With Every Sense but Smell
FOR years, airlines and the military have used flight simulators to train pilots for equipment failure or bad weather.
But lately, the still-evolving technology has been put to use to allow novices to accompany a fighter pilot on a strafing run over the Death Star or to ride a flying sports car down the throat of a tyrannosaurus rex.
In some ways, this is easier to simulate than landing a 747 in a fog-bound airport.
A real-life simulator, after all, must measure up to the operators' previous experience.
But the fantasy rides -- though called "flight simulators" by amusement park designers -- can take some poetic license.


Burmese Military Increases Attacks on Detained Opposition Leader
The Burmese military leadership, in an unusual escalation of its verbal attacks on the imprisoned opposition leader, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, said this week that the country would "never accept" her as a leader and asserted that nations pressing the Nobel laureate's case were "bullying our country, threatening our country."
Until Maj.
Gen.
Khin Nyunt, a senior leader of the junta that rules Myanmar, formerly Burma, made the remarks in a speech broadcast on state radio, the Burmese public had not been officially told that Mrs.
Aung San Suu Kyi won the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize in October for her nonviolent campaign for democracy.
But short-wave radio broadcasts from abroad spread the word, setting off student rallies several weeks ago inher support.
Universities Closed
The Government, which put down pro-democracy demonstrations in September 1988 with barrages of gunfire that killed hundreds, responded to the recent protests by closing the nation's universities indefinitely.


Scant Unity for Old Soviet Republics
In proclaiming their new Commonwealth of Independent States, the 11 survivors of the old union showed again that they are very good at destroying the old.
Beginning Monday, they will have the chance to show if they have learned how to cooperate in building something new.
The signs are not auspicious.
Within days of the proclamation of the commonwealth a week ago, Russia's President, Boris N. Yeltsin, was occupying Mikhail S. Gorbachev's old Kremlin office and the Soviet flag was nowhere to be seen.


The U.N.'s Happy Surprise
The United Nations has reason to thank the soft-spoken Peruvian who was almost accidentally chosen Secretary General a decade ago.
Javier Perez de Cuellar got the job because an exhausted Security Council could not agree on anybody else.
Insiders knew him as a careful and competent diplomat, but to outsiders he seemed a colorless civil servant with a deadpan expression and, for Anglophones, a difficult name.
As he finishes his second term in a thankless job, it is obvious that the world was lucky indeed.
Mr.
Perez de Cuellar has achieved high-profile results with low-profile diplomacy.
Witness the freeing of Western hostages, the winding down of wars in Cambodia and El Salvador, the withdrawal of Soviet forces from Afghanistan and Namibia's transition to independence -- all brought about with the U.N.'s intercession.


Chaco Canyon
To the Editor: Your piece on Chaco Canyon (Sept. 22) was welcome, especially to one who has been there many times.
While the author, David Laskin, caught the mystery of Chaco, and some of the loneliness, the traveler should be advised not to stay at the trading post, but to bring a tent and use the park's campgrounds.
Only when you see the sun go down against the salmon-red cliffs, view the ruins in moonlight, and hear the coyotes wail do you catch the real loneliness.


Matching Wints With Duck and Geese
"WE try to look like a clump of grass," explained Joe Damiano, as he and his 12-year-old son, Christopher, matched wits with the winter ducks and geese in Croton Bay from their floating blind on the Hudson River.
Water fowling is a waiting game.
For hours they waited, hunkered down in their hunting skiff, a 17-foot aluminum boat draped in camouflage curtains.
The father-and-son team was armed with shotguns, Federal duck stamps, hunting licenses and a plan.


Style Makers; Francesco Borghese, Perfumer
Francesco Borghese is the chief executive of Orlane U.S.A., the American branch of the noted French skin-care company.
He is the son of Princess Marcella Borghese, who has made her own mark on the business.
But his involvement in the industry goes deeper.
He has his own company, La Perfumerie, and through it is trying to expand the ways Americans use fragrances.
"Perfume should do more than just sit in a bottle and look good," he said.
Hence, the "One" line, a series of six fragrances, each based on an exotic locale: "Malaga," "Mandalay," "Indochine," "Provence," "Capri" and "Emerald Isle." They can be used as bath oils, body lotions and potpourri extenders.


The Sense of Triumph Fades, Uncertainty and Unease Grow
FOR the United States, 1991 began with victory in the brief, vivid war in the Persian Gulf, and it ended with victory in the long, convoluted struggle to contain Communism.
Congratulating himself, his predecessors and the American people in a Christmas Eve homily, President Bush said success had been won by the "millions of Americans who supported their country and a strong defense under nine Presidents."
But the twin triumphs of the old year, however splendid, offer no guarantee of stability in the new.


A Shapely 'Beauty' (But Forget the 'Giselle')
The Power and the Glory -- Peter Martins's staging of "The Sleeping Beauty" compressed a $2.8 million spectacle into a brilliant esthetic statement about the line of descent from Marius Petipa's classicism to the New York City Ballet's neo-classicism.
Tico-Tico -- Paul Taylor hit the spot with "Company B," an instant masterpiece that looks at the pain and innocence of the 1940's via the Andrews Sisters; the Houston Ballet and the Paul Taylor Dance Company put the piece at the top of the charts.


POSTINGS: New Name in Fort Lee; Deep Discounts and a Facelift for Condos
Sutton Heights, an 18-unit condominium complex in Fort Lee, N.J., had not opened when the developer, Jomalt Inc., of Bergen County, defaulted last spring to its construction lender, First Savings and Loan Association of Little Falls, N.J.
Last month, after a modest facelift and deep discounts on the prices -- nearly 50 percent off the original asking prices of $400,000 to $450,000 -- the complex opened.
Since then the bank has had sales contracts on half the units in the complex on Palisades Avenue and Route 5.


What Business Leaders Predict for 1992
IN assessing the county's economic prospects for the new year, the mood of Westchester business leaders is somber.
In interviews with eight people across a spectrum of the business community, there was no expectation that the economy would show much improvement in 1992.
Although they cited a few reasons for optimism, they suggested that the tools for ending the recession were woefully inadequate.
S. J. Schulman, president of the Westchester County Association:


Camera
In the last decade, the photographic calendar has become both a major industry and a source of inspiration.
Picture calendars for 1992 are more plentiful than ever, and they vary in quality of reproduction and picture selection.
One in particular is worthy of special attention: the 1992 Martin Munkacsi calendar produced by the Ilford Company, a subsidiary of the International Paper Imaging Products division.


Maintaining and Restoring Fine Slabs of Marble
MARBLE, although durable, requires special care to remain beautiful.
If the right products are used, cleaning marble already in good condition is easy, and even rejuvenating neglected marble usually is not too difficult.
But polishing dulled marble and mending chipped or broken pieces are generally jobs for experts.
To clean marble, use detergents and other products specifically formulated for it.
These are available from marble and janitorial supply companies and some tile stores.


What's Coming Up
FOR A TIME, THE POSSIBILITY OF change appeared bleak.
No matter how relaxed the message being sent down runways, guys continued to hide behind weight-of-the-world wide shoulders and corporate-raider tailoring, as if these were keys to the executive Stairmaster.
But this past fall there were flashes of hope that men might be getting the hint after all, and so, for spring, men's wear designers, like ascetics discovering early Aretha records, are responding with ideas full of ease and delight.
Karl Lagerfeld giveth (with newly notched lapels on four-button suits) and Andrew Fezza taketh away (collarless shirts and wonderfully slouchy jackets).
Ronaldus Shamask joins Barneys New York with a cheeky new collection.
And A/X, Giorgio Armani's smart-aleck "Gap Italiano," is brilliantly concise and shrewdly priced.
"Men do change," John Steinbeck wrote, "but change comes like a little wind." Ahh.
A breeze none too soon.


Hope Dims for Saving a Millbrook Mansion
DECAY chips relentlessly at Halcyon Hall, a vast and vacant 200-room mansion built in the Tudor style that for nearly a century has towered over the rustic village homes of Millbrook, N.Y, like a lord over his serfs.
But the market is weak and government agencies are feuding, and a result is that the building may be beyond repair -- assuming there is anyone ready to undertake that task.
Halcyon Hall may become one of the more dramatic examples in the Northeast of the architectural losses in prospect as agencies like the Resolution Trust Corporation, charged with disposing of thousands of foreclosed properties as efficently and economically as possible, overwhelm other agencies seeking to preserve these symbols of the nation's history.


Now If It Only Had the Money; New York Finally Issues Its Shopping List for State Parks
WHEN voters narrowly rejected New York State's $1.975 billion environmental bond act in November 1990, officials conceded that one reason for the defeat was public confusion over precisely how the state would spend the money.
This was especially true for the $800 million to be set aside to protect environmentally sensitive land.
But with the release earlier this month of a 210-page draft report, "Conserving Open Space in New York," which is filled with maps from every corner of the state showing 1,300 parcels of mountains, forests, shores, aquifers and other land the report said should be preserved for future generations, no one is likely to suggest anymore that the state does not have a plan.


One-Fourth of Stony Point Police Face Drug Tests Under New Plan
Under an unusual agreement announced last week, almost a quarter of the police officers of the Rockland County town of Stony Point are to be tested for illegal drugs every month -- a greater percentage than anywhere else in the state.
The New York State Director of Criminal Justice, Richard H. Girgenti, said he did not know whether it would ever be practical to test such a large percentage of officers in major cities, but he said the Stony Point program should be studied.


Bridge
In many areas of the game modern players, as a group, are much more sophisticated and knowledgeable than their parents and grandparents were.
But in one obscure corner this is not true.
The number of enthusiasts who enjoy tackling double-dummy problems, which were routinely attached to bridge columns early in the century, has dwindled to a precious few.
Even looking at all four hands, a well-composed double-dummy problem may take an expert an hour or two to solve, or prove altogether too difficult.
Before trying to solve the diagramed deal in double-dummy, with South playing four hearts after an opening trump lead, consider that it was intended as a single-dummy problem.
Twenty world-class players, competing in the Pamp Par world contest in Geneva in October 1990 were expected to ferret out the solution in single-dummy, looking at the North-South hands on a computer screen.
History does not record how many succeeded, but the number was probably very small.


'Culture Wars'
To the Editor:
Sometimes it is awfully simplistic to say no more than that a subject is complex.
A case in point is the Rev.
Andrew M. Greeley's review of James Davison Hunter's "Culture Wars: The Struggle to Define America" (Nov. 24).
Of course all Roman Catholics do not think alike, all Baptists do not think alike, all secularists do not think alike, and I suppose that not even all the readers of Andrew Greeley think alike.
Having trotted out the truism that America is a large and various country, Father Greeley concludes that Mr.
Hunter "falls substantially short of making a convincing case for the realignment he thinks he sees."


Carol Martin to Wed
Carol Marie Martin, a registered nurse, and Dr.
Glenn M. Bolton, an anesthesiologist, are engaged to be married in August.
Ms.
Martin, 30 years old, graduated from the University of Iowa and is a nurse at the University of Colorado Hospital in Denver.
She is a daughter of Patricia Martin of Marion, Iowa, and the late Kenneth Martin.
Dr.
Bolton, 33, graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and received a medical degree from New York University.
He is in private practice in Denver.
He is the son of Sy and Louise Bolton of Jamaica Estates, Queens.


Care Can Keep Holiday Gift Plants Alive
POTS of dwarf conifers and evergreens are often given as gifts.
The little plants are usually decorated with colorful ribbons, tiny bows and packages.
And what is more these gifts are alive and may be planted in the garden.
But the trick now is to keep them alive.
Until the planting season does come -- and it is best to set the young plant out in spring -- keep it cold, that is dormant.
Growth is not to be encouraged at this time of year.
If the garage is unheated and it has a window, this would be a good place to keep the plant.


Pan Am Demise Hits Caribbean
THE demise of Pan American World Airways on Dec. 4, on the brink of the big season in the Caribbean, has created a pinch for flights there and back.
The airline had held onto its South and Central American business despite declaring bankruptcy Jan. 8, 1991, and also its routes to the Caribbean, Mexico and Bermuda, three vacation areas where it had a longstanding reputation and where it focused its hopes for rebuilding.
But Pan Am never made it into the season of bigger cash flow.
And the timing of its expiration has affected both northern tourists and Caribbean nationals returning home for the holidays.
In the jargon of the industry, lack of lift is affecting some islands and cruise vessels that sail from island ports.


Q and A
Transferring Rent Rights Question: My rent-stabilized studio apartment has seven months left on the lease.
There is a vacant one-bedroom apartment in the building with a rent lower than mine.
Can my landlord refuse to rent me the larger apartment? . . .
Dale La Shomb, Manhattan


Neediest Cases Medical Van Offers Youth Healthy Start
Why can't Johnny read?
Sara Monajem of The Children's Aid Society attributes it to blurry vision that makes words look like pictures.
She attributes it to cavities that hurt so much it's hard to think of anything else.


Cheryl Adams, A Lawyer, Wed
Cheryl Anne Adams, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wilsie H. Adams Jr. of Potomac, Md., was married yesterday to John Patrick Falvey Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Falvey of Gaithersburg, Md.
The Rev.
William Metzdorf performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Mercy Church in Potomac.
Mrs.
Falvey, 29 years old, is an associate at the law firm of Akin, Gump, Hauer &amp; Feld in Washington.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
She and her husband, an Amherst College graduate, both received law degrees from the Georgetown University Law Center.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of McKenna &amp; Cuneo in Washington.


Dr. Philip Wey Weds Elizabeth Lies
Elizabeth Heffley Lies, a daughter of Dr.
Bert A. Lies Jr. of Santa Fe, N.M., and Jacqueline B. Castle of Buffalo, was married yesterday to Dr.
Philip David Wey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James S. Wey of Needham Heights, Mass.
The Rev.
Christine Chakoian officiated at the Fourth Presbyterian Church in Chicago.
Mrs.
Wey, 26 years old, is studying for a master's degree in public administration at New York University.
She graduated from Brown University, as did the bridegroom.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Santa Fe.
Her mother is an interior designer in Buffalo.


Matt Scudder Is No Degenerate
To the Editor:
I don't know who started the rumor that Lawrence Block's private eye Matt Scudder is "a degenerate" who once murdered a child (Letters, Nov. 24), but it certainly wasn't anyone familiar with the novelist's work.
As Mr.
Block recounts the incident in early novels in the series such as "The Sins of the Fathers" (1976), when Scudder was a policeman one of his shots went wild during a running gun battle and killed a Puerto Rican girl.
As a result of the tragedy Scudder quit the New York Police Department and spent the next several years as a hopeless alcoholic.
In his most recent appearances he has stopped drinking and attends A.A. meetings daily, but his sense of guilt still leads him to drop a decent percentage of his income as an unlicensed P.I. into whatever poor box he happens to be passing.
If this is degeneracy, maybe we don't need another biblical flood quite yet.
FRANCIS M. NEVINS JR.
St.
Louis


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Glen Cove 263,000
57 Dosoris Way  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old center-hall Dutch colonial; dining room, basement, 2-car garage; taxes $4,100.
Hauppauge 217,000
15 Dexter Court  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 20-year-old splanch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, partial basement; taxes $4,000.
Massapequa Park 188,000
45 Mayflower Avenue  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old Cape Cod; family room, basement; taxes $4,500.
Ridge 134,500
12 Pond Lane  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 17-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 1-car garage; taxes $3,800.
Smithtown 235,000
8 Cignet Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 27-year-old colonial; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; taxes $5,600.
Stony Brook 270,000
155 Christian Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 110-year-old Victorian; den, firplace, porch, 1-car garage, barn; taxes $1,950.
OTHER AREAS Wilton, Conn. 930,000
11 Crosswicks Ridge  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 5-year-old colonial; marble fireplace, intricate moldings, 2 acres; taxes $8,755.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 482,500
5 Ludlow Drive
4-bedroom, 3-bath, 60-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, eat-in kitchen, den, greenhouse, playroom; taxes $7,281.
Freehold, N.J. 182,500
81 Eagle Nest Road
4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 10-year-old colonial; fireplace, patio, family room, 2-car garage; taxes $4,425.


More Layoffs at Stake if State Makes Cuts in Aid
LAYOFFS of county government workers mandated by passage of the 1992 budget could exceed the hundreds expected if the state seeks to solve its fiscal problem as it did a year ago, by reducing aid to local communities, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke said last week.
Mr.
O'Rourke, pleased with the few changes imposed by the Board of Legislators on his $1.18 billion no-tax- increase spending plan, said in an interview that the Westchester budget "was based on us not getting hit by Albany any more than we were last June" when state support for schools and local government was slashed.


Human Tides: The Influx in Europe - A special report.; Europeans Look for Ways To Bar Door to Immigrants
The "fortress Europe" that Americans, Japanese and other outsiders fear when the European Community finally becomes a tariff-free, continent-wide market at the end of next year is already being built.
But its walls are intended to keep out people, not commodities.
A flood of people fleeing poverty and political unrest in parts of Eastern Europe, in Africa and in South Asia has combined with years of high unemployment in Europe to inflame social and political tensions not only in European Community countries but in Austria and Switzerland as well.


Louis Bennett, 82, Ex-Dean of Students At Baruch College
Louis Lowell Bennett, a former dean at Bernard M. Baruch College, died on Wednesday in Miami Beach.
He was 82 years old and lived in Miami Beach.
He died of heart failure, his family said.


CAMPUS LIFE: Berkeley; Women's Studies Are Upgraded To a Department
Courses in women's studies at the University of California at Berkeley have come a long way since they were established by a group of graduate students 15 years ago.
The program recently won departmental status, which makes Berkeley the only campus systemwide that offers a graduate program in women's studies.


The Show Was Packed, And So Was the Cafeteria
Man About Town -- Sebastiao Salgado had not one but two one-man shows, and photographs in a third exhibition, at the International Center of Photography in New York.
Endless articles sang his praises; in response, one critic pronounced the work pretentious and, worse yet, too beautiful.
Women About Town -- Annie Leibovitz, Helen Levitt, Mary Ellen Mark, Sheila Metzner and Lisette Model (whose show came to the United States from Canada this year), all with major museum retrospectives.


Miss Christofilis Weds D. A. Geffen
Charlene Wendy Christofilis, a daughter of Wanda Bartos of Pompton Lakes, N.J., and C. Charles Christofilis of West Paterson, N.J., was married yesterday to David Andrew Geffen, the son of Steven B. Geffen of Armonk, N.Y., and the late Carole K. Geffen.
The Rev.
Brian Brennan officiated at St.
Patrick's Cathedral in New York.
Mrs.
Geffen, 28 years old, graduated from Vanderbilt University and received a law degree from Washington and Lee University.
Until recently, she was an associate at the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.
Her father is a senior vice president and the general counsel of Herzog, Heine, Geduld, a New York stockbrokerage.
Her mother is an assistant deputy public defender in Paterson, N.J.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Leaf Sweep
Q.
Each year I have major leaf-raking chores.
Is it O.K. to allow the leaves in the foundation planting areas to remain until spring, or must I remove them now? -- Joseph Gold bloom, Fair Lawn, N.J.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
EVERYBODY WAS KUNG-FU DANCING Chronicles of the Lionized and the Notorious.
By Chet Flippo.
St.
Martin's, Paper, $13.95.


The Local Call Goes Up For Grabs
THE downtown fiber-optic terminal of the Teleport Communications Group Inc. doesn't look like much.
Located 250 feet below the ground in a basement of Manhattan's 2 World Trade Center, it has no wall-sized electronic maps, no banks of flashing lights, no massive control consoles.
There are only aisles of metal racks, each one holding boxes of electronics that are connected to bundles of thin cables sheathed in yellow plastic.
The entire operation, which controls a web of cables beneath the streets of New York and into New Jersey, is monitored by only two or three technicians.
Yet "B-6," named for the basement level on which it is located, is at the forefront of a sweeping movement in telecommunications: the breakup of the local telephone monopoly.
Just 10 years after the American Telephone and Telegraph Company signed the historic antitrust settlement that spurred rampant competition in the long-distance telephone business, state and Federal regulators are preparing to open local markets to the same ferment -- hoping that rates will fall and service will improve in the process.


Recalling a Year of Mostly Pluses
EVEN as we prepare to greet the New Year, it might be useful to look back at some of the cultural events that brightened (or dampened) the Westchester music scene in 1991.
Among other happenings, for instance, the county gained a shiny new chamber orchestra: the Hutchinson River Chamber Players.
Founded and directed by Jeffrey Levine, a Pelham resident, the ensemble made its debut a month ago.


Correction
An article on Dec. 1 about Florence referred incorrectly to the doors framing the baptistery of the Duomo, or Cathedral.
The doors are reproductions of the gilded originals by Ghiberti.
The originals are being restored, and some are on display in the Museo dell'Opera del Duomo.
The article also misstated the location of the Palazzo Pucci.
It is on the Via de Pucci, not on the Via de Tornabuoni or one of its side streets.


A Toy Exhibit in Scarsdale And Photographs in the Bronx
THE Scarsdale Historical Society's Christmas special is "The Toys We Treasured," a collection of playthings that no doubt were taken for granted by their original owners.
As for today's children reared on plastic, they may not even recognize them as toys, much less as treasures, unless briefed by parents, even grandparents.


Noonan Keeps Blackhawks on Track
Brian Noonan scored all three of Chicago's goals Friday night as the Blackhawks extended their home-ice unbeaten streak to 12 games by rallying to tie the Winnipeg Jets, 3-3.
Noonan scored once in the first period and twice in the second for his second National Hockey League hat trick.
The tie enabled the Blackhawks, who outshot the Jets, 45-21, to extend their unbeaten streak at Chicago Stadium to 9-0-3 since Oct. 27.


Vanishing Atomic Particles Suggest Need for a 'New Physics'
After two years of trying to count neutrinos coming from the Sun, Russian and American scientists are becoming convinced that something strange is happening to these elusive subatomic particles on their way out of the Sun.
Nearly all of them vanish, perhaps escaping detection by changing character.
The scientists reported this month that a new, more rigorous analysis of their observations had confirmed preliminary findings that virtually no solar neutrinos can be detected reaching Earth, even though the nuclear-fusion processes occurring at the Sun's core are presumably producing a profusion of these particles.
Neutrinos have no electric charge and little or no mass.


DON'T TELL
Your author's logic seems to go like this: If a woman encounters sexual discrimination at work, she is using good judgment in "declining to invoke the legal process" available to her.
Following this wise course, Anita Hill "proceeded with a recommendation" -- from the man who offended her -- "to a university teaching job." This seems like a tidy accommodation: tolerate the boor, then use him for later career advancement.
The part that bothers me is not openly stated but it hovers, unspoken, nonetheless: later on, after he helps you get your career securely on track, you can go back and skewer him.
GEORGE W. BROWN, M.D.
Albuquerque, N.M.


Huntington's Tax Assessor Is Knocking
A FLEET of white vans with roof-mounted cameras has photographed 13,500 properties since September, and inspectors have gathered data on 7,600 of the 68,000 properties that the Town of Huntington expects to inspect, describe and put on computer.
The effort is part of a $2.3 million inventory by the Cole-Layer-Trumble Company of Dayton, Ohio.
The financing is "an expense to taxpayers," said the town's new Assessor, Bryan J. Monaghan.


A Problem of Taxonomy
To the Editor:
I'd like to thank The Times for its recognition and support of my book "Maus II." I was delighted to see it surface on your best-seller list (Dec. 8).
I never expected my work to reach such heights (my mice never dressed for success).
Delight blurred into surprise, however, when I noted that it appeared on the fiction side of your ledger.


Given New York Today, Could Anyone Lead It?
IN 1989, when New Yorkers had grown tired of Edward I. Koch and were yearning for a new beginning -- or, at least, some peace and quiet -- David N. Dinkins was asked whether the city had gotten so out of control that not even a mayor could make a difference.
"If nothing else," Mr.
Dinkins replied, "I can change the climate, the atmosphere. I can provide leadership.
"If a mayor can't make a difference," he said, "who can?"


Volunteers of America Assisting in AIDS Care
CARRYING on a 95-year tradition of addressing contemporary social concerns, the Mid-Hudson division of the Volunteers of America is initiating a respite program for people who care for AIDS and H.I.V. victims.
In a three-pronged effort, the nonprofit organization will recruit and train volunteers, inform other service providers in Westchester, Putnam and Rockland Counties of the new program and "make AIDS victims and their care givers aware that we exist," said Catherine J. Marsh, director of the local Volunteers of America office.


Noonan Keeps Blackhawks on Track
Brian Noonan scored all three of Chicago's goals Friday night as the Blackhawks extended their home-ice unbeaten streak to 12 games by rallying to tie the Winnipeg Jets, 3-3.
Noonan scored once in the first period and twice in the second for his second National Hockey League hat trick.
The tie enabled the Blackhawks, who outshot the Jets, 45-21, to extend their unbeaten streak at Chicago Stadium to 9-0-3 since Oct. 27.


Doing Business
In preparation for her nomination last week as a Secretary of Commerce, Barbara Franklin has done all the right stuff.
Ms.
Franklin, who in 1964 became one of the first women to earn a Harvard M.B.A., got her first White House job in 1971, when President Richard M. Nixon made her the woman in charge of recruiting more women.
After that, Mr.
Nixon appointed her to the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
In 1984, she opened her own business -- as a consultant to consumer products companies.
She now sits on the boards of seven big corporations.
But not least among the talents that seemed to catch Mr.
Bush's eye is her fund-raising ability -- last month she was co-chairman of a dinner that raised almost $1.2 million for Mr.
Bush's re-election campaign, and in recent years, she has given various Republican organizations and candidates around $60,000 from her own pocket.
All in all, said President Bush, she is "a leader and a role model for many women in business."


'We Are With You,' Churchill Told Europe, 'but Not of You'
To the Editor:
There are much wider issues at work than those highlighted by Anthony Lewis in "Still Little England?" (column, Dec. 16) when considering Britain's stance at the European Community meeting in Maastricht, the Netherlands.
Prime Minister John Major may have been pandering in part to the right wing of his own party in resisting proposals for monetary and political union, but he was also reflecting the terrible dilemma that Europe presents to Britons.


The Price of Health: Employee Fraud - A special report.; Vast Amount of Fraud Discovered In Workers' Compensation System
Fraud and exaggerated claims are driving up the cost of workers' compensation insurance by billions of dollars a year, a variety of experts say, and have become a significant though still largely unrecognized factor in the skyrocketing cost of health care.
This conclusion has been reached by regulators and law-enforcement officials in several states who are looking into the forces behind the rising costs and by insurance officials who have begun investigations of questionable claims.
It is suggested, too, by a number of studies.


To Each His Own
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein speaks of "how little our understanding of  [ Mozart ]  has grown" in the bicentennial year.
How does Mr.
Rothstein know this, given the fact that each listener trying to understand Mozart has different experiences and varying original levels of knowledge?
He himself has come through the year bored and finding what many of us had thought to be beautiful and profound "pious expressions of deep feeling." But this tells us only about Mr.
Rothstein, not about "us."  EDWARD S. HERMAN Penn Valley, Pa.


Giants' Lost Season: An Outside Lineman's Inside Line
The National Football League playoffs began this weekend, but the defending Super Bowl champions will be watching at home.
What happened to the Giants in 1991?
Leonard Marshall, the defensive end for the Giants, discussed his team's season during an interview with Neil Amdur, sports editor of The Times, at the New Jersey home of Marshall's lawyer, Myra T. Peterson.
The following are excerpts of that interview.
Going into the 1991 season, I was very optimistic about what we could accomplish as a team.
You always try to focus upon being competitive from week to week.
But there were weeks during the season where we weren't in tune taking on people, yet we played well.
And there were weeks when I thought we were well prepared and focused and didn't play well.
That's why we were 8-8: lack of consistency on both sides of the football.


Jump-Start Those Animal Spirits
WHAT THIS economy needs," The Wall Street Journal exhorts, "is more risk-taking, more
animal spirits
." A few years ago, the investor Warren Buffett found that "Leaders, business or otherwise, seldom are deficient in
animal spirits
and often relish increased activity and challenge."
Not everyone agrees with the need for, or the meaning of, these
animal spirits
.
"We really did have a genuine bubble in real estate," says Richard Syron, president of the Boston Federal Reserve Bank, "and it was driven by
animal spirits
." He means that property values were inflated by overspeculation, and uses the phrase in the sense of "misplaced optimism."
From what vasty deep were these spirits summoned, and why does the cliche afflict economists particularly?
"Physitions teache," wrote Bartholomew Traheron in his 1543 translation of a surgery text, "that there ben thre kindes of spirites,
animal, vital
and
naturall
. The animal spirite hath his seate in the brayne, and . . . is called
animal
, bycause it is the first instrument of the soule, whych the Latins call
animam
." (You wonder why copy editors want hazardous-duty pay for this column?)


Sunday Dining; Welcome Respites When You Have a Child or Two in Tow
The holidays are, for the most part, a time for children.
And New York City opens its arms to youngsters in many ways at this time of year.
For those who are taking children around town this weekend to see the seasonal wonders, here are three Manhattan spots where they would enjoy eating.
American Festival Cafe
20 West 50th Street, north of Rockefeller Center skate rink; (212) 246-6699 -- This casual cousin to the formal Sea Grill is a diverting spot to go skating and have a bowl of soup, a sandwich or a simple entree.
It's a big, open and sunny space facing the Rockefeller Center skating rink, which is one of the most festive holiday spots in the city.


Care Can Keep Holiday Gift Plants Alive
POTS of dwarf conifers and evergreens are often given as gifts.
The little plants are usually decorated with colorful ribbons, tiny bows and packages.
And what is more these gifts are alive and may be planted in the garden.
But the trick now is to keep them alive.
Until the planting season does come -- and it is best to set the young plant out in spring -- keep it cold, that is dormant.
Growth is not to be encouraged at this time of year.
If the garage is unheated and it has a window, this would be a good place to keep the plant.


POSTINGS: Midtown High Point; Post Office's Flag Day
Construction on the new United States Post Office General Mail Facility in mid-Manhattan reached its high point last month when a steel girder topped with an American flag was placed on the roof 100 feet above street level.
The five-story, 800,000-square-foot building, scheduled to be completed in January 1993, is the Postal Service's largest single construction project currently under way.
It will merge with Morgan Station, Manhattan's main mail-processing center, via a two-story-high, 600-foot-long bridge.
The bridge spans West 29th Street along the new building's northern side at the second and third floors.


Topics of The Times; Aftershock
On the morning of Dec. 26 a New Yorker woke up euphoric.
"Why are you so happy?" she asked herself.
The condition of her house (littered), her favorite dress (gravy-stained) and her head (aching) were no cause for celebration.
Then she remembered. It was over.


C. P. Meade to Marry Miss Ruddick
Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Perry Ruddick of Cedar Grove, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Julia Addison Ruddick to Charles Patrick Meade, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Meade of Brookville, L.I.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Ruddick, 29 years old, is an associate in project finance at Barclays Bank in New York.
She graduated from Duke University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Virginia.
Her father, who retired as vice chairman of Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, is the chairman of First Century Partners, Smith Barney's venture capital affiliate in New York.


Kerry Kelleher and Daniel Brosky Are Married
Kerry Jean Kelleher, the daughter of Mrs.
Joseph J. Kelleher of Manhasset, L.I., and the late Mr.
Kelleher, was married yesterday to Daniel Francis Brosky, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Brosky of Brockway, Pa.
The Rev.
Thomas Groenewold officiated at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Manhasset.
The bride, 27 years old, is an administrative assistant for the Field Point Capital Management Company in New York.
Mr.
Brosky, also 27, is a broker and agent in New York for the Prudential Insurance Company of America.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
The fact that the cold war has ended and the Soviet empire is in the process of disintegration has not stopped espionage writers from concerning themselves with the Communist threat.
Their most common approach is to postulate a revival of Stalinism, in which right-wing former Kremlin masters organize a putsch to restore themselves to power.
Often, a scheme to take out the United States may be involved.
Another approach is to take a look at American right-wingers who see their lives dissipated without a Soviet threat.
They long for the good old days when they knew where they stood and could plot their little games.
So they get together to do something about it.


In the Nation; A More Desperate Struggle
The end of the Soviet Union and the resignation of Mikhail Gorbachev, though at least a momentary gain for freedom and democracy, are sad events.
The fall of a giant state, owing largely to its own human flaws, has the quality of tragedy; and a great leader's peaceful surrender of power again demonstrated the vision that distinguished him, as few others of his time.
President Bush paid the proper tribute when he said that Mr.
Gorbachev had been "responsible for one of the most important developments of this century -- the revolutionary transformation of a totalitarian dictatorship and the liberation of his people from its smothering embrace."


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE HALF MAN By George Packer. Random House, $20.


Victoria Hunter, Producer, Weds
Victoria Meigs Hunter, a film producer, and Matthias Gohl, a jazz musician and composer, were married yesterday at the Puck Building in New York.
The Rev.
John Shelby Spong, the Episcopal Bishop of Newark, officiated.
Mrs.
Gohl, 30 years old, is an associate producer with Insignia Films, a documentary production company in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University and has an master's degree in theater administration from the University of California at San Diego.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Austin F. Hunter of New York.
Her father is a retired travel agent.
Her mother, Barbara Hunter, is the president of Hunter MacKenzie Inc., a New York public relations company.


The Cruel Joke Of Steinbrenner
To the Sports Editor:
It becomes more and more apparent that the front office of the Yankees, whoever is in charge, are content for the team to have yet another season with 90 or so defeats.
This is a disgrace not only for the team, but for all of New York.
The more or less leadershipless club is just drifting, while the other teams are busy improving themselves in preparation for next season.
The idea of recalling George Steinbrenner is a cruel joke.
He was the one who led the team of glory to its present disastrous condition.
OTTO STERN New York


Making a Difference; A Super Problem in Supercomputers
NOT so long ago, a customer who wanted the most powerful supercomputer had no choice but to wait for Seymour R. Cray to finish his latest invention.
But that is no longer the case, as the Cray Computer Corporation found out last week when the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, the sole customer for the company's new Cray-3 computer, tired of delays and abruptly canceled its order.
Adding insult to injury, Lawrence Livermore switched its order to a C-90 from Cray Research Inc., the company Mr.
Cray left two years ago when it decided it could not simultaneously finance development of two new supercomputer designs.


Nancy Frost To Wed in June
Mr. and Mrs.
Rufus S. Frost of Worcester, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nancy Brereton Frost, to Theodorick Bowden Bland, a son of Mrs.
Richard H. Downes of Lawrenceville, N.J., and the late James E. Bland.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Frost, 23 years old, teaches Spanish at Lawrence Academy in Groton, Mass.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is an owner of RE/MAX Central Realtors in Worcester.


Steinbrenner Puts Strategy Into Every Move
George Steinbrenner is like the 6-year-old boy who, seeing another boy with a shiny new toy truck, approaches him and says, "If you let me play with your truck, I'll be your best friend."
Fay Vincent is Georgie's new best friend, just as Bart Giamatti was his best friend and, before that, Peter Ueberroth was his best friend.
Steinbrenner has, in effect, told Vincent, "If you let me play with my own toy again, I'll be your best friend."


Ancient Coins Are Given New Lives as Rarefied Gems
The small abstract gold earrings reflect the light in the tiny store as Dany Kornfeld leans over a green jewelry leather case lined in green suede.
Though they are an ancient Celtic design, the earrings do not clash with her casual contemporary turtleneck sweater.
Mrs.
Kornfeld, 41 years old, specializes in contemporary jewelry made from antique coins, seals and objects.
Last week she opened a small shop, Ariadne Jewels, at 968 Madison Avenue at 76th Street.
It is adjacent to Ariadne Galleries, established by her partner, Torkom Demirjian, a decade ago to assemble ancient art objects to sell to collectors, museums and decorators.
The jewelry shop is an outgrowth of that business.


Noted With Pleasure
History's Great, Grave Whole
Each generation tends to view its own age as the culmination of history.
Such an idea, according to the historian Jakob Burckhardt (1818-97), is shortsighted and misleading.
This is from "On Fortune and Misfortune in History," included in "German Essays on History," edited by Rolf Saltzer (The German Library/Continuum, paper).
Our profound and utterly ridiculous self-seeking first regards those times as happy that are in some way akin to our nature.
Further, it considers such past forces and individuals as praiseworthy on whose work our present existence and relative welfare are based.
Just as if the world and its history had existed merely for our sakes!
For everyone regards all times as fulfilled in his own, and cannot see his own as one of many passing waves. . . .
But every individual -- we too -- exists not for his own sake, but for the sake of all the past and all the future.
In the face of this great, grave whole, the claims of peoples, times and individuals to happiness and well-being, lasting or fleeting, is of very subordinate importance, for since the life of humanity is one whole, it is only to our frail powers of perception that its fluctuations in time or place are a rise and fall, fortune and misfortune.
Standing in Eden
The poet and mystic Thomas Traherne (1637-74) records how, in the aftermath of a religious vision, he stepped out into the street of an English town and found the everyday world transformed.
This ecstatic account is included in "Profitable Wonders: Aspects of Thomas Traherne" by A. M. Allchin, Anne Ridler and Julie Smith (Morehouse Publishing, paper).
The Dust and Stones of the Street were as precious as GOLD.
The Gates were at first the End of the World, The Green Trees when I saw them first through one of the Gates Transported and Ravished me; their Sweetness and unusual Beauty made my Heart to leap, and almost mad with Extasie, they were such strange and Wonderful Things; The Men!
O what venerable and Reverend Creatures did the Aged seem!
Immortal Cherubims!
And yong men Glittering Sparkling Angels and Maids strange Seraphick Pieces of Life and Beauty!
Boys and Girles Tumbling in the Street, and Playing, were moving Jewels.
I knew not that they were born or should Die. . . .
The Citie seemed to stand in Eden, or to be Built in Heaven.
The Streets were mine, the Temple was mine, the People were mine, their Clothes and Gold and Silver was mine, as much as their Sparkling Eys fair Skins and ruddy faces.
The Union of Living Things
The scientist James Lovelock offers us a startling image of our place in nature in this excerpt from "Healing Gaia: Practical Medicine for the Planet" (Harmony).
We are not managers or masters of the Earth, we are just shop stewards, workers chosen, because of our intelligence, as representatives of the others, the rest of life of our planet.
Our union represents the bacteria, the fungi, and the slime molds as well as the nouveau riche fish, birds and animals and the landed establishment of noble trees and their lesser plants.
Indeed all living things are members of our union and they are angry at the diabolical liberties taken with their planet and their lives by people.
People should be living in union with the other members, not exploiting them and their habitats.
A planetary physician observing the misery we inflict upon them and upon ourselves would support the shop steward and warn that we must learn to live with the Earth in partnership.
The Living Museum
We are, David Owen realized after buying an old house, not so much owners of a home as caretakers of it, conservators for the next generation.
This is from "The Walls Around Us: The Thinking Person's Guide to How a House Works" (Villard).
My house was a canvas on which other people had been painting (or, more recently, wallpapering) for more than two hundred years. . . .
Every house is a work in progress.
It begins in the imaginations of the people who build it and is gradually transformed, for better and for worse, by the people who occupy it down through the years, decades, centuries.
To tinker with a house is to commune with the people who have lived in it before and to leave messages for those who will live in it later.
Every house is a living museum of habitation, and a monument to all the lives and aspirations that have flickered within it.
Holding the World Together
The novelist Leslie Marmon Silko (using the Pueblo Indians as her example) reminds us that, in many cultures, storytelling isn't simply an entertainment -- it's a way of maintaining a culture's health and unity.
Her piece is included in "Critical Fictions: The Politics of Imaginative Writing," edited by Philomena Mariani (Bay Press, 115 West Denny Way, Seattle, Wash. 98119, paper).
At Laguna Pueblo . . . many individual words have their own stories.
So when one is telling a story, and one is using words to tell the story, each word that one is speaking has a story of its own, too.
Often the speakers or tellers will go into these word-stories, creating an elaborate structure of stories-within-stories. . . .
I'm talking about something that comes out of an experience and an understanding of the original view of creation -- that we are all part of a whole; we do not differentiate or fragment stories and experiences.
In the beginning, Tseitsinako, Thought Woman, thought of all things, and all of these things are held together as one holds many things together in a single thought.
So in the telling . . . the storytelling always includes the audience, the listeners.
In fact, a great deal of the story is believed to be inside the listener; the storyteller's role is to draw the story out of the listeners.


Mocking American Mores, And Shaking Off a Royal Slump
Oddest Successful Classical Revival -- Peter Martins's New York City Ballet production of "The Sleeping Beauty" sparkled with brilliant dancing, yet its breakneck pace robbed the fairy tale of magic and humanity.
Rugged Individualists, Still -- Pina Bausch, Meredith Monk and Phoebe Neville continued to go their own choreographic ways, and it remains exciting to follow them.


No Commonwealth of Independent Visas Yet
The Soviet Union's breakup into independent states has so far meant little change in visa requirements for travelers.
Former Soviet republics that are now members of the new Commonwealth of Independent States are accepting Russian visas for travel throughout their territory, consular officials in New York say.
Ukraine has begun issuing national visas at Borispol Airport in Kiev, where flights arrive directly from Frankfurt, Zurich and Vienna without stopping in Moscow.
But Volodymyr Zholdokov, a spokesman for the Ukrainian mission to the United Nations, said the former republic did not reject Russian visas.


Pornography Shouldn't Be Blamed for Violence
To the Editor:
Catharine A. MacKinnon's work on gender discrimination has contributed much to labor law, yet in "The Palm Beach Hanging" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15) she makes remarks on sexuality that do women more harm than good.


Gritty Images of Aspen, Free of Gaud and Glitter
Few places in the world are as instantly pigeonholed as Aspen, Colo.
Millions of people who have never set foot there are convinced they know it well from a cascade of media impressions: private jets stacked up at the airport, $12 million log-cabin-style homes, celebrity gridlock on the ski slopes.
But to judge by the most recent work of the film maker Frederick Wiseman, this image of the town is a wild distortion.
Mr.
Wiseman filmed there for six weeks in the winter of 1990, and his two-and-a-half-hour documentary, which will be shown Monday at 9 P.M. on PBS, bears scant resemblance to the Aspen thought of as a mud wallow for the rich and famous.


Will Masur Work Miracles? Will Mozart Survive His Bicentennial?
Biggest Musical Cliffhanger -- The continuing transformation of the New York Philharmonic by its new music director, Kurt Masur, who has been described, for better and worse, as a Kapellmeister.
Which way will the orchestra go?
The Revenge of Sidney Carton -- A contemporary opera -- John Corigliano's "Ghosts of Versailles" -- that takes a jaundiced view of the French Revolution while nearly selling out seven performances at the Metropolitan Opera with advance word of its campy humor, extravagant theatrics and nostalgic sentimentality.


In Darien, Mame Returns With Patrice Munsel
THERE are musicals that demand a star but could live without one.
And, of course, there are musicals with no such requirement.
And then there is a musical like "Mame," a terminal case of star dependency.
Connecticut's Broadway Theater in Darien is lucky to have Patrice Munsel to hold up and maneuver the show.
She gives it class, charm, pizazz and glamour.


A Toy Exhibit in Scarsdale And Photographs in the Bronx
THE Scarsdale Historical Society's Christmas special is "The Toys We Treasured," a collection of playthings that no doubt were taken for granted by their original owners.
As for today's children reared on plastic, they may not even recognize them as toys, much less as treasures, unless briefed by parents, even grandparents.


How Chinese Artists Express Themselves
I would like to offer some comments on Helen A. Harrison's review "Chinese Emigres' Influences"  [ Oct. 13 ] .
I am a specialist in the field of Chinese art who has spent nearly three years living in China and is fluent in Chinese.
I am acquainted with the eight artists whose work was included in the exhibition held at the Smithtown Arts Council Gallery.


A FIGHT TO THE DEATH
I was disturbed that an issue as important as euthanasia should be clouded by what seemed to me to be very personal problems between a husband and wife, ending in a vengeful and apparently unnecessary suicide.
Five years ago one of my oldest and closest friends found she had terminal cancer in both lungs and promptly sent away for information from the Hemlock Society.
She was a very orderly and proper woman, determined to preserve her dignity by ending her life while she still had all her faculties, and she asked me to sit with her while she followed the instructions in the booklet.
She was so proper, by the way, that, although I arrived at her apartment at 2 P.M., she refused to begin the final procedure until 5, since it did involve a certain amount of liquor, and she never had a drink before the cocktail hour!


Beatty Redux, Poetic Infernos, And How About Those Shamans
Happiest Comeback -- Warren Beatty threw off Dick Tracy's ugly yellow raincoat and the career pall of "Ishtar" to come back fresher than ever.
He casually ad-libbed the year's shrewdest line in "Truth or Dare," the documentary about his then-love, Madonna -- "She doesn't want to
live
off camera" -- and went on to play his most seductive character in years, the comic-romantic hero of "Bugsy."
Silliest Line -- "It's a living thing, Brian. It breathes, it eats and it hates." Even Robert De Niro couldn't get away with this description of a fire in "Backdraft." Let's just be grateful he stopped there.
He could have gone on: "A fire sings, it dances, it calls out for Chinese food . . . "


Heidi Lipton to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Lipton of Philadelphia have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Heidi Beth Lipton and Richard Katz, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
S.
Sheldon Katz of West Nyack, N.Y.
Miss Lipton, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, where she is studying for an M.B.A. degree.
Mr.
Katz, also 25, a summa cum laude graduate of Yale University, is an associate in investment banking at Goldman, Sachs in New York.


Grace Fallon Has Wedding
Grace Catherine Fallon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John N. Fallon of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Howard Allen Pollack, a son of Roy H. Pollack of New York and Princeton, N.J., and the late Margaret J. Pollack.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas F. Pike officiated at St.
George's Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Pollack, 31 years old, is a vice president and broadcast manager for Wunderman Worldwide, a direct-marketing advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father retired as a vice president for external affairs at New York Telephone and is a consultant to Nynex in New York.


Mamie Biggs Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Charles L. Biggs of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Mamie Clare Biggs, to Gregory Clarence Case, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence Case of Shawnee Mission, Kan.
Miss Biggs, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is a manager of special events at Marshall Field's, the Chicago department store.
Her father is the managing director in management consulting at Deloitte &amp; Touche in New York.


Soviet Union's Demise Spurs Upheaval in U.S. Heartland
The Strategic Air Command, the nerve center of the United States' nuclear strike force, is fading into history, along with the Soviet Union.
For the men and women who control the nation's long-range bombers and missiles, as for their neighbors in Omaha and the little town of Bellevue, Neb., the end is bittersweet.


Sunday Menu; A Little Bit of Italy When It's Cold Outside
An Italian thread runs through each of these recipes.
They provide a satisfying cold-weather meal in less time than it takes to choose the groceries and stand in the check-out line.
And it's nice enough to double or triple and serve to guests.
Grilled Pork Tenderloin
2 teaspoons reduced-sodium soy sauce  1 clove garlic, minced  1 tablespoon coarsely grated ginger  1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary  1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar  1 teaspoon brown sugar 10 ounces pork tenderloin.
1. Combine all ingredients but pork in bowl.
2.
Cut pork into four chunks and add to marinade.
Marinate while you prepare the rest of the meal.
3.
Prepare stove-top grill.
Grill pork a total of about 10 minutes, turning to brown on all sides and brushing with marinade each time.
Yield: 2 servings.
Zucchini with Tomatoes And Anchovies  1 pound zucchini, washed, trimmed and sliced about 1/8-inch thick  1 teaspoon olive oil  1 cup canned crushed no-salt-added tomatoes  2 teaspoons rinsed, drained and mashed anchovies  Freshly ground black pepper.
1. Saute zucchini in hot oil in nonstick skillet. Turn to brown on both sides.
2.
While zucchini is browning, stir in tomatoes and anchovies and season with pepper.
Reduce heat and simmer until zucchini has softened and flavors are melded, about 5 minutes.
Yield: 2 servings. Polenta 1 1/4 cups water  1/2 cup instant polenta.
1. Bring water to boil in covered pot.
2.
Reduce heat to medium high and slowly stir in polenta.
Cook, stirring often, until mixture has thickened but is still soft.
Remove from heat and spoon onto plates; top with zucchini and tomatoes.
Yield: 2 servings.


A. R. McKinstry, 97; Ex-Episcopal Bishop
The Rev.
Arthur Raymond McKinstry, the former Episcopal bishop of Delaware and a friend of two Presidents, died Christmas Day at the Methodist Country House, his residence in Greenville, Md.
He was 97 years old.
Bishop McKinstry died after long suffering from cancer, said his son, James, of Wilmington, Del.


Meeting the New Head Of County Hospitals
IN a typical two-bed room at the County Medical Center, corporate executives and welfare recipients are often roommates, products of the same hospital procedures and wearing identical hospital gowns.
Only their insurance carrier knows the difference.
"This is the only hospital that I know of with equal facilities for the prosperous and the indigent," Dr.
George E. Reed said last week, adding: "We are very proud of that. We are one of the few hospitals in the United States that takes care of everyone who comes along."


New Yorkers, etc.
You're in bed with a virus, maybe the flu. You feel like death on toast.
In search of mindless escape, you turn on the television and get back-to-back commercials for cold and flu remedies.


Corrections
A picture on Dec. 15 with a report in the Style Makers column about Gloria Cranmer Webster, a Kwakiutl Indian chief, was published in error.
It showed Frances Fullerton, Mrs.
Webster's sister, at the opening ceremonies of the American Museum of Natural History exhibit on potlatch, of which Mrs.
Webster is the curator.


Prune, Plan, Dream
If weather permits, do some renovative pruning of overgrown deciduous shrubs. (If weather doesn't permit, this can be done anytime until spring growth begins.)
Take a break and visit botanical gardens and their libraries.
Browse through their magazine and newsletter sections.
Choose some unusual nurseries and seed companies and order their catalogues.


Donna A. Davis Has Wedding
Donna Ann Davis, a director of dining services for the Canteen Corporation in New York, was married yesterday to Lieut. (j.g.) Paul Michael Basile of the Navy, currently stationed in Philadelphia as the damage control officer aboard the frigate Clark.
The Rev.
Donald E. Babinski performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Agnes Cathedral in Rockville Centre, L.I.
Mrs.
Basile, 24 years old, graduated from East Carolina University.
Her father, Joseph V. Davis, is a transport manager for General Electric in New York.
Her mother, Nancy Davis, is a clerk for the Nassau County Public Works Department in East Rockaway, L.I.
The bride's parents live in Garden City, L.I.


CAMPUS LIFE: Princeton; A Centennial Observed, in Paper
For years now, the large bound volumes of The Daily Princetonian that line the walls of a musty, third-floor room in the newspaper's campus headquarters have attracted more dust than attention.
But in recent months, current and former "Prince" writers have been removing those volumes from the shelves and re-examining the articles contained in their yellowing pages.
The writers are preparing a book on Princeton's history in celebration of the newspaper's 100th anniversary as a daily next April.


Data Update
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Oct. 91
Sept. 91
Oct. 90
Nation
$99,200
$99,700
$92,900
Northeast
136,700
137,100
136,200
Midwest
76,800
76,100
72,000
South
88,200
91,800
83,200
West
147,600
144,100
142,000
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
8.66
8.74
9.91
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.26
6.31
8.01
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
8.59
8.65
9.72
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.11
6.24
7.85
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
8.60
8.63
9.73
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.16
6.22
7.93
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
8.83
8.90
10.06
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.87
6.86
8.25
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
4.35
4.44
6.96
National Mortgage Contract Rate
8.78
8.78
9.69
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Dishes to Serve a New Year's Gathering
BEFORE the countdown to 1992 begins, the countdown for that New Year's Eve party or New Year's Day open house has been under way.
What to serve?
New Year's Eve demands elegance and a touch of luxury perhaps.
On New Year's Day, on the other hand, there can be greater informality -- yet a feeling of abundance should prevail.
By making slight adjustments, similar menus can be tailored to fit both occasions.


Business Diary
Yeltsin Stands Alone, Not Quite Master of All He Surveys
When Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev resigned last week and the Soviet Union's Parliament voted itself out of existence, Boris N. Yeltsin, Russia's President, became the informal leader of a new, loosely organized, Commonwealth of Independent States.
Mr.
Yeltsin inherits a vast, tattered economy.
"About 70 percent of the population now lives below the poverty line," said Vladimir Kvint, a lecturer at Babson College.
Mr.
Yeltsin has a plan.
New rules go into effect next week allowing foreign companies to own rubles and invest freely in Russian companies.
And next week, prices will be re-formed (upward) so they better reflect production costs.
Even so, the plan has a gaping hole.
"There is still no real privatization," said Mr.
Kvint.
"Only a handful of the 1.15 million legal entities are private," he said.
Until Mr.
Yeltsin enacts a privatization law, "the reforms will be very difficult to carry out," he said.
A Rise in Orders of Durables
Sales at the malls may have fizzled this Christmas season, but airplanes, satellites and jet engines did very well.
According to the Commerce Department, orders for durable goods -- big-ticket items that are supposed to last three years or more -- rose by 1.2 percent in November.
"It looks like what we might be seeing here is the beginning of a turnaround," said Michael L. Penzer, an economist at the BankAmerica Corporation.
A Drop in Personal Income
Turnaround?
Not so fast.
The Commerce Department said that personal income contracted by three-tenths of 1 percent in October due to layoffs.
Bullishness at the O.T.C.
With the Dow Jones industrial average reaching record highs -- it closed the week at 3,101.92 -- individual investors are back in the market.
But the Big Board's not the only one doing well.
Nasdaq's over-the-counter market reported last week that 1991 will be its best year ever, with more than 41 billion shares traded worth an estimated $690 billion.
Disney's Tangled Dress Code
Don't expect to see unkempt mice at Disneyland.
That's what the Walt Disney Company said as it began hiring 12,000 people to work at its $4.5 billion Euro Disneyland theme park near Paris.
Violating the company's dress code (Only one earring per ear, please.) can result in dismissal.
"For us, the appearance code has a great effect from a product-identification standpoint," said Thor Degelmann, vice president for human resources at Euro Disneyland.
But Disney's rules on acceptable clothing, hair styles and -- yes -- even pantyhose, have gotten the company into a legal tussle.
France, after all, is the birthplace of la liberte.
One union appealed to the Government in the name of "human dignity." The Government may take Disney to court to determine if the code violates French law.
Picking Over the Soviet Splinters
Put aside questions about who controls the defunct Soviet Union's hoard of strategic nuclear missiles and there is still the problem of what to do when a unified market of 300 million suddenly splinters.
United States Ambassador Robert S. Strauss is telling people to invest, if they can stomach the risk.
Not everyone agrees.
"There have always been drumbeaters for investment. I'm not one of them at this time," said Benjamin Weiner, president of Probe International, a consulting firm in Stamford, Conn.
"The republics are places for raw materials like oil, metals and diamonds, not investment," he said.
Ethnic tensions are likely to rise, he said.
"Russia has 31 contending ethnic regions. Those rivalries will never go away." More Gripes With Japan
Economists say Japan's economy is slowing down. (It's still growing faster than any other industrial nation).
But slow growth or not, its current account surplus is surging, mostly from trade.
The Finance Ministry said last week that Japan's surplus with the rest of the world for November was $7.26 billion, a 330 percent increase from the year before and its best showing ever.
Japan's current account surplus for fiscal 1991 could exceed $100 billion -- double its 1990 figure.
The Bush Administration is miffed by the rise since trade talks have been going on for more than a decade.
"It's the only major trading partner with whom we haven't lowered our trading deficit over the last couple of years," said Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher.
Japan said no last week to imports of rice "We all agreed that Japan's interests are to be considered as well as those of the other negotiators," said Koichi Kato, Japan's chief cabinet officer.
With its huge surpluses it's hard to argue Japan's has been ignored.
The French Insurance Rescue
The Executive Life Insurance Company moved a step closer to becoming French last week when a California Superior Court Judge, Kurt J. Lewin, approved the $3.55 billion bail out bid from a group led by Credit Lyonnais, the big French bank.
Executive Life met its demise when its huge portfolio of junk bonds collapsed in value.
Policyholders are expected to receive 95 percent of the value of their policies up to $100,000.
Large policyholders are expected to receive slightly less.
Not a bad settlement considering insurers, unlike banks, are not Federally insured.
Kevin Maxwell Quits
Kevin Maxwell, son of the late Robert Maxwell, resigned last week as publisher of The New York Daily News.
Kevin Maxwell, British authorities allege, may have had a role in the collapse of the family businesses and in the movement of money from the public Maxwell companies into the private ones.
The Maxwell public companies owe about $4.4 billion.
Cray vs.
Cray vs.
Cray
First there was Cray Research Inc., the computer company started by Seymour Cray, who built the world's first supercomputer.
Then there was the Cray Computer Corporation, the upstart supercomputer maker spun off from Cray Research by Mr.
Cray.
But Cray Computer's survival is now in question.
The Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory last week canceled the upstart's contract to build a $30 million, superfast machine based on tricky new technology and an untested gallium arsenide chip.
Researchers were getting antsy because Cray was taking so long to build the machine.
The lab will buy the Y-MP C-90 supercomputer made by Cray Research, Mr.
Cray's original company.
"In this market you've got choices," said Gary Smaby, an analyst with the Smaby Group in Minneapolis.
Michael Milken's Many Suitors
While Michael Milken, the imprisoned junk-bond king, meditates on his wrongdoings, dozens of claims worth billions of dollars are being filed against him and his former employer, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
Drexel filed for bankruptcy protection in 1990.
Last week, U.S.
District Judge Milton Pollack, who is overseeing Drexel's bankruptcy, ordered the claimants against Mr.
Milken and Drexel to combine their claims into a single, "universal settlement." Some of the claimants are investors who lost money, others are state and Federal regulators seeking to recover what they spent bailing out bankrupt savings and loan institutions that bought Drexel junk bonds.
If the suits are combined, the proceedings will be speeded up and millions of dollars in legal fees will be saved.
But the talks must proceed quickly.
The first suit goes to court next April.
A Bit of Americana Fades
They are not the toniest stores in town .
Still, the McCrory Corporation has a lot of them -- 1,000 nationwide.
But hurt by the weak economy and large losses last year, McCrory said it would close 229 stores in January.
A Forgiving Fannie Mae
The Federal National Mortgage Association -- Fannie Mae -- acknowledged last week that phony bidding has been common in its sales of mortgages.
But Fannie Mae said it would be lenient -- this time.
Rather than impose financial penalties on the 53 banks and Wall Street firms that buy billions of dollars worth of its mortgage securities, Fannie Mae would simply put the firms on probation while it changes its record keeping and auditing procedures.
After that, any new violations could result in suspension.
"We couldn't come up with a justification for money fines based on our analysis of the selling action," said Frank D. Raines, Fannie Mae's vice chairman.
That's a rather enlightened view.
But what about the integrity of the market?
The Securities and Exchange Commission is looking into that.
G.M.'s Stubborn Consistency
The General Motors Corporation hit upon a novel way to motivate the work force last week, and it didn't come from Japan.
Give bonuses to the white-collar workers -- the management team that put the nation's No. 1 car company on a trajectory to 73,000 or more layoffs by 1995, possibly $8 billion in losses this year and the closing of 21 assembly plants.
Then take away the bonuses traditionally given to the blue-collar work force -- the people who actually build the cars.
The formula may not necessarily get the results G.M.'s upper management is looking for.
"We kept our promise to our employees," said John Maciarz, a spokesman for the company.
The United Auto Workers, upset by the deal, does not agree.
A Macabre Relic -- Sold!
Here's an investment with some upside potential: the pistol Jack Ruby used to kill Lee Harvey Oswald.
The gun, a .38-caliber Colt Cobra, sold for $220,000 at an auction of Americana held last week in New York.
What will the buyer, whose identity was not disclosed, do with the gun?
"I guess he's going to put it away," said Frank Roman, who submitted the bid on the collector's behalf.


Streetscapes: The 1871 Gilsey House; Re-Restoration in the Offing
IF the 60's, 70's and 80's were decades of the architectural restoration of almost every major landmark, it may be that the 90's -- and the turn of the 21st century -- will be decades of re-restoration, correcting earliershortfalls and mistakes.
One example is the 1871 Gilsey House, a cast-iron extravaganza at the northeast corner of 29th Street and Broadway.
It received praise for a modest facade fixup that rescued it from oblivion in 1980.
Now the facade needs to be largely redone, but the building can never be really restored to its original condition, regardless of budget.


Maywood Journal; Hit-and-Run Death Still Puzzles Town
ON many streets here, there are brilliant reminders of the holiday season, like bulb-laden Christmas trees hanging from street lamps along West Pleasant Avenue, the main thoroughfare.
Elsewhere, ornate banners proclaim a merry message of love and cheer.
But one sign on Spring Valley Avenue across from the Bergen Mall Shopping Center has a more subdued, haunting effect, and its plea reaches into the consciousness of all who see it, they say.


Help for Alzado
Hollywood has come to the aid of former Oakland Raiders' All-Pro lineman LYLE ALZADO.
ARNOLD SCHWARZENEGGER, EMILIO ESTEVEZ, STEVEN SEAGAL and JOHN CANDY will be among the celebrities at the "Lyle, This One's For You" tribute next month in Beverly Hills honoring Alzado, who is battling brain cancer.
Proceeds from the Jan. 11 benefit at the Beverly Hilton Hotel will benefit the Lyle Alzado National Steroid Education Program.
Alzado, 42 years old, was diagnosed last year with inoperable brain cancer, which he says was caused by steroid abuse.
(AP)


Out on the Highway, You Could Be in Carnegie Hall
Hall on Wheels -- Ford introduced car radios with ambiance simulators, making four-seat sedans sound like 2,000-seat concert halls.
Price Break -- Prices for table-top stereo headed downward as major firms like Denon, Panasonic and Yamaha, trying to tempt buyers during a recession, offered complete and musically competent sound systems for less than $1,000.


Taking Note of the Year's Events
EVEN as we make ready to greet the New Year, it might be well to look back at some of the cultural events that brightened (or dampened) the Connecticut music scene in 1991.
Among other happenings, for instance, we greeted the arrival of the first ever:
State Troubadour: The poet, composer and balladeer Tom Callinan was appointed to that exalted post in June, after 14 years and 6 solo albums (the most recent, aptly enough called "The Connecticut Troubadour") devoted largely to writing and singing about life in New England.
"The state is a vibrant patchwork of people and places," said the 44-year old Clinton resident, who added that he hoped to compile a book of local stories and songs.


Service Centers At Winter Games
A network of customer centers has been opened in France by American Express to provide travel and financial services for the thousands of visitors expected for the Winter Olympics in the Alpine region around Albertville in February.
Opening the centers is described by local businesspeople as a counterattack by American Express on Visa, which has the exclusive on credit-card sales at ticket windows at the Olympic sites for events tickets.


Center Helps Those for Whom Sleep Is an Enemy
JUDITH M. CULLEN, a systems program analyst, can remember lying in bed, eyes wide open, watching a stranger move about her room in the shadows.
Transfixed with fear and unable to move or make a sound, she could only lie and wait silently for the figure to disappear, as it always did, and for control over her body to return.
David Elving Schwartz, a Newark lawyer, recalls driving along the Garden State Parkway when, he says, he felt a wave of fatigue sweep over his body.
Struggling to stay awake, he slapped himself, hard, in the face.
Then, glancing over at a car beside him, Mr.
Schwartz was embarrassed and hurt at seeing the occupants of the other car laughing at him.


Miss Vanderpool to Wed in August
Nathalie Akin Vanderpool of Cambridge, Mass., and Dr.
Harold Y. Vanderpool of Galveston, Tex., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Claire Vanderpool, to Robert Alexander Provost 3d, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Provost Jr. of Lexington, Mass.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Vanderpool, 26 years old, graduated from Vanderbilt University and is studying for an M.B.A. at Boston University.
Her father is a professor of medical ethics at the University of Texas, where her mother, a doctoral candidate in developmental psychology at Harvard University, had been an assistant professor in pediatrics.


Dr. Goldstein To Wed in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Goldstein of Fair Lawn, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Jennifer Lynn Goldstein, to Dr.
Basil Matthew Michaels, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur Michaels of Bridgeport, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Dr.
Goldstein, 28 years old, is a psychiatrist in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Delaware, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a medical degree from New York University.
Her father is the chairman of Fast Pulse Technology Inc., a laser manufacturing concern in Englewood, N.J.
Her mother, Marion Goldstein, is the company's office manager.


Making a Differnce; Pennzoil's Siberian Gambit
CAN Russian oil help rescue the Pennzoil Company?
The Houston-based company, disparaged by Wall Street and weakened by falling oil and gas profits, said last week that it had struck a deal to develop and produce oil and gas in a western Siberian field within the vast Russian Federated Republic.


Chess
Three players shared the lead as the final round of the elite, all-grandmaster Investbanka International Tournament in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, got under way at the end of November, but only one finished with a flourish -- Boris Gelfand of the Soviet Union.
Using sharp tactics, Gelfand defeated Predrag Nikolic of Yugoslavia and took first prize with a 7 1/2-3 1/2 score.
It's pretty clear that he has got over the defeat in his quarterfinal world championship candidates match at the hands of Nigel Short.


Can't Tell Coaches Without a Scorecard
The latest news in the National Football League's Coaches Derby -- take a deep breath -- is: BILL PARCELLS has apparently decided to accept the head post in Tampa Bay, according to a newspaper in Chicago; the new sideline boss in San Diego will be Georgia Tech Coach BOBBY ROSS, according to a newspaper in Atlanta, and the Seattle Seahawks' president and general manager, TOM FLORES, will start the search for a new head coach to replace CHUCK KNOX by looking in the mirror, according to Flores himself.
Parcells is expected to bring the former Bears general manager JERRY VAINISI with him to the Buccaneers, The Chicago Tribune reported yesterday, citing unidentified N.F.L. sources.


Stocks and The Public: Newly in Love
IT is the quiet trends that sneak up on markets, noticed by too many analysts only when it is too late.
The trend of the 1990's, it appears, may be the return of the individual investor.
The reason for that return -- the disappointment over plunging interest rates -- is obvious, but long-term trends often get washed out by the excitement of the moment.
Only now is it becoming clear just how pervasive the trend became in 1991.


Dishes to Serve a New Year's Gathering
BEFORE the countdown to 1992 begins, the countdown for that New Year's Eve party or New Year's Day open house has been under way.
What to serve?
New Year's Eve demands elegance and a touch of luxury perhaps.
On New Year's Day, on the other hand, there can be greater informality -- yet a feeling of abundance should prevail.
By making slight adjustments, similar menus can be tailored to fit both occasions.


This Area Where We're Not Dead
SARAH'S LAUGHTER
And Other Stories. By Susan Engberg. 194 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $18.


Will Open Job Market Lead to Open Minds?
With seven -- possibly eight -- head-coaching vacancies in the National Football League, the most ever at one time and almost a third of the jobs in the league, there is some concern around the league that members of minority groups won't be hired or even interviewed for those jobs.
There are jobs open at San Diego, Minnesota, Green Bay, Pittsburgh, Tampa Bay, Seattle and with the Los Angeles Rams.
There could be another job open next week, if the Colts decide not to retain Rick Venturi.


The 3-Year Leap Of Todd Oldham
Todd Oldham never went to design school.
He taught himself how to make patterns and really wants to be a film director.
But in three years he has achieved what some designers struggle a lifetime for: His clothes are sold in many of the best stores in the country and he is the recipient of the Council of Fashion Designers of America's 1991 award for new talent.
"I haven't had any formal training, but that's worked to my advantage," he said at a recent interview in his New York showroom.
"People don't know what to expect."


Ms. Grevers, Student, Weds
Catherine Anne Grevers, a law student, and Douglas James Schmidt, a jewelry company executive, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
John and St.
Mary in Chappaqua, N.Y.
The Rev.
Charles Kavanagh officiated.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Georgetown University and has a master's degree in psychology from Harvard University.
She is a second-year student at New York University School of Law.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
August Grevers of Chappaqua.
Her father is the president of New York Navigation Inc., an international shipping company in New York.


There's a Big Job That Gorbachev Can Still Do; The Task Before Us
To the Editor:
It is easy to join hungry and tired Russians and punish Mikhail Gorbachev in defeat.
Your Moscow dispatches seem to delight in calling him "Johnny one-note" and "irrelevant."


Robert P. Storch to Marry Sara Lord
Mrs.
Victor A. Lord of Albany has announced the engagement of her daughter Sara Matilthe Lord to Robert Phillip Storch, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney Storch of Jacksonville, Fla.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lord and her fiance are prosecutors in the public integrity section of the Justice Department in Washington.
She is a daughter also of the late Mr.
Lord.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
As a Rhodes Scholar, she earned a master's degree in politics, philosophy and economics at Oxford University, and she has a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father was a senior partner in the Albany law firm of McNamee, Lochner, Titus &amp; Williams.
Her mother, Athena V. Lord, is an author of children's books.


Beth Wagshul Has Wedding
Beth Alison Wagshul, the assistant copy chief of advertising for Saks Fifth Avenue, and Stephen Matthew Besen, a partner in the law firm of Weil, Gotshal &amp; Manges, both in New York, were married last evening at the Choate Chapel on the campus of Choate Rosemary Hall in Wallingford, Conn.
Rabbi Daniel Isaac officiated.
Mrs.
Besen, 30 years old, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ely Cutler Wagshul of Meriden, Conn.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father, a former chief of staff of Meriden-Wallingford Hospital, is a founding partner in Urology Associates in Meriden.


Jersey City Youth Shot to Death in Brooklyn
A teen-ager from Jersey City was fatally shot while stopped in a car in Brooklyn early yesterday morning, the police said.
The youth, Corey Ching, 17 years old, of 101 Magnolia Avenue, who was driving the car, was shot once in the chest.


Yankee Fans: Out of Debate
To the Sports Editor:
What is all the carping going on about whether or not the Mets' moves guaranteed them a pennant or not?
They are exciting, dynamic moves, and, as a Yankee fan, I would love to be speculating how Bonilla, Saberhagen and Murray helped my team.
Alas, we Yankee fans have nothing positive to debate, only total agreement that the Yankees are in total chaos.
STEVE WALK Great Neck, L.I.


The Executive Computer; On Whom Will the Spotlight -- and the Ax -- Fall in 1992?
THE past year has been a tumultuous one for the computer industry, and there is no reason to suspect the new year will be any more tranquil.
The most optimistic executives say the market may grow a little; others suggest that a shakeout will winnow many second- and third-tier companies and shake the foundations of the top tier.
John McCarthy, an analyst with Forrester Research Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., a market research firm, predicted "continued bloodletting as business and the economy go bad."


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL 3-11  BUSH'S TOUR BRINGS CONTROVERSY
As President Bush leaves on Monday for Australia and Asia, the good-will tour he planned has changed into a blunt sales pitch for American exports and jobs, causing anger and dismay in Japan.
Page 1


Fiber-Optic Network And Cable Rates
In reading the article "Speed-Up of Fiber-Optic Network Debated" (Dec. 8), I found the claimed concern by the cable industry about higher rates for the consumer quite amusing.
I certainly haven't seen the cable industry demonstrate that concern for the consumer as it uses its monopolies within communities to jack up cable rates.
It seems obvious that the cable companies are afraid of any competition.
They realize that most of their customers are very dissatisfied and would probably leave them in droves if they had other choices.


Care Can Keep Holiday Gift Plants Alive
POTS of dwarf conifers and evergreens are often given as gifts.
The little plants are usually decorated with colorful ribbons, tiny bows and packages.
And what is more these gifts are alive and may be planted in the garden.
But the trick now is to keep them alive.
Until the planting season does come -- and it is best to set the young plant out in spring -- keep it cold, that is dormant.
Growth is not to be encouraged at this time of year.
If the garage is unheated and it has a window, this would be a good place to keep the plant.


Plan for New Commodities Center Faces Uncertain Future
A year after it was announced as a victory in New York City's battle to retain big business, the plan for a new $450 million commodities trading center in TriBeCa appears likely to be scaled down because commodities firms can now find cheaper office space elsewhere in lower Manhattan.
The project would be the recipient of one of the largest real-estate subsidies from the city and state.
Already the focus of fierce opposition from TriBeCa residents, the project is now being squeezed by a depressed market for office space in which landlords are desperate for corporate tenants.


Knock, Knock
Is George Steinbrenner quietly trying the locks on The House that Ruth Built?
In the summer of 1990, Mr.
Steinbrenner, the New York Yankees' principal owner, was banned for life from baseball for conduct unbecoming an owner -- consorting with a gambler.
Since then, the only clamor for his return has been coming from him, but he is apparently intent on worming his way back in.
Meeting with the other Yankee partners in Florida last week, Mr.
Steinbrenner reportedly said that his lawyers would eliminate two lawsuits that Commissioner Fay Vincent has said must disappear before he will even consider a reinstatement.
If that happens, some sports columnists speculated, he could be back in baseball by August, when the two-year suspension that Mr.
Vincent originally intended to impose would be up.
The consensus among fans who were interviewed seemed to be that Mr.
Steinbrenner, known for bickering with his players and managers, would be about as welcome as, well, rain at a ballgame.


A Suicide in Amherst?
THIS BRIEF TRAGEDY
Unraveling the Todd-Dickinson Affair.
By John Evangelist Walsh.
Illustrated. 230 pp.
New York: Grove Weidenfeld. $19.95.


Aspen Courses on Paragliding
Paragliding -- a sport popular in the European Alps in which participants run from a mountain slope seated in a harness below a nylon paraglider or wing and float to the valley below -- is being offered to visitors signing up for a three-day course at Aspen this winter.
Paragliders can control their descent by manipulating the wing as if coming down by parachute.
The lessons are being given by the Aspen Paragliding School at the base of Tiehack-Buttermilk Mountain.
The courses, held once or twice a week, cost $375 a person and consist of one day of ground school, with students learning how to handle the canopylike wing without flying, and two days of short flights originating at Tiehack-Buttermilk.
Group classes are for three to eight people, and each class has two instructors, with at least one certified by the American Paragliding Association.
Private lessons cost $375 a day.
More information: (303) 925-7625, (303) 927-3258 or (303) 927-4524.


Don't Look Now, but the Best Was Straight Out of a Thrift Shop
Great at Last -- Stuart Davis's late paintings, seen in unprecedented quantity in a retrospective at the Metropolitan Museum of Art -- a stunning tribute to a painter who never stopped getting better.
Best Early Years -- Robert Rauschenberg's, seen in two installments -- a crisp survey of the artist's 1962-64 silkscreen paintings, at the Whitney, and an illuminating journey through his efforts of the early 50's, organized by the Menil Collection and inaugurated at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington.


Maintaining and Restoring Fine Slabs of Marble
MARBLE, although durable, requires special care to remain beautiful.
If the right products are used, cleaning marble already in good condition is easy, and even rejuvenating neglected marble usually is not too difficult.
But polishing dulled marble and mending chipped or broken pieces are generally jobs for experts.
To clean marble, use detergents and other products specifically formulated for it.
These are available from marble and janitorial supply companies and some tile stores.


Tech Notes; Harnessing a Plane's Turbulence
AS they fly, airplanes generate vortexes of swirling air off the back of each wingtip.
The ones generated by small craft are inconsequential, but large airliners and cargo planes churn out what have been described as "horizontal tornados" that can persist for several minutes.
These contribute to drag on the plane -- and can throw other aircraft violently out of control, especially if their wingspan is about the same as the diameter of the vortex.
Until now, the only way to assure safety has been to space planes far enough apart so that the vortexes have time enough to dissipate.
But this has led to costly delays in landings at airports.


Authorities Exceed Original Roles
There can be no doubt that some of the functions performed by "independent" government authorities are performed well (e.g., sewage treatment in a number of communities).
There can also be no doubt that too often the authorities are not held properly accountable for their actions ("Authorities: Autonomy vs. Accountability," Dec. 15).
Clearly, a number of the authorities, particularly the larger, so-called multi-agency authorities, have expanded their roles well beyond their initial purpose.
One has to ask whether these agencies like the Port Authority, which provides funds for Newark Airport and the PATH trains (among other things), are really the bodies best suited to handle the areas which they govern.
I do not remember any poll of PATH riders on the subject of our satisfaction with Port Authority management.


Champions And Casualties Share the Stage
WHILE the Giants were winning a classic Super Bowl, scud missiles were whining through the skies of the Persian Gulf.
When the Minnesota Twins were winning a classic World Series, the Soviet Union was crumbling, ruble by ruble, into a commonwealth without wealth.
In 1991, sports produced classic theater amid raw reality.


Managing; Stempel Walks the Tightrope
IN Robert C. Stempel, the General Motors Corporation has a chief executive with more respect among factory workers than any other commander of the auto giant in modern times.
"He's a people person, not one of those financial guys," said Annette Morrow, a 15-year veteran at G.M.'s Arlington, Tex., plant.


California Dreams: Moving In, or Out
With California's economy in decline, Gov.
Pete Wilson has been hammering at the theme that there are two kinds of Californians: those who pay taxes and those who receive government services.
The nation's most populous and diverse state is headed for a fiscal "train wreck," the Governor says, if tax revenue continues to decline and health, welfare and education costs continue to rise, if middle-class working people leave the state while immigrants and indigents move in.


Link From J.F.K.
To the Editor: In regard to recent letters on J.F.K.
Airport access, the Commitee for Better Transitstrongly suggests that arrivals to New York in the evenings and weekends forgo the free Port Authority bus-A Train connection and take either a yellow medallion taxi or the Green Line Q-10 bus, which operates 24 hours, to the Union Turnpike-Kew Gardens subway station and board either the E or F train to Manhattan.
This is the route airline employees prefer.
The A makes all stops except on weekdays, through some very questionable neighborhoods whereas the E and the F run express except between 1:30 and 5:30 A.M.
The E uses Eighth Avenue and terminates at the World Trade Center; the F takes Sixth Avenue before heading to Brooklyn and Coney Island.
Both the E and F stop within convenient walking distance of major midtown hotels.
They take 25 to 35 minutes to midtown Manhattan.


A Second-Act Woman, A Quadruple-Threat Man, Zillion-Dollar Deals and Career Meltdowns
Biggest Flash in the Pan -- After selling eight million copies of his debut album, Vanilla Ice -- touted as rap's answer to Elvis -- bombed with a live album and a movie, "Cool as Ice," which closed in a week.
Jack of All Trades -- A critical drubbing didn't keep Harry Connick Jr., the 24-year-old jazz Wunderkind, from having four albums on the Billboard 200 Top Album chart this month.
"Blue Light, Red Light" found him arranging as well as writing, singing and conducting his own 40's-style big-band songs.


The Bushes: Low-Tax Texans
The approach of an election year, in a recession that has meant increases in state and local taxes for many Americans, has stirred up an old controversy that has dogged George Bush for a decade.
The issue is the place the President calls home.
And the emphasis this time is on the tax savings it generates.


Dollars Are Leaving Philippines, Too
The withdrawal of American forces from the Subic Bay naval base by the end of 1992 will close a chapter in the Philippines' turbulent relationship with its former colonial ruler, but it poses economic problems for this already poor country.
The decision to withdraw from Subic is expected to end a longstanding political debate.
Since Filipinos won full independence from the United States in 1946, they have been divided over the issue of the American military presence.


Kate Feketie, Student, Is Wed
Kathryn Ann Feketie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Feketie of South Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to William Thomas Freeman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Parker Freeman of Moorestown, N.J.
The Rev.
Michael J. Feketie, an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Sorrows Roman Catholic Church in South Orange.
Mrs.
Freeman, 27 years old, is known as Kate.
She graduated cum laude from Colgate University and is studying for an M.B.A. at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of labor relations at the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority at the Meadowlands.


Sabbath Bans Draw Israelis Into Quarrels
The shouting match took place at Jerusalem's central bus station on a Saturday at 4:52 P.M. -- 26 minutes before the end of the Jewish Sabbath.
One of the belligerents was a taxi driver dressed in black denim pants and a black leather jacket.
The other wore the long black coat, suit and hat of a rigorously observant Jew.


Sarah Morehouse, Professor, Is Wed
Sarah Powell Morehouse, a professor of political science at the University of Connecticut, and Malcolm E. Jewell, a professor of political science at the University of Kentucky, were married yesterday in Bridgeport, Conn.
The Rev.
Daniel Crowley officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
Dr.
Morehouse, who is 64 years old and will keep her name, graduated from Wellesley College and has master's and Ph.D. degrees from Yale University.
She is a daughter of the late Ralph and Eugenia Powell.
Her two previous marriages ended in divorce.


BEST SELLERS: December 29, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
12
SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."
2
3
11
NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as nightmares and disasters to the town.
3
2
6
NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the lives and fortunes of Edwina Winfield and her large family.
4
4
19
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.
5
8
32
THE POLAR EXPRESS, written and illustrated by Chris Van Allsburg. (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.) A small boy's Christmas Eve train ride.
6
5
2
THE JOLLY CHRISTMAS POSTMAN, written and illustrated by Janet and Allan Ahlberg. (Little, Brown, $16.95.) A mailman delivers letters to nursery rhyme and fairy tale characters.
7
9
4
WLT, by Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $21.95.) The birth, prosperity and decline of a down-home Minneapolis radio station.
8
6
13
NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II. (LP)
9
7
16
THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An American naval officer, assigned to investigate an accident in the Alps, has to contend with a mysterious force. (LP)
10
1
DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA, $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and pictures.
11
12
42
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
12
13
9
REMEMBER, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $22.50.) A television correspondent takes a trip across Europe to learn the truth about her fiance's suicide. (LP)
13
14
7
GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Macmillan, $21.95.) The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.
14
10
9
COMEBACK, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $21.95.) A diplomat, returning to his native Gloucestershire, finds that his past life in horse racing may help save others.
15 *
91
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
15
ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The actress's memoirs. (LP)
2
3
18
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's commonplaces, from meat loaf to pet dogs to fireflies. (LP)
3
4
11
DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.
4
2
8
UNDER FIRE, by Oliver L. North with William Novak. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography of the retired Marine lieutenant colonel, with his view of the Iran-contra affair.
5
5
4
MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.) The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.
6
6
4
THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A reporter's account of an N.B.A. championship season spent with Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls.
7
7
8
CHILDHOOD, by Bill Cosby. (Putnam, $14.95.) The entertainer recalls his boyhood and reflects on the ways of today's kids.
8
10
19
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)
9
13
2
THE WORLD IS MY HOME, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) The autobiography of the popular novelist. (LP)
10
8
9
PRAIRYERTH, by William Least Heat-Moon. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A close look at the people and mores of Chase County, Kansas.
11
12
28
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
12
9
7
MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural scene.
13
15
4
MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) The story of an Auschwitz survivor in the Catskills, told in comic-book form; reclassified this week as nonfiction.
14
14
2
ANNIE LEIBOVITZ: Photographs, 1970-1990. (HarperCollins, $60.) An album of portraits of musicians, politicians, writers, athletes, dancers and artists.
15 *
11
6
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends that the media and political groups are staging a war against women's rights.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
59
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
2
5
99
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
3
4
42
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
4
3
6
MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial advice by a Florida entrepreneur.
5
1
4
THE BEST TREATMENT, by Isadore Rosenfeld. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) Advice from a physician on a host of medical problems.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
TROLLOPE: A Biography, by N. John Hall. (Clarendon/Oxford University, $30.) With tact, wit and what looks like an absolute knowledge of Trollope and his works, Mr.
Hall gives us the novelist who made both life and art into marvelous comic ironies.
EDGAR A. POE: Mournful and Never-Ending Remembrance, by Kenneth Silverman. (HarperCollins, $27.50.) Mr.
Silverman sifts the evidence to yield an authoritative life of the unhappy hack who produced a handful of poems and stories the world cannot forget.
OCTOBER SURPRISE: America's Hostages in Iran and the Election of Ronald Reagan, by Gary Sick. (Times Books/Random House, $23.) Mr.
Sick lays out his case, which is circumstantial and not conclusive, that the 1980 Reagan campaign made a deal with Iran not to release the hostages during Jimmy Carter's term.
SANTIAGO: Saint of Two Worlds, by Joan Myers, Marc Simmons and Donna Pierce. (University of New Mexico, Cloth, $45; Paper, $25.) Words and pictures (by Ms. Myers) that explore the remarkable legend of St.
James in Spain and America.
CRYSTAL RIVER: Three Novellas, by Charlie Smith. (Linden/ Simon &amp; Schuster, $20.) Extraordinary tales that explore the weaknesses and needs that drive people together and apart.
LIVING AFTER MIDNIGHT, by Lee K. Abbott. (Putnam, $21.95.) In this collection of five short stories and a novella, Mr.
Abbott's prose exhibits high intensity, tight focus and a concentration on the depths and dimensions of more or less ordinary people.
THE MAN TO SEE.
Edward Bennett Williams: Ultimate Insider; Legendary Trial Lawyer, by Evan Thomas. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $27.50.) Though an authorized biography, this life of the justly celebrated lawyer spares none of Williams's faults.


CAMPUS LIFE: Southern Methodist; Hoping to Attract Top Physicists With New Collider
Southern Methodist University is looking to a Superconducting Super Collider to attract world-class physicists to Dallas and to strengthen its physics department at the same time.
The collider, which is designed to be the world's largest particle accelerator, is now being built south of Dallas, less than an hour from campus.
The particle accelerator will test scientific theories about the fundamental elements of matter and the forces that hold matter together.


A Sampler of the Year's Memorable Dishes
IN doing our tally of restaurants reviewed this year, we recall specific dishes as vividly as the restaurants that served them.
The first of three rated Excellent, Bella Luna (554 Old Post Road, Greenwich, 862-9555), serves three dishes that we could feast on again and again: Vitello alla griglia con funghi e mascarpone, grilled rare veal served over wild mushrooms on toasted bread topped with mascarpone; cheese-filled tortellini cooked al dente and enhanced by a golden garlic cream sauce, and a dessert of poached pear stuffed with brandy-infused mascarpone in a white wine sauce.


For New Year's Eve, Think Ethnic
TO eat out on New Year's Eve and not spend too much money, think ethnic.
Even those ethnic restaurants planning elaborate parties later in the evening are offering their regular menus and modest prices before the parties.
Eating at an ethnic restaurant on the Island once meant Italian or Chinese, but no more.
There is no longer a need to trek to Manhattan for foreign fare.


Miss Harang to Wed
May wedding plans for Elizabeth Anne Harang, a research associate in therapeutics at the Genzyme Corporation, a chemical and drug manufacturing concern in Cambridge, Mass., and Andrew Farren Mahon, a market research consultant at New Science Associates in Southport, Conn., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Jacques Harang of Huntington, L.I.
Mr.
Mahon's parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond P. Mahon of Madison, Conn.
Miss Harang, 28 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Mount Holyoke College and received a master's degree in membrane biophysics from the University of California at Davis.
Her fiance, 29, graduated from Georgetown University.


Maintaining and Restoring Fine Slabs of Marble
MARBLE, although durable, requires special care to remain beautiful.
If the right products are used, cleaning marble already in good condition is easy, and even rejuvenating neglected marble usually is not too difficult.
But polishing dulled marble and mending chipped or broken pieces are generally jobs for experts.
To clean marble, use detergents and other products specifically formulated for it.
These are available from marble and janitorial supply companies and some tile stores.


The Executive Life; Boffo? No. But Jobless 'Comics' Get a Laugh
AS the recession drags on, entrepreneurs across America are trying their best to make a buck off it.
One of them is 28-year-old Carylin Berger, manager of Stand-Up New York, a comedy club on Manhattan's Upper West Side.
In November, Ms.
Berger created a competition for the title of "Funniest Unemployed Person in New York." The first qualifying round attracted a modest audience and earned a couple of reviews in local newspapers.
The second qualifying round -- held the week before Christmas -- drew camera crews from three national television shows and a standing-room-only crowd.


Throw Away Those Scripts. Some of the Greatest Moments Were Wordless.
Great Theater Without Words I -- In Brian Friel's "Dancing at Lughnasa," five unmarried sisters in the County Donegal, Ireland, of August 1936 momentarily escape poverty, drudgery and despair with a spontaneous dance to the pagan music blaring forth from their new Marconi wireless.
Great Theater Without Words II -- In Jon Robin Baitz's "Substance of Fire," Ron Rifkin plays a modern King Lear of Gramercy Park -- an elitist New York book publisher and embittered Jewish father -- who tries to eradicate a lifetime of crippling rage by setting fire to a postcard painted by Adolf Hitler.


In Darien, Mame Returns With Patrice Munsel
THERE are musicals that demand a star but could live without one.
And, of course, there are musicals with no such requirement.
And then there is a musical like "Mame," a terminal case of star dependency.
Connecticut's Broadway Theater in Darien is lucky to have Patrice Munsel to hold up and maneuver the show.
She gives it class, charm, pizazz and glamour.


Stage Fright Is the Villain Many Actors Must Upstage
"MY COURAGE sank," wrote the actor, describing the frozen terror that accompanied his opening as Solness in "The Master Builder,""and with each succeeding minute it became less possible to resist this horror." His voice soon faded, his throat constricted, and "the audience was beginning to go giddily round." Only fears of a career-ending scandal permitted him to grope his way through the rest of the evening.
One would expect such an episode to belong to an actor's apprenticeship, presumably in a regional or provincial playhouse.
Instead, not only was the victim Laurence Olivier, the year was 1965, when he was at the apogee of his fame, and the site of the calamity was the National Theater in London.
Moreover, his torment continued unabated for years.


Denise DeRosa Has Wedding
Denise Liliane DeRosa, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank DeRosa of Wilton, Conn., was married yesterday to Raymond Michael Hassett, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond Hassett of Millersville, Md.
Msgr.
Otto L. Garcia officiated at Our Lady of Fatima Church in Wilton.
The bride, 24 years old, is a manager at the Talbots clothing store in Westport, Conn.
She graduated from the Catholic University of America.
Her father is the public-information director of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn.


Courtney Cimilluca Weds in Summit
Courtney Hampton Cimilluca, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Cimilluca of Summit, N.J., was married there yesterday to Bartholomew Thomas Zanelli Jr., a son of Judith Brown Zanelli of Summit and the late Mr.
Zanelli.
The Rev.
William H. Strain officiated at Calvary Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Zanelli, 23 years old, is a marketing specialist at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is an executive vice president of Lehman Brothers, the New York investment banking firm.
Her mother, Carol Cimilluca, is the assistant director of the Overlook Hospital Foundation in Summit.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Dec. 7  MANHATTAN  East Midtown 375,000
345 East 56th Street  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,800-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, maid's room, dining room, terrace, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,950, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  Fort Washington 90,000
116 Pinehurst Avenue  (Hudson View Gardens)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; dinette, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $677, 22% tax-deductible (Broker: Simone Song Properties)  Greenwich Village 353,000
302 West 12th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. prewar condo; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, sunken living room, fireplace, 3 exposures; common charge $539; taxes $3,441 (Brokers: Goodstein Equities-Sheila Cornacchini Real Estate)  TriBeCa 115,000
74-76 Reade Street  500-sq.-ft, open-loft co-op in prewar building; elevator, 1 bath, 14-ft. ceilings, exposed-brick walls; maintenance $300, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Tabak Real Estate)  Upper East Side 960,000
570 Park Avenue (63d St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 2,300-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, fireplace; maintenance $1,750, 28% tax-deductible (Brokers: Olshan Realty-Corcoran Group)  BRONX  City Island 110,000
353 Fordham Place  2-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family, 2-story brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, L.I.
Sound view; 25- by 60-ft. lot; taxes $500 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Riverdale 220,000
5445 Sylvan Avenue  2-family detached house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,300 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy and Associates)  BROOKLYN  Ditmas Park 327,500
466 East 17th Street  6-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family, detached, frame colonial; dining room, studio with skylight on top floor, rear deck, original oak woodwork, 2-car garage, landmark district, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,100 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  Park Slope 190,000
455 13th Street  2-family, 3-story brick town house; 1 1/2-baths in floor-through unit; 1 bath in duplex; 2 bedrooms in each; 17- by 100-ft. irregular lot; taxes $1,543 (Broker: Park West Realty)  Park Slope 313,000
484 14th Street  2-family, 3-story limestone duplex; 4 bedrooms, dining room, eat-in kitchen in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath in each; 19- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,787 (Broker: Marilyn A. Donahue)  QUEENS  Bayside 206,000
50-20 206th Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 22- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Rego Park 188,000
69-04 Alderton Street  2-family detached frame house; 2 bedrooms, dining room in 2d-floor unit; 1 bedroom, eat-in kitchen in other; 1 bath in each, 1-car garage, 26- by 126-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Dix Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Heartland Village 100,000
55 Lanped Loop  (Mirador Estates)  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. condo in 3-year-old building; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 20- by 20-ft. storage area, pool; common charge $179, taxes $600 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)  Tottenville 205,000
36 Satterlee Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family, detached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 38- by 113-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)


Global Lender Withholds Kenya's $63 Million
In an ominous financial setback for this East African country, the International Monetary Fund has delayed disbursing a $63 million loan because of dissatisfaction with progress on promised economic reforms, Western diplomats report.
The rebuff by the economic and fiscal agency comes a month after Kenya was denied new help by another major agency, the World Bank, and by Western countries for the next six months , saying that the Government needed to clean up corruption and step up political and economic liberalization.


What's Coming Up
1992 WILL BE A YEAR OF bold statements.
As usual, design manufacturers are riding on the coattails of fashion, introducing vibrant colors for everything from teacups to towels.
Another strong trend is the continued concern for the environment.
Not only are consumers more aware of what they are buying, but also manufacturers are bending over backward to use environmentally correct materials.
One company has even gone so far as to make a nylon-like carpeting out of recycled plastic soft-drink bottles.
And gadgets, ever-popular items, are being designed to be more user-friendly.


An Unparalleled Opportunity
To the Editor:
Since Edward Rothstein confesses in "Mozart Bicentennial: Too Much, Too Late"  [ Dec. 1 ]  that he finds much of Mozart's music "boring," it would follow that he lacks enthusiasm for Lincoln Center's unprecedented efforts in performing, over a 19-month period, the entire body of this composer's work.
We are more persuaded by the genuine enthusiasm of audiences, scholars and many other music critics around the world for this unparalleled opportunity to learn more about Mozart.


Talking: Mortgages; Whether To Retain A Broker
IT'S increasingly likely that anyone seeking to finance or refinance a home may be planning to do so through a mortgage broker.
The Federal National Mortgage Association, the nation's largest investor in home mortgages, estimates that by the end of 1991 about 37 percent of all mortgages it is financing originated through brokers, compared with 27 percent in 1989.
A mortgage broker acts as an intermediary between borrower and lender, seeking the best rates and terms for the borrower by shopping among many lenders and helping compile the documentation needed to qualify the borrower.


Defense Wins It For Chiefs
This week, the Chiefs were ready for Todd Marinovich.
They switched a new person into the "lurk" position in the secondary, and the choice was safety Deron Cherry, a guy who had been around the league 10 years longer and was 9 years older than Marinovich, the Raiders' rookie quarterback.
"I think he kept losing me in his picture," said the 32-year-old Cherry, who surfaced as the Chiefs' special defensive weapon and had two of the Chiefs' four interceptions of Marinovich as Kansas City edged the Raiders, 10-6, this afternoon in an American Conference wild-card playoff game here before 75,827 fans in Arrowhead Stadium.


Prison for Doctor
GEORGE T. ZAHORIAN, the doctor convicted of selling steroids to professional wrestlers, was sentenced Friday in Harrisburg, Pa., to three years in prison.
Zahorian, a urologist, was also fined $12,700 and ordered to serve two years' probation after his jail term, which starts Feb. 3.
Zahorian said he plans to appeal the conviction. (AP)


Bailing Out
Less than two years after he signed on to head the department in charge of New York City's jails, Allyn R. Sielaff may be looking around for some nice quiet state prison system to run.
A few months after Mr.
Sielaff came to the job of Correction Commissioner with a reputation as a pragmatic reformer, he came under fire for his handling of a clash between prisoners and guards at the Rikers Island jail.
Then a Federal judge held him in contempt for failing to do something about jail overcrowding.
Then New York City Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman criticized the Correction Department for giving a $250,000 consulting contract to a company that Ms.
Holtzman said was unqualified.
Finally, the controller's office, hinting at impropriety, raised questions about another contract, this one for $1.9 million, awarded by Mr.
Sielaff's department.
Last week, after Mayor David N. Dinkins called him in for a chat about that contract, Mr.
Sielaff announced he would resign to pursue "other interests."


Yeltsin Wins; Russia Is, As Always, The Heart Of the Matter
IT was ever Russia, Boris N. Yeltsin made clear more than a year ago as he laid out his design to govern not the fading Soviet Union but Russia, enduring Russia, long the core of empire for grand czars and petty bureaucrats.
As he began engineering what seemed in that Soviet time an oddly obtuse ambition to be elected the first president ever of the Russian republic, Mr.
Yeltsin said to anyone who asked that he considered Russia a far more promising domain than the Soviet Union and that he coveted its governance far more than Mikhail S. Gorbachev's Soviet presidency.
Much of the outside world, as if mistaking Gorbomania for Slavic fate, did not believe Mr.
Yeltsin.
But now, as both Mr.
Gorbachev and his harshly clutched union recede so suddenly, so shockingly into the sphere of memory, Mr.
Yeltsin stands triumphant with the flow of centuries of history, groping there for the key to the unknown, daunting future.


Political Talk
No More Friendly Enemies
For all the attention in Albany on the war between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the Republican leaders of the State Senate, whom Mr.
Cuomo has blamed for blocking a budget agreement and for keeping him out of the Presidential race, there has been something of a sideshow struggle between the Governor and another Republican: United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato.
Although they come from different parties, the Governor and Senator D'Amato were on distinctly friendly terms for years, sometimes using words like "superb" (Mr. Cuomo did) and "super, just super" (Mr. D'Amato did) to describe each other's work.
But not now.
The first real signs of hostility surfaced two weeks ago, when Mr.
D'Amato announced that he would go to snowy Albany to issue some thoughts about the state budget.
"Oh, we'll make sure to shovel the Capitol steps for him," a sarcastic Mr.
Cuomo told reporters at a news conference. ("Yes, before and after," piped in his chief of staff, Andrew J. Zambelli, as the room dissolved in laughter.)
The next day Mr.
D'Amato, who had never before taken such a public interest in state budget matters, did show up, declaring that if Mr.
Cuomo couldn't handle his own state's budget, "obviously people will wonder how you can handle that situation nationwide." Mr.
Cuomo lashed back at the Senator as a lackey sent by Republicans in Washington, calling him "B.A.D. -- a Bush Attack Dog."
That provoked an expression of outrage from Mr.
D'Amato.
"Your decision to respond to my economic ideas with personal vitriol is wrong," he wrote in a letter to Mr.
Cuomo.
"I demand an apology."
None came from the Governor, who later predicted that Mr.
D'Amato, who is expected to face a tough reelection battle next fall, would be a severe drag on the Republican State Senators who will also be campaigning.
"It's going to be like running through the mud with a 900-pound sumo wrestler on your back," he said.
People close to both men say there is genuine irritation between the two that could well harden into permanent ill feelings.
On the other hand, it is certainly not impossible that all the nasty words served other purposes than just an exchange of slurs.
For Mr.
Cuomo, the D'Amato appearance did bolster his contention that there might be a national Republican plot against him.
And for Mr.
D'Amato, an attack on a Governor who has sagged in the polls, along with the publicity surrounding the theatrics of their falling out, may well have given a boost to his re-election bid.
You Wanted It
Angry Democrats last week turned the table on New Jersey's largest teachers' union, the New Jersey Education Association, using an Assembly Appropriations Committee hearing on tax repeal to deliver a stern public lecture.
"The teachers' union unmistakably added their voice to the chorus of repeal, repeal, repeal," said Assemblyman Bernard F. Kenny, a Democrat from Hudson County.
"Now that the Legislature is considering a sunset and review of the tax package and programs, the N.J.E.A. is doing an about-face. I'm perplexed."
The 137,000-member association put its money and votes behind Republican candidates in the Nov. 5 election.
The teachers' union, one of the most powerful unions in the state, was angry with Democrats over a section of the Quality Education Act that tried to shift teacher pension costs from the state to local schools in richer districts.
Monday's hearing was the first face-to-face meeting between Democrats and N.J.E.A. representatives since the election, and the Democrats seized that opportunity to give the union a tongue-lashing.
"When the N.J.E.A. panicked because the Q.E.A. shifted teacher pension and social security costs to the local level, the Democrats stepped in and delayed the shift for a period of two years," said Assemblyman John A. Villapiano, another Democratic member of the Appropriations Committee.
"But the union still balked, then worked to defeat the Democratic legislators who crafted the 1990 tax program.
"To suggest now that the program is fine and should be left alone is at best an about face and at worst, hypocrisy."
Wayne S. Dibofsky, the associate director of government relations for the union, bore the brunt of the Democrats' anger as he sat before the committee arguing against repeal of the entire $2.8 billion tax package the Democratic-controlled Legislature approved 18 months ago.
"We're concerned about the growing deficit, the quality of life in New Jersey and the quality of schools," Mr.
Dibofsky said.
"All could be drastically hurt by this suggestion that we start from ground zero."
And a spokeswoman for the teachers' union, Karen Joseph, accused the Democrats of "distorting our message."
"The N.J.E.A. has never opposed taxes," Ms.
Joseph said.
"Taxes are what pay for public education."  From Erie to Albany
Jim Kelly, the Buffalo Bills quarterback, is arguably the best-known person in western New York right now.
But a new survey of community leaders by Business First, a magazine that covers the area, cites somebody else as the "most influential" person in the region: Dennis T. Gorski, the Erie County Executive.
Mr.
Gorski, a Democrat who soundly turned back a challenge in November from Mayor James D. Griffin of Buffalo, is about to start his second four-year term.
He is the only Democrat ever elected to the post.
Although Buffalo and the New York metropolitan region are so far apart that some people have suggested they belong in different states, the 47-year-old Mr.
Gorski is expected at some point to try to parlay his influence into a bid for statewide office.
One of his predecessors as county executive, Edward V. Regan, a Republican, is the State Comptroller, and another western New Yorker, Stan Lundine, the former Mayor of Jamestown, is the Lieutenant Governor.
Directory Assistance
What a difference a year makes.
"Crotty, Davis, Forsythe, Dullea, Fryer, Poklemba," reads the speed-dial listings on the telephone in Governor Cuomo's conference room in the State Capitol.
Apparently the budget chaos has kept Mr.
Cuomo's staff so busy that no one has had a chance to change the names, which represent the people who held six of the highest positions in the Cuomo administration last year.
All six men -- who were, respectively, the Governor's chief of staff, counsel, budget director, director of state operations, press officer and criminal-justice director -- left following Mr.
Cuomo's November 1990 re-election, for jobs in either private business or higher education.
The changeover has been cast as a way to bring on a new team for Mr.
Cuomo's third term, although some officials in the Capitol also took it as an early sign that some of those closest to Mr.
Cuomo, who might not have left if they thought he were headed for the White House, did not believe he would wind up running for President.
Just for the record, when things calm down it's time to change the labels on those buttons to: (Andrew J.) Zambelli, (Elizabeth D.) Moore, (Patrick J.) Bulgaro, (Mary Ann) Crotty, (Anne W.) Crowley and (Richard H.) Girgenti.


Dishes to Serve a New Year's Gathering
BEFORE the countdown to 1992 begins, the countdown for that New Year's Eve party or New Year's Day open house has been under way.
What to serve?
New Year's Eve demands elegance and a touch of luxury perhaps.
On New Year's Day, on the other hand, there can be greater informality -- yet a feeling of abundance should prevail.
By making slight adjustments, similar menus can be tailored to fit both occasions.


Brian Donnelly Weds Miss Graf
Susan Ellen Graf, a daughter of George N. Graf Jr. of Port Washington, L.I., and Mrs.
Rollins Robinson Smith of Naples, Fla., was married yesterday to Brian Patrick Donnelly, a son of Richard and Patricia Donnelly of Plandome, L.I.
The Rev.
Charles Lynch performed the ceremony at St.
Peter of Alcantara Roman Catholic Church in Port Washington.
Mrs.
Donnelly, 29 years old, is a program coordinator for Marlboro Event Promotions at Philip Morris in New York.
She graduated from the University of Rhode Island.
Her father is a vice president of the North Fork Bank in Garden City, L.I.
Her mother, Joan Burgess Smith, is a vice president of Dean Witter Reynolds in Naples.


Quotation of the Day
"We have the icon back! We have the power of St. Irene again!" BISHOP VIKENTIOS, pastor of St.
Irene of Chrysovalantou Church in Astoria, Queens.  [ 1:2. ]


Dishes to Serve a New Year's Gathering
BEFORE the countdown to 1992 begins, the countdown for that New Year's Eve party or New Year's Day open house has been under way.
What to serve?
New Year's Eve demands elegance and a touch of luxury perhaps.
On New Year's Day, on the other hand, there can be greater informality -- yet a feeling of abundance should prevail.
By making slight adjustments, similar menus can be tailored to fit both occasions.


Foreign Affairs; Rushdie's Death Foretold
In Gabriel Garcia Marquez's haunting novella "Chronicle of a Death Foretold," a man is killed in full view of his neighbors, who all knew of the impending murder.
Some felt the execution was deserved, others refused to believe the warnings, most procrastinated and a few tried to intervene, but their dreamlike actions had no effect.
Ask the U.S.
Government, the British Government and the United Nations what they are doing to lift Iran's death sentence against Salman Rushdie.
Officials will condemn terrorism and offer comforting words.
Ask further and you might get the chilling feeling that while they surely want Mr.
Rushdie to live, they are not exerting themselves to prevent his murder.


Stephen Roney Wed to Miss Kehm
Marjorie Nossen Kehm, a daughter of Mrs.
Walter C. Kehm of Rye, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Kehm, was married yesterday to Stephen Francis Xavier Roney, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Roney of White Plains.
The Rev.
Edward Johnston, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Christ's Church in Rye.
He was assisted by the Rev.
Gerard Reedy, a Roman Catholic priest and the dean of Fordham College at Fordham University.
Mrs.
Roney, 24 years old, is a sales assistant at Snow Country magazine in New York.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her mother, Priscilla Kehm, is the manager of U Name It Travel in Harrison, N.Y.
Her father was a patent counsel with the GAF Corporation.


It's a Great Movie. Now, if They Can Just Get It Into the Cassette.
Biggest -- It earned $185 million at the box office and won seven Academy Awards, but "Dances With Wolves" was never bigger than in its first week in video stores, when the nearly 1,200 feet of tape required for the three-hour movie frequently caused it to spill off its spools and jam inside the cassette.
You Heard the Man -- "There will be no colorized 'Citizen Kane,' " said Martin Weinstein, vice president of Turner Home Entertainment, on the occasion of the classic's 50th-anniversary release in August.


Maintaining and Restoring Fine Slabs of Marble
MARBLE, although durable, requires special care to remain beautiful.
If the right products are used, cleaning marble already in good condition is easy, and even rejuvenating neglected marble usually is not too difficult.
But polishing dulled marble and mending chipped or broken pieces are generally jobs for experts.
To clean marble, use detergents and other products specifically formulated for it.
These are available from marble and janitorial supply companies and some tile stores.


Making a Differnce; Mr. Dunkel's Big Push
FOR five years, the countries that belong to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade have been debating new global trading rules.
But the talks have become snagged over such nettlesome issues as farm subsidies and import quotas.
Now, Arthur Dunkel, the Director General of GATT, has put forward his own ambitious compromise plan to end the impasse.
In making his take-it-or-leave-it proposal on Dec. 20, Mr.
Dunkel was suddenly trying to play binding arbitrator and not his usual role: the patient, somewhat cajoling referee of negotiations.


Senior Rates
To the Editor: Florence is every bit as wonderful as Sue Cullinan says it is although I believe she is wrong in saying that senior citizens are given discounts at the Ufizzi Gallery.
We asked for such discounts several weeks ago and discovered they have them but that Americans are not eligible.
Something that low-budget travelers should know is that it may cost them a good deal to get to the Florence airport, which is near Pisa.
If they have an early morning flight, there is no train to get them there in time.
They will have to go by taxi and it will cost more than $200.
TOM GOSSETT Winston-Salem, N.C.
The Italian Government Travel Office in New York comments:
Free admission to state museums (including the Uffizi and the Accademia) is granted to those under 18 and over 59 who come from European Community countries and from all other countries that grant reciprocal privileges.
Since there is no such privilege for Italians in the United States, the reciprocity does not apply to Americans.


Data Bank
New Orders for Durable Goods
Nov.
Oct.
Sept.
Monthly percent change
1.2
2.6
-4.3
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
-0.1
0.3
0.4
Consumer Spending
Monthly percent change
0.7
-0.1
0.5
Cash Wheat Price
Dec. 27
Dec. 20
Dec. 13
No. 1 K.C., per bushel
$4.27
$4.14
$4.00
Coal Production
Dec. 20
Dec. 13
Dec. 6
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
20,319
20,420
19,321
Electric Power
Millions of kilowatt hours, weekly total
59,523
54,965
56,284
Weekly Jobless Claims
Dec. 13
Dec. 6
Nov. 29
In thousands
473
493
414
Paperboard Production
Thousands of tons
769.8
775.1
810.2


O.K., So It Wasn't Musical, but It Was a Knockout
Performance of the Year of Any Sort, Anywhere -- Ariane Mnouchkine and her Theatre du Soleil in the "Oresteia" cycle in Paris.
Although there is a persistent undercurrent of music, this is theater, pure and not so simple, and about the best the world has to offer today.
Opera Debut of the Year -- Deborah Voigt's sumptuous statement of the title role in the Boston Lyric Opera's production of "Ariadne auf Naxos."


Man Is Killed by Subway Train
Within a 13-hour period, in four separate incidents, one man was killed by a New York City subway train, two men suffered severed legs when they were hit by trains, and another man apparently escaped injury because he was lying in the trough between the tracks when a train passed over him, Transit Authority officials said.
"After the train passed over him, he got up and ran away," said Caren Gardner, a spokeswoman for the authority.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Amid Recession, a Recovery for Shelton
TWO years ago, the vacancy rate for Shelton's six million square feet of office and industrial buildings was 37 percent, the highest in Fairfield County.
This was a result of a building spree that began in the late 70's, when the city courted developers in an effort to shed its smokestack image and create a more viable economy.
Hundreds of thousands of square feet of new commercial space came onto the market in time for the 1987 crash.


Goodbye, Yuppies. Hello, Beasts. (Plus the Mellowing of Arnold)
Story of the Year -- A smart young woman is entrapped by a brutish male who eventually wins her respect and affection.
This premise can be found in the year's two most seamlessly fine films: "The Silence of the Lambs" and "Beauty and the Beast." "Bugsy" and "Thelma and Louise" are close behind.
Memorable Malady -- Writer's block, turned into an even worse nightmare than it already is.
Made ingeniously surreal in both "Barton Fink" and "Naked Lunch."


Mary Carroll, Lawyer, Wed
Mary Margaret Carroll and Christopher James French, both lawyers, were married yesterday at St.
Patrick's Cathedral by John Cardinal O'Connor.
The bride, 28 years old, is an associate in the New York office of Phillips, Lytle, Hitchcock, Blaine &amp; Huber, a Buffalo law firm.
She graduated cum laude from New York University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Fordham University, as did the bridegroom.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Carroll of New York.
Her father is a sacristan at St.
Patrick's.


Paul Um Wed To Jennifer Choi
Jennifer Jung Eun Elizabeth Choi, an equity marketing specialist at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York, and Paul Woochong Um, a programmer and analyst at Pitney Bowes Inc. in Stamford, Conn., were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Cornelius Chang officiated at St.
Monica's Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Ms.
Choi, 23 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Cornell University, she is a daughter of Jae Heung Choi and Bok Soon Choi of Fort Lee, N.J.
Her father is an adviser to the Asian-American/New York City Police Department Committee.
Her mother is the president of the Good Nature Food Services Corporation, a store in New York.


DON'T TELL
Laura Mansnerus's Hers column "Don't Tell" (Dec. 1) took me back to Detroit 40 years ago.
I applied to an advertising agency for a position as a copywriter.
Following a two-hour interview during which I was all but shown to my desk, I received a phone call informing me that I didn't get the job.
Why?
Because the client, one of the big three automotive giants, didn't want a woman writer on the account.
Forty years ago, who could I have complained to?
Progess is slow, but we've come a long way.
Maybe.
JUDE ROCHE
Warwick, N.Y.


Tip Stevens Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Stevens 3d of Bethlehem, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Rinalda Van Brunt Stevens to John Norman Walker, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John C. Walker of Grafton, Wis.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Stevens, 27 years old, is known as Tip.
She is an associate publicist for Avon Books in New York and a graduate of Princeton University.
Her father is a division manager of Computer Aid, a Philadelphia computer consulting company.


There's a Big Job That Gorbachev Can Still Do; Got Main Thing Right
To the Editor:
Mikhail S. Gorbachev deserves better treatment than he gets in William Safire's "Gorby Invites the Deluge" (column, Dec. 12).


CAMPUS LIFE: Lehigh; College Course Emphasizes Value Of Children's Books
Some Lehigh University students are revisiting the fantasy lands of Winnie-the-Pooh, Treasure Island and the kingdom of Narnia in a popular new course on childhood literature.
But this time they are reading the texts with adult eyes and seeing meanings they may have missed as children.
The class, called "Classics We Read Too Early," is taught by Prof.
Barbara H. Traister, who has culled books from the library of many a childhood.
The list is not light on reading, as the students wading through nearly 700 pages of "David Copperfield" have discovered.
The other books in the course include "Winnie-the-Pooh," "The Wind in the Willows," "The Hobbit," "The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe," "Treasure Island," "The Adventures of Tom Sawyer," "Gulliver's Travels" and "Alice in Wonderland."


On the Street; Warm Finery To Put on the Dog
When the temperature dips into the 20's, dogs travel to Fifth Avenue wearing the latest in canine sweaters and coats that often reflect today's sporty fashion trends.
In the 1950's some women in mink coats had miniature minks made for their pets.
Last week outside Bergdorf's a tiny Yorkshire terrier was dressed in a shearling coat with an elaborate monogram of gold and silver thread stitched across the back, while on lower Fifth Avenue a ferocious-looking bulldog named Archie looked quite spiffy in a studded black leather biker jacket with an American eagle on the back.
This canine fashion statement turned heads and drew smiles from passers-by.


First Americans First
Organizers of Pasadena's annual Rose Bowl parade thought they'd upstage all the quincentenary hoopla over Christopher Columbus by picking his descendant and namesake Cristobal Colon as their 1992 grand marshal.
The New Year's Day procession, dubbed "Voyages of Discovery," would be the kickoff to a year of hero worship, they figured.
They didn't figure enough.
In the minds of some Americans, Columbus rates no worship, and they certainly don't concede that he "discovered" anything.
These dissenters are, of course, Native American Indians, whose ancestors were here first -- indeed, first by thousands of years.
To them, Christopher Columbus symbolizes neither exploration nor heroism, but imperialism and genocide.


2 Malones Combine for 60 to Power Jazz Past Heat
Karl Malone scored 38 points and grabbed 13 rebounds and Jeff Malone added 22 points as the Utah Jazz routed the Miami Heat, 128-103, this afternoon.
Blue Edwards had 16 points for Utah, while John Stockton added 12 points and 14 assists.


No Headline
IN the early autumn of 1990, 7-year-old Shawn Fernandez returned home from playing tag and found his father and a few relatives at the family's house in the Hill section of New Haven.
When he asked where his mother was, "everyone got nervous and said they didn't know," the boy said.
"After a while I just figured she had left me."
The next day Shawn's father handed him an article from The New Haven Register reporting that his mother had been seriously wounded in a gun accident involving her 16-year-old son.
While reading the article, his emotions shifted from deep sadness to anger, said Shawn, whose mother has since made a slow recovery.


2d Job for Counselor
The sports psychologist JACK LLEWELLYN really has his hands full now.
Last week, the Atlanta Braves hired Llewellyn to work with their players.
Now, the Atlanta Hawks have hired him, too.


Maintaining and Restoring Fine Slabs of Marble
MARBLE, although durable, requires special care to remain beautiful.
If the right products are used, cleaning marble already in good condition is easy, and even rejuvenating neglected marble usually is not too difficult.
But polishing dulled marble and mending chipped or broken pieces are generally jobs for experts.
To clean marble, use detergents and other products specifically formulated for it.
These are available from marble and janitorial supply companies and some tile stores.


Despite the Death of the Cool One, Jazz Survives; The Blues Is Back, and Look Out Cleveland!
Johnnys Come Lately -- Carnegie Hall and Lincoln Center, two of the country's most prestigious institutions, finally added jazz programming.
Why wasn't it included a decade or two earlier -- or, for that matter, in other parts of the country?
Answer: the graying of the classical music audience, a k a the bottom line.
Death of the Cool -- In the years before his death, in September, Miles Davis produced erratic music -- a strange compromise between the brilliance of his trumpet and his badly conceived commerical impulses.
But his recordings over the last 40-odd years leave something increasingly rare: the sound of a person ruminating over his own weaknesses and failings.


Rethinking Saberhagen
To the Sports Editor:
Before we all go running off to buy our 1992 Mets World Series tickets, let's step back examine the Saberhagen swap for McReynolds, Jefferies and Miller.


Very Special Deliveries From Sweden and Ireland
There Is No Such Thing as a Language Barrier -- Ingmar Bergman's productions in Swedish of Ibsen, Strindberg and O'Neill at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Art in Harmony -- Brian Friel's "Dancing at Lughnasa," which has the finest writing, acting and dancing in any drama this season.


Hurtling Off the Precipice?
To the Editor:
"Will the Aura of Recession Always Be With Us?" (Nov. 24) presents two schools of opinion regarding the engineered "soft landing" of 1991.
One contends that it is a deep, lingering recession; the other, that it is a shallow, short recession in the recovery mode.


Beeville Journal; There's a Stranger in the Bar, But He's Only Packing a Pen
The tall, lanky Texan strode into the dance hall.
He leaned up against the bar and ordered a pitcher of beer.
He surveyed the crowd with his ice-blue eyes.
"You live around here?" he asked some of the young women who stood nearby gaping at his posse of heavily armed men.


Maintaining and Restoring Fine Slabs of Marble
MARBLE, although durable, requires special care to remain beautiful.
If the right products are used, cleaning marble already in good condition is easy, and even rejuvenating neglected marble usually is not too difficult.
But polishing dulled marble and mending chipped or broken pieces are generally jobs for experts.
To clean marble, use detergents and other products specifically formulated for it.
These are available from marble and janitorial supply companies and some tile stores.


A Homage, Not an Investment
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein's mistake in evaluating the Mozart bicentennial celebrations at Lincoln Center and elsewhere lies in his utilitarian view of the proceedings.
He asks if the benefits
to the listener
of novel insights into Mozart's music outweigh the festivals' costs, both financial and in terms of musical overkill.
He concludes that they do not.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 29, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE WASTE LANDS, by Stephen King. (Plume, $15.) The third volume of "The Dark Tower," a series about time travel and a heroic quest.
2
34
THE PRINCE OF TIDES, by Pat Conroy. (Bantam, $5.99.) Complex family relationships in South Carolina's low country and New York City.
3
6
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
4
5
COLD FIRE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.99.) A reporter tracks the course of a good Samaritan.
5
9
THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) An ice-age trek across Europe.
6
2
STAR TREK VI: The Undiscovered Country, by J. M. Dillard. (Pocket, $4.99.) Enemies of the Federation capture Captain Kirk and Dr.
McCoy.
7
5
PRISONER OF MY DESIRE, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 12th-century English belle seeks to capture the heart of a lord.
8
3
THE FOURTH K, by Mario Puzo. (Bantam, $5.99.) The tumultuous career of President Francis Xavier Kennedy, cousin of John.
9
27
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) A boy and his Cherokee grandparents.
10
18
FOUR PAST MIDNIGHT, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Four tales of late-night horror.
11 *
1
MURDER AT THE NATIONAL CATHEDRAL, by Margaret Truman. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A professor-sleuth investigates the death of an Episcopal priest.
12
1
THE WITNESS, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Jove, $4.99.) A Philadelphia cop finds himself on the hit list of a band of robber-terrorists.
13
10
CIRCLE OF FRIENDS, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $5.99.) The coming of age of Irish women.
14
8
HOCUS POCUS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Berkley, $5.99.) Life in the near future, as noted by a college professor and prison administrator.
15
1
CARNAL INNOCENCE, by Nora Roberts. (Bantam, $5.50.) A celebrated violinist finds perils and romance rather than the quiet she seeks in a Mississippi town.
16 *
4
PERCHANCE TO DREAM, by Howard Weinstein. (Pocket, $4.99.) A "Star Trek" novel.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
110
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday matters.
2
30
THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by Cleveland Amory. (Penguin, $7.95.) A self-styled curmudgeon's memoir of a cat that adopted and soon owned him.
3
24
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
4
32
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
5
40
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
6
25
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
7
8
A LIFE ON THE ROAD, by Charles Kuralt. (Ivy, $5.99.) The memoirs of the newscaster for CBS television.
8 *
425
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
9
9
A NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SENSES, by Diane Ackerman. (Vintage, $11.) How the ability to taste, touch, smell, hear and see affects our lives.
10
53
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
20
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
13
SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS GOES "BOINK," by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
3
9
UNNATURAL SELECTIONS, by Gary Larson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.
4
3
THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1992. (World Almanac/Pharos, $7.95.) The latest edition of a standard reference work.
5
5
A SOUTHERN BELLE PRIMER, by Maryln Schwartz. (Doubleday, $10.) A guide to propriety and protocol below the Mason-Dixon line; humor.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


'Into The West' Taps Irish History
There is something compelling about watching a horse gallop on a beach.
Possibly it is the juxtaposition of animal power and grace against the relentless rush of the sea, a tableau evoking wonder and a lyrical sense of things as they ought to be.
The sellers of beer know this, as do the makers of movies.
A white horse on a beach both opens and ends "Into the West," now being filmed at Ardmore Studios in this small town just south of Dublin.
In between is a story of two boys, encouraged by ancient and modern epics, who try to escape a drunken father and their life in a North Dublin ghetto.


Security Surprise
To the Editor: Other readers may be as surprised as I was to learn that the security officers at Heathrow Airport in London will confiscate an ordinary fever thermometer in the hand luggage of an outbound passenger.
On a recent trip, my toilet-article kit was in a carry-on bag, and the thermometer, in a protective case, was in the kit.
The inspector called over a supervisor, who told me that regulations forbade my taking the thermometer; in reply to my questions, he said that if it broke, the escaping mercury might threaten pressure seals of the airplane.
His superior confirmed the prohibition and said that it was "the law."


The New American Family: Reality Is Wearing the Pants
FOR much of the last 25 years, the changing shape of the American family has been a cultural war zone.
Conservatives bemoaned it.
Trend spotters sold it.
Feminists celebrated it.
But recently the rate of change has slowed, the rhetoric seems to have subsided and a period of reassessment may have begun.
For most Americans the model of a father at work and a mother at home has been relegated to history.
Economic reality, if nothing else, is rapidly making it an antique, rather than an icon that must be defended.


Domestic Pressures; The Deal Gap: What Bush Needs and Tokyo Can't Give
JAPAN has looked forward to welcoming President Bush for months, hoping to give new definition to the global partnership between Tokyo and Washington.
But now rising political problems for Mr.
Bush and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa are transforming the hopes into something like dread.
Instead of highlighting the issues that bind them together as allies, Mr.
Bush's visit next week is likely to underscore the conflicts, especially in the trade area.
Indeed, the President is coming to Japan with 21 executives of the automobile and other industries to press for more concessions to open Japan to American exports and investments just as Tokyo is hardening its attitudes and feeling more and more that American policies are the problem.


Corrections
An article and a chart last Sunday about Bill Clinton's record as Governor of Arkansas misstated several comparative population figures for Arkansas and the United States.
Arkansas's population was 2,350,725 in 1990, according to the Census Bureau; it grew 2.81 percent from 1980.
The United States population grew 9.78 percent, to 248,709,873.


POSTINGS: 20 Units in Park Slope; Faux Limestone Co-op
Granted that the Victoria, a five-story, 20-unit co-op, is not a replica of any of the brownstones or rowhouses along First Street off Fifth Avenue, or for that matter, anywhere else in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn.
But its developers, Michael Rovere and The Metropolis Group, a.k.a. 297 First Street Associates, tried to keep the building, No. 297, in the spirit of its surroundings by using reddish brick and touches such as window sills, recesses for downspouts and a parapet of coping stone, instead of metal, to give an illusion of limestone.
"It's an abstraction of styles," said Michael Dobbs, project manager representing the architect, Rafael Vignoly of Manhattan.
The $4.6 million building, named after Mr.
Rovere's 5-year-old daughter, is on a 100- by 100-foot lot where his woodworking shop once stood.
By fitting in amenities such as a recreation area, an elevator, a garden and a 20-car indoor garage, the project was allowed an extra 4,000 square feet under the city's Quality Housing ordinance.


Rachel Gafni to Marry Barry Boden
Judge and Mrs.
Abraham J. Gafni of Philadelphia have announced the engagement of their daughter, Rachel Ilana Gafni, to Dr.
Barry Paul Boden, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jerome Boden of Rockville, Md.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gafni, 24 years old, graduated from Barnard College and is a fourth-year medical student at Temple University.
Her father is a judge in the Court of Common Pleas in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Miriam L. Gafni, is the managing partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Freedman &amp; Lorry.


Playing by Our Rules
IN THE NAME OF DEMOCRACY
U.S.
Policy Toward Latin America in the Reagan Years.
By Thomas Carothers. 309 pp.
Berkeley: University of California Press.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
A PUPPET PERFORMANCE
Rhu and Burrett McBee and some of their 35 handmade puppets will give a free performance for children at the Yonkers Library's Getty Square Branch, tomorrow at 10 A.M.
The husband and wife team call themselves Susquipedalia Puppet Productions after the Latin word for "world of one and one-half foot tall beings," which is about the size of their puppets.


A FIGHT TO THE DEATH
As a healthy woman and a member of the Hemlock Society, I can't understand all the fuss about a person's wish to die ("A Fight to the Death," by Trip Gabriel, Dec. 8).
In this country, where people are killed every day because we will not enact effective gun control laws and where we do not provide adequate medical care to many who would seek it, it is hypocritical to shed our collective tears for those who have opted to commit suicide and immoral to condemn the compassionate people who help them.
TRUDE HASSBERG
Bayside, Queens


Care Can Keep Holiday Gift Plants Alive
POTS of dwarf conifers and evergreens are often given as gifts.
The little plants are usually decorated with colorful ribbons, tiny bows and packages.
And what is more these gifts are alive and may be planted in the garden.
But the trick now is to keep them alive.
Until the planting season does come -- and it is best to set the young plant out in spring -- keep it cold, that is dormant.
Growth is not to be encouraged at this time of year.
If the garage is unheated and it has a window, this would be a good place to keep the plant.


Islam in Algeria: An Echo of Iran, but Not a Repeat
It is tempting to argue, as many in Algeria and elsewhere in the Muslim world already do, that the emergence of Islamic fundamentalism as the most powerful force in this country will result in a reprise of the voyage Iran took more than a decade ago.
The triumphant Algerian fundamentalists claim Iran as their model.
But the differences between the experiences are important and they will play a big role in the style, substance and longevity of an Algerian Islamic fundamentalist government, which may be proclaimed here as early as next month.


Angel Fernandez, 75, Former Cuban Official
Angel Fernandez, Minister of Justice in Cuba's first revolutionary Government and a former Supreme Court Justice in Havana, died Tuesday in Mercy Hospital in Miami.
He was 75 years old and lived in Coral Gables, Fla.
Mr.
Fernandez died of a heart attack after suffering complications from an automobile accident four years ago, family members said.


Elizabeth Wardenburg Is Affianced
Mrs.
Walter Speed Rowland of Wilmington, Del., and Frederic A. C. Wardenburg 4th of Seattle have announced the engagement of their daughter, Elizabeth Blair Wardenburg, to James Henry Edmondson Fosburgh, a son of Liza Fosburgh of Cherry Plain, N.Y., and the late Pieter W. Fosburgh.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Wardenburg, 27 years old, is a third-year medical student at Yale University.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is a family therapist in Seattle.
Her stepfather is the assistant general counsel of Hercules Inc., the chemicals manufacturer in Wilmington.


Lending to the 'Might Succeeds'
To the Editor:  Regarding "A Failure of Nerve on Banking Reform" (Dec. 8), Michael Jacobs advocates lending to the "mighty but few."


Up to Her Elbow in Alligators
THE MOON BY WHALE LIGHT
And Other Adventures Among Bats, Penguins, Crocodilians, and Whales.
By Diane Ackerman. 249 pp.
New York:  Random House. $20.


Animal League Called Self-Serving
For the past 15 years, I have been associated with a small humane group on the eastern end of Long Island, the Animal Rescue Fund.
One of our primary goals has been to reduce the dog population in order to achieve some sort of parity between the number of animals that need homes and the number available for them.


With Miller Gone, Brooklynites Brawl for Power
When Mel Miller was stripped of his Assembly seat after being convicted of fraud charges, Brooklyn lost both its decades-long hold on the Speaker's post and a political leader whose brash personality and political acumen had been the threads holding together the borough's disparate Democratic factions.
Now, with important local issues like reapportionment coming up, Brooklyn is wondering whether those groups will be able to pull together without Mr.
Miller at a time when demographic changes are splintering the county's old political alliances.


DON'T TELL
I was concerned to hear Mansnerus say now, 18 years later, that she "did the right thing" by keeping quiet.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 gives women (and men) the legal right to be free not only from sexual harassment and sexual discrimination in the work place, but also from retaliation.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the courts have vigorously enforced these rights.
R.
GAULL SILBERMAN Vice Chairman, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Washington


Dockside Mall Opens in St. Kitts
A shopping arcade with 26 stores may not sound like much in the United States but in St.
Kitts in the Caribbean it is of major economic importance.
When the new Pelican Mall was opened this month near the pier in Basseterre, the capital, the Minister of Tourism, Michael O. Powell, said he hoped it would help attract more cruise ships to the Federation of St.
Kitts and Nevis.
The mall, with the interior designed to resemble a traditional Caribbean street, includes a restaurant and tourism offices.
A new bandstand and ticket booth for the Carib Queen, a ferryboat operating between the two islands, have been built nearby.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Amid Recession, a Recovery for Shelton
TWO years ago, the vacancy rate for Shelton's six million square feet of office and industrial buildings was 37 percent, the highest in Fairfield County.
This was a result of a building spree that began in the late 70's, when the city courted developers in an effort to shed its smokestack image and create a more viable economy.
Hundreds of thousands of square feet of new commercial space came onto the market in time for the 1987 crash.


Cars Trickle Back To Pedestrian Malls
DOWNTOWN pedestrian malls, which spread across the country in the 1960's and '70's, have been plagued in recent years with slumping sales and a severe image problem.
It is estimated that there are 200 of them, and many were unable to compete successfully in the 80's with the more modern malls and shopping centers on the cities' outskirts.
Shoppers tended to dismiss many of the pedestrian malls -- sometimes little more than repaved older streets closed to traffic -- as inconvenient and inaccessible.


O.K., So It Wasn't Musical, but It Was a Knockout
Performance of the Year of Any Sort, Anywhere -- Ariane Mnouchkine and her Theatre du Soleil in the "Oresteia" cycle in Paris.
Although there is a persistent undercurrent of music, this is theater, pure and not so simple, and about the best the world has to offer today.
Opera Debut of the Year -- Deborah Voigt's sumptuous statement of the title role in the Boston Lyric Opera's production of "Ariadne auf Naxos."


Key Issues Separate Koreas In Talks to Ban Atomic Arms
North and South Korea resumed talks today on a proposed accord to insure that Korea is free of nuclear weapons, but South Korea said the two sides had yet to overcome important differences on the issue of inspections and nuclear military exercises.


Dishes to Serve a New Year's Gathering
BEFORE the countdown to 1992 begins, the countdown for that New Year's Eve party or New Year's Day open house has been under way.
What to serve?
New Year's Eve demands elegance and a touch of luxury perhaps.
On New Year's Day, on the other hand, there can be greater informality -- yet a feeling of abundance should prevail.
By making slight adjustments, similar menus can be tailored to fit both occasions.


Mutual Funds; 1991 -- It Was a Very Good Year
WHO made the most money in mutual funds in 1991?
Among stock fund investors, the biggest risk-takers fared best.
But less-venturesome investors also did well this year.
In 1991, the average stock fund rose 26.6 percent through Dec. 26.
That's light years ahead of 1990, when the average stock fund dropped 7.3 percent, and also ahead of 1989's 23.3 percent gain.


Making a Differnce; A Mutual Attraction
JOHN GUMMERE, chairman and chief executive of the Phoenix Mutual Life Insurance Company, expresses nothing but contempt when he surveys the large number of mutual life insurers that have converted to stock ownership to raise capital.
Mutual companies -- those owned by their policyholders -- are formed "to enable the policyholders to obtain insurance at lower prices than they could get from a stock company," Mr.
Gummere said.
"De-mutualization is an admission of management failure. If we are doing our jobs right, we are producing insurance at a lower price than the stock companies, and we are doing it profitably."


Jill B. Barnard Has Wedding
Jill Barbara Barnard and John William Draper, both vice presidents at New York advertising agencies, were married yesterday in Riverside, Conn.
The Rev.
Samir J. Habiby officiated at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Draper, 29 years old, is a vice president at Young &amp; Rubicam.
She graduated from Colgate University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian K. Barnard of Cos Cob, Conn.
Her father is the president of Barnard-Maine Ltd., a necktie manufacturer in Cos Cob.
Her mother, Carole J. Barnard, is the executive director of Elderhouse Adult Day Center in Norwalk, Conn.


On the Town With Hempstead Youths
HOLIDAY time, and Rosanna Romero was bouncing and lurching her way to New York City.
Her chartered bus bumped along the rocky road known as the Queens portion of the Long Island Expressway, but Rosanna seemed oblivious to the movement.
A ninth grader in Hempstead High School, Rosanna was but a half-an-hour away from her first visit to Radio City Music Hall.


A May Wedding For Ms. Carew
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Guy Carew of Weston, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Alicia Brooke Carew to Philip Ulfsson Hammarskjold, a son of Ulf Gorannson Hammarskjold of Philadelphia and Helga Hammarskjold of Haverford, Pa.
The wedding is to be in May.
Ms.
Carew, 26 years old, graduated from Smith College.
She and her fiance are studying for M.B.A. degrees at Harvard University.
Her father is the managing director of Historic Hudson Valley, a preservation organization in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Her mother, Alicia Marie Carew, is the president of Carew Travel Consultants in Westport, Conn.


Wrong Way to Fight a Recession
The Bush Administration's first step toward an anti-recession policy is a serious misstep.
Federal regulators, at the behest of the Treasury Department, are telling bank examiners to ease up on loan officers.
The idea is to entice banks into extending more loans -- even ones hitherto deemed a shade too risky -- to pump life into a stagnant economy.
But manipulating loan decisions to fight recession is dangerously wrong.
It invites loan officers to make the same mistakes that buried the economy in wasteful real estate boondoggles during the 1970's and 1980's, and buried taxpayers under a $500 billion bailout.


Missouri Is Too Much for Murray State
Anthony Peeler scored 23 points and Jevon Crudup added 20 today in Missouri's 92-52 rout of Murray State.
The Tigers (9-0) started the game with a 12-4 run, then pulled away with a 31-6 run for a 43-18 lead at the end of the first half.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING Sports View Wins With a two-week rest and a new jockey, Chris Antley, Sports View cruised to a length-and-a-half victory yesterday in the 53d running of the $200,000 Widener Handicap, Hialeah Park's richest race for older horses.
It was the second stakes victory of the afternoon for Antley, who brought Indian Fashion in first by a head in the co-feature, the Opa-Locka Stakes.
Sports View, from the D. Wayne Lukas stable, had been held out of workouts since finishing second in the Seminole Handicap at Hialeah under the ride of Angel Cordero on Dec. 14.
The winner outfinished Alyten, who beat Peanut Butter Onit by a nose for second.
Sports View, the second betting choice to fourth-place Fanatic Boy, earned $120,000 for the mile-and-a-quarter race on a card that drew Hialeah's biggest crowd of December, 12,151, despite intermittent rain.
Victory for Study Hard: Study Hard scored his third straight victory and second in a row in a stakes yesterday in the $119,000 Alex M. Robb Stakes at Aqueduct.
Study Hard, owned by Two Sisters Stable and ridden by Angel Cordero Jr., came from far back in the eight-horse field to win by 3 1/4 lengths over Sea Hunter.
He carried 120 pounds and covered the mile and a sixteenth in 1:461/5 .
The victory was Study Hard's fifth in 12 starts this year.
The 3-year-old gelding, who won the Irish Castle stakes at Aqueduct in his previous start on Dec. 6, earned $71,400.
Sea Hunter, 122 pounds, with Jorge Chavez riding, was 2 1/2 lengths ahead of Carr's Pleasure, 111, ridden by Richard Migliore.
Study Hard, who raced coupled in the wagering with Zee Best, returned $3.40, $2.20 and $2.10 for $2 across the board as the favorite.
Sea Hunter paid $2.80 and $2.80 and Carr's Pleasure was $4 to show. (AP) GOLF  Geddes Leads by 1  Jane Geddes, the defending champion, moved into a one-stroke lead after the second round of the Daiyko Masters in Gold Coast, Australia, yesterday by shooting her second straight five-under-par 69.
Helen Alfredsson of Sweden moved into second place at 139 after also shooting a 69 over the 6,149-yard Palm Meadows course.
Corinne Dibnah of Australia eagled the 18th hole for a 69 and was two strokes off the pace.
The first-round leader, Muffin Spencer-Devlin, shot a 75 and fell to a 145, where she was tied with Meg Mallon, who had a 71.
Another American, Amy Alcott, was at 142 after a 69 in the second round.
Geddes, who won the tournament last year in a playoff with a fellow American, Kristal Parker, had six birdies and a lone bogey yesterday.
Dibnah, whose round included an eagle and four birdies, is aiming for her first victory in Australia. (AP) TENNIS Dutch Team Advances Richard Krajicek and Brenda Schultz led the Netherlands to a 3-0 victory over Australia yesterday in the first round of the Hopman Cup team tournament in Perth, Australia.
Schultz beat Australia's top woman player, Rachel McQuillan, 6-7 (5-7), 6-3, 6-2, and Krajicek trounced Todd Woodbridge, 6-0, 6-3.
Schultz and Krajicek defeated the two Australians, 8-4, in the mixed doubles, which was reduced to one pro set.
Natalya Zvereva of Belarus and Andrei Cherkasov of Russia also advanced to the quarterfinals by beating a British team.
Zvereva defeated Jo Durie, 4-6, 6-0, 6-4, and Cherkasov defeated Jeremy Bates, 6-3, 4-6, 6-1. (AP)


Should They Sell? Should They Censor? Talk About Your Hard Choices
The Mario Cuomo Award -- To the Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., for deciding that it cannot decide if a Greek kouros it bought for around $9 million in 1985 is a fake.
Closest Call -- Blaming what it called "adverse publicity," the Barnes Foundation withdrew its petition to a Pennsylvania court for the right to go against the wishes of its founder and sell paintings from its remarkable collection.


Meeting the New Head Of County Hospitals
IN a typical two-bed room at the County Medical Center, corporate executives and welfare recipients are often roommates, products of the same hospital procedures and wearing identical hospital gowns.
Only their insurance carrier knows the difference.
"This is the only hospital that I know of with equal facilities for the prosperous and the indigent," Dr.
George E. Reed said last week, adding: "We are very proud of that. We are one of the few hospitals in the United States that takes care of everyone who comes along."


Sports of The Times; Postcards From World Of Sports '91
THE airlines keep folding.
Soon there will be one huge American carrier, with every flight stopping in Atlanta.
Nevertheless, a wandering writer will continue to collect exotic luggage tags as a reminder that sports are universal.
NEW YORK, JAN. 2 Miami, Colorado and Georgia Tech all claim the unofficial national collegiate football title after bowl victories.
Tri-champions.
Isn't anarchy wonderful?


Preserving the Tradition Of the Debutante Ball
Thirty-one young women carried on the 19th-century tradition of being presented to family and friends at the 56th Debutante Cotillion and Christmas Ball at the Waldorf-Astoria.
The evening on Dec. 21 benefited the New York Downtown Hospital, which serves lower Manhattan.
Mass coming-out parties in the waning years of the 20th century are only an echo of the lavish private dances that were once given to present young women, usually freshmen in college, to society and to eligible bachelors.
But galas like this one still retain their own aura of glamour.
And the tradition of white dresses, a string of pearls and a bouquet of white flowers remains.


Katherine L. Greenebaum Marries
Katherine Lynn Greenebaum, a daughter of Michael L. Greenebaum and Linda S. Greenebaum, both of Amherst, Mass., was married yesterday to Joshua McIntosh May, a son of Joseph May of Nashville and the late Natalie McCuaig May.
Judge Norman Stahl of Federal District Court in Concord, N.H., officiated in the Johnson Chapel at Amherst College.
Ms.
Greenebaum, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in fiction writing at the University of Virginia.
Her father retired as the principal of Marks Meadow School in Amherst and as a professor of education at the University of Massachusetts.
Her mother is a violinist in the Springfield (Mass.) Symphony and a music teacher in the Amherst public school system.


Ms. O'Connell Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Philip R. O'Connell of Southport, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathleen O'Connell to Raymond James Peloso, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William M. Peloso of Bronxville, N.Y.
Ms.
O'Connell and Mr.
Peloso are both 25 years old and graduates of Georgetown University.
Ms.
O'Connell is the university's coordinator of graduate business admissions and services.
Her father, a consultant, retired as the corporate secretary of the Champion International Corporation, the paper products company, with headquarters in Stamford, Conn.


'Annie Get Your Gun' Revived in Elmsford
IT begins invitingly.
"There's No Business Like Show Business" is played as a harmonica solo.
Members of the orchestra, wearing flannel shirts and vests, fit right in, taking their places on stage left.
The up-tempo music sounds terrific.
Dropcloths on the furniture arouse curiosity.
Then a pianist gets up when a rooster that has been shot lands on his head.
Before long, it's all too clear that Scott Harris, the director of the Westchester Broadway Theater production of "Annie Get Your Gun" is going to have to keep coming up with visual notions to spruce up, or divert attention from the archaic presumptions of a book that offends modern sensibilities.


Which One Is Thelma? And Other Questions for the Ages
The Good News -- The New York Times critics reviewed more films (381) than in any year since 1988 (419). (The bad news: this means that business was not good but terrible. As movies fail at the box office, increasingly lousy new ones are thrown into theaters to take up the slack.)
The Good News -- Barry Levinson's "Bugsy," Mike Leigh's "Life Is Sweet," Martin Scorsese's "Cape Fear," Gus Van Sant's "My Own Private Idaho," Spike Lee's "Jungle Fever," Joel and Ethan Coen's "Barton Fink" and Jonathan Demme's "Silence of the Lambs." (The bad news: if this were a 10-best list -- and it isn't -- only seven films would be on it.)


1960's Deja Vu; New From Detroit: A High-Power, Gas Guzzling Muscle Car
ONE by one in a small factory in Detroit, the Chrysler Corporation is assembling by hand the American auto industry's newest car for the 90's: the two-seat, sunset red, 10-cylinder, 400-horsepower, $55,000 Dodge Viper.
Because Chrysler took just three years and $70 million to move the car from concept to market, Popular Science magazine this month named the Dodge Viper one of the year's 100 greatest achievements in science and technology.
USA Today, reacting to the car's muscular design and raw power, said the Viper would "rip through the nation's automotive consciousness with the bite of an overamped electric current." The irony that seemed to escape them was that Chrysler's hot new car for 1992 is basically a 1960's muscle car.


Chrysler's Wee Hauler Named Summit
I HAVE been carting flora again.
This time, of course, it was a Christmas tree, and the choice of haulers in the driveway included a couple of old Cadillacs, my black '88 Honda Prelude, a 1992 Acura NSX or a new and somewhat weird little thing called an Eagle Summit.
It won't take much to guess the vehicle of choice, given the others.
And, yes, the Summit won, as it will win many such contests.
I am Summit-smitten, and it's a sure bet that lots of people who want a van are going to love it, too.


Care Can Keep Holiday Gift Plants Alive
POTS of dwarf conifers and evergreens are often given as gifts.
The little plants are usually decorated with colorful ribbons, tiny bows and packages.
And what is more these gifts are alive and may be planted in the garden.
But the trick now is to keep them alive.
Until the planting season does come -- and it is best to set the young plant out in spring -- keep it cold, that is dormant.
Growth is not to be encouraged at this time of year.
If the garage is unheated and it has a window, this would be a good place to keep the plant.


A Few of the Usual Suspects Handed Over Some Real Gems
Brand-Name Value -- Three of the best new series carried familiar creative tags: NBC's "I'll Fly Away," from Joshua Brand and John Falsey ("Northern Exposure"); CBS's "Brooklyn Bridge," from Gary David Goldberg ("Family Ties"), and "Civil Wars" from Steven Bochco Productions.
Back on the Shelf -- But then so did one of the worst: "Sunday Dinner," Norman Lear's misguided sitcom, not to be confused with NBC's dud magazine "Sunday Best," starring Carl Reiner.
Moral: If you spot anything with Sunday in the title, duck.


Corrections
A sports article on Dec. 8 about the Olympic prospects of the Baltic states misidentified the 1988 winner of the silver medal in 1,500-meter men's freestyle swimming.
It was Stefan Pfeiffer of West Germany.


A Nightmare Circling Overhead
OLD FLOATING CLOUD
Two Novellas.
By Can Xue.
Translated by Ronald R. Janssen and Jian Zhang.
Foreword by Charlotte Innes. 269 pp.
Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press.
Cloth, $32.95.
Paper, $12.95.


Juliet Davison To Wed in May
Juliet Ann Davison, a lawyer in New York, and Chris Adrian Lutes Jr., a restaurateur in Cambridge, Mass., have announced their engagement.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Davison, 28 years old, is an associate at the law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson.
She graduated from Brown University, as did her fiance, and received a law degree from the University of California at Berkeley.
She is a daughter of Judith K. Keenan of Boston and John S. Davison of Bethesda, Md.
Her mother is the headmistress of the Commonwealth School in Boston.
Her father is a senior official in the bureau of African affairs at the State Department in Washington.


The Dow's Betting on Battles for the White House
THE odds are, the stock market will register a gain in 1992.
Indeed, the Dow usually climbs the year the White House is up for grabs, as well as the year before, according to Birinyi Associates, a market research firm in New York.
Since 1960, there have been only two election years in which the Dow declined; since 1936, there have been only four.


THE END OF THE GOLDEN ROAD
Nicholas D. Kristof's article "China: The End of the Golden Road" (Dec. 1) was insightful.
As a Chinese, I have experienced great disillusion with the present Government.
In China, corruption is not a moral issue but merely a fact of life, a skill that has to be mastered if one wants to live better.
That is one of the reasons I left my country.
Yet, before I left, I myself had to bribe someone.
But I don't feel guilty about it because it was the only way.
As the article concludes, "the fall of the Qing Dynasty in 1911-12 did not lead to prosperity . . . but to decades of chaos and civil war." And chaos in China is what has been the most feared in all ages.
Kristof is right; China is indeed a prisoner of its past.
DAVID WANG
New York, N.Y.
ILS&gt;Photo of a Chinaman (Photograph by Mark Leong)


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
A PUPPET PERFORMANCE
Rhu and Burrett McBee and some of their 35 handmade puppets will give a free performance for children at the Yonkers Library's Getty Square Branch, tomorrow at 10 A.M.
The husband and wife team call themselves Susquipedalia Puppet Productions after the Latin word for "world of one and one-half foot tall beings," which is about the size of their puppets.


Collector's Item
It wasn't exactly like a line of ninja turtle toys hitting the stores at the same time their new adventure hits the screen, but it was close.
With Oliver Stone's movie "J.F.K." just unleashing a fresh wave of assassination fever, Earl Ruby doubtless caught the peak of the market last week when he put his brother's pistol up for bids in New York City.
The Colt Cobra that Jack Ruby used to kill Lee Harvey Oswald 28 years ago fetched $220,000 from an anonymous New Jersey gun collector.
After his brother died in prison in 1967, Mr.
Ruby began the legal battle in which he recently won possession of the gun from his brother's lawyer.
Mr.
Ruby shrugged off questions on the various Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories.
But since the day millions of TV viewers saw Jack Ruby, gun in hand, approach Mr.
Oswald, there has been no doubt about who shot the accused Kennedy assassin.
Well, almost no doubt.
"It's part of history," said Mr.
Ruby.
"That's what they tell me. I don't know."


Welcome Whiffs of Haydn and Bach During a Year of You-Know-Who
Most Arresting New Orchestral Piece -- Aaron Jay Kernis's rich and challenging "Symphony in Waves" -- extravagant at one moment, spare and ascetic at the next, everywhere a technical challenge to Gerard Schwarz and the New York Chamber Symphony, who nevertheless did well by it in November.
A Truly Genuine Musical Celebration -- On a sunny Saturday morning in June at the Peru, Ind., High School Auditorium, Cole Porter's hometown had its own centennial celebration.
The mailman sang, the high school choir did its song and dance.


Who Can Stop Civil Wars?
Civil war with modern weapons is a brutal and destructive business that is often extraordinarily hard to stop.
Until now such situations have generally been considered as beyond the jurisdiction of international or regional organizations.
Even the provision of international emergency humanitarian assistance has often proved difficult and controversial.
In Yugoslavia the pattern of non-intervention has been cautiously put aside.
Both the European Community and United Nations are involved in efforts to halt the fighting and foster the process of peaceful settlement.
In Somalia, in a far less publicized but even more lethal civil war, there has been virtually no regional or international effort to stop the fighting, and it has become increasingly difficult to provide even minimum humanitarian relief.
In other formerly proud states, sovereignty is also dissolving into anarchy, fueled by old feuds and grudges and an abundant supply of arms.


Miss Bender a Bride
Patricia Anne Bender and Matthew David Felix were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Michael Holzmann officiated at St.
Elizabeth's Roman Catholic Church in Melville, L.I., assisted by the Rev.
David Bumbaugh, a Unitarian minister.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from the University of Richmond, as did the bridegroom.
She is an account executive at David S. Wachsman Associates, a New York public-relations firm.
Her parents are Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald T. Bender of South Huntington, L.I.
Mr.
Felix, 28, is a sales manager for the Cardio-Fitness Corporation, which operates exercise centers in New York.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William D. Felix of Summit, N.J.


Taking Some Cues From G.E.
GENERAL MOTORS and the International Business Machines Corporation, which plans to cut 20,000 workers next year, get poor marks from Wall Street and business professors.
The problem is footdragging on cost-cutting, despite some clear industrial examples available to follow.
When John F. Welch Jr., then 45 years old, became chairman and chief executive of the ailing General Electric Company in 1981, action was immediate, and tough.
And G.E. posted an unbroken record of rising quarterly profits until a big charge for accrued pension liabilities temporarily halted the streak early this year.


A Double Standard on Latin America
To the Editor:
The authors of "Stop Propping Up the Castro Regime" (Forum, Dec. 8) urge the United States Government to remind everyone that "they should not be propping up dictatorships." This reads as a call for censorship and repression against those who do not support United States foreign policy.
According to the authors, Cuba is far from being a democracy, and the economic embargo against Fidel Castro should be strongly enforced by our Government.
If they are so concerned about democracy in this part of the world, I hope they have been consistent in their views and felt as hesitant when Augusto Pinochet of Chile and the Duvaliers of Haiti were in power.


Topics of The Times; Do Take an Old-Fashioned Walk
Recently a woman enjoying a slow, happy saunter through lower Manhattan suffered a cruel rebuke.
"You're not walking fast enough," her companion barked, "to do a
thing
for your health."
"But if I walk fast," the woman replied, "I won't be able to look at anything. And wanting to look at the world is why I walk in the first place."
"Well, you're not helping yourself at all," the friend replied, and trotted on ahead.


Maintaining and Restoring Fine Slabs of Marble
MARBLE, although durable, requires special care to remain beautiful.
If the right products are used, cleaning marble already in good condition is easy, and even rejuvenating neglected marble usually is not too difficult.
But polishing dulled marble and mending chipped or broken pieces are generally jobs for experts.
To clean marble, use detergents and other products specifically formulated for it.
These are available from marble and janitorial supply companies and some tile stores.


What's Coming Up
YOU CAN DRESS LIKE A COWGIRL, A COQUETTE, A SAILOR who has jumped ship or a ballerina who has jeted into a ballroom.
Your shoes can have clunky platforms or barely cling to your feet with skinny laces and spindly heels.
You can go out looking as though you forgot your blouse or veil your lacy bra with a tailored white shirt.
Your hemline can rest above your knee or hang anywhere below.
You can wrap up in rumba ruffles or wear flowers everywhere, including in your hair.
And incidentally, the latter can be slightly disarrayed.
These are just some of the eclectic fashion fillips that will show you've got a grip on 1992 style.
It's not that anything goes, but that diverse -- often contradictory -- fashion notions all work in today's diverse, often contradictory world.
One thing, though, will help you with whichever route you choose: a shapely, healthy body is a very attractive prop underneath it all.


Results Bring Joy to Region's Muslims
From Beirut to Khartoum, Muslim fundamentalists reveled today in the news of the landslide victory scored by Islamic candidates in Algeria's first multi-party general elections and predicted a religious surge throughout the Middle East.
"What has happened in Algeria is another evidence that the tide of Islam will sweep the whole world," said a commentator on the radio station that speaks for the Party of God, the main fundamentalist faction in Lebanon.


'Scrooge' Visits Tenants in Milwaukee
For the first time in years, Robert Johns, a Milwaukee County Sheriff's detective, spent the day after Christmas evicting people.
In his time in the department, he has evicted thousands of tenants for nonpayment of rent, but until this week evictions in the two weeks around Christmas were almost unheard of here.


Dishes to Serve a New Year's Gathering
BEFORE the countdown to 1992 begins, the countdown for that New Year's Eve party or New Year's Day open house has been under way.
What to serve?
New Year's Eve demands elegance and a touch of luxury perhaps.
On New Year's Day, on the other hand, there can be greater informality -- yet a feeling of abundance should prevail.
By making slight adjustments, similar menus can be tailored to fit both occasions.


6 AT CITY COLLEGE CRUSHED TO DEATH
At least six people were crushed to death and 18 others were seriously injured last night as a crowd tried to surge through the only entrance to a celebrity basketball game at City College in Upper Manhattan, the police and emergency medical personnel said.
The crush happened shortly after 7:15 P.M. as an estimated 5,000 people lined up to enter the game in Jerimiah T. Mahoney hall on the campus at 138th Street and Convent Avenue in Harlem, Officer Steven Sherman of the 26th Precinct said.
The crowd first passed through two sets of double doors to get into the hall but the crush occurred when they were funneled down a flight of stairs to a single entrance to the gymnasium.


Somalia Self-Destructs, And the World Looks On
GUARDS with automatic rifles roam the corridors these days in the decrepit three-story building that houses the Digfer Hospital in the Somali capital.
Even in the casualty section, business is conducted at gunpoint as armed men bring in their wounded children and demand attention from a handful of nurses overwhelmed by too many victims and not enough supplies.
For more than a month now, Mogadishu, a once-languid city of whitewashed buildings and tropical foliage, has been enveloped in a mad swirl of self-genocide.
Two men, Gen.
Mohammed Farrah Aideed and the President of Somalia, Ali Mahdi Mohammed, are waging a personal struggle for control of the ruined city.
They belong to the same political grouping (the United Somali Congress) and the same tribe (the Hawiye) but different subclans.
Their vendetta has brought the deaths of more than 4,000 people and wounded more than 10,000 others in a war that the world, with more important items on the agenda, chooses to ignore.


Catherine Stahl Wed
Catherine Amy Stahl, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald A. Stahl of Rochester, was married yesterday to Stephen Paul Glenning, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Glenning of Albany.
The Rev.
Earl S. Johnson Jr. officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Pittsford, N.Y., assisted by the Rev.
James Lawlor, a Roman Catholic priest.
Mrs.
Glenning, 25 years old, graduated from St.
Lawrence University, as did the bridegroom, and is an assistant portfolio manager in Rochester at Howe &amp; Rusling.
Mr.
Glenning, also 25, is studying for an M.B.A. degree at the University of Rochester.


Is the Electronic Book Closer Than You Think?
COMPUTER enthusiasts have long dreamed of the electronic book, a small, handheld computer that would display pages as crisp and pleasing to the eye as those designed by a master craftsman.
But year after year the dream has lingered frustratingly over the horizon as the people who make books, the publishing companies, have remained mired in the age of Gutenberg.
Now there are signs that the publishers are becoming as interested as the computer buffs.
Enticed by a variety of new technologies and visions of the profits that might be made from selling words without all that paper and ink, they are preparing to reinvent the book.


Colleen Doherty Married to W. P. Minicozzi 2d
Colleen Alice Doherty and William Philip Minicozzi 2d, both graduate students at Stanford University, were married yesterday in Washington.
Msgr.
James Montgomery officiated at St.
Dominic Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Minicozzi, 23 years old, graduated cum laude from Princeton University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, as was the bridegroom.
She is studying law at Stanford.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David P. Doherty of New York.


Protecting Parrots In the Caymans
The Cayman Brac parrot has become an endangered species, as hurricanes and development destroy the trees where it nests, and as people capture and sell the birds for pets.
As of this month the bird, properly called Amazona leucocephala hesterna, will get some protection, in an official reserve on its home island of Cayman Brac, one of the three Cayman Islands in the Caribbean.
A census earlier this year counted about 300 of the birds -- an iridescent green with white forehead and splashes of blue, yellow and red -- on Cayman Brac, the only place it is found.
The reserve is on 100 acres of land donated by a Minnesota man to the Nature Conservancy, a conservation organization.
In research on the Cayman Brac parrot, the International Council for Bird Preservation found that the heart of the birds' nesting area was on the property.
Earlier this month the Nature Conservancy donated the land to the National Trust for the Cayman Islands, which is managing the reserve.


Beth Mooney Plans to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
William S. Webster of Riverside, Conn., have announced the engagement of Mrs.
Webster's daughter Beth Ann Mooney to Jeffrey Longcope, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas M. Longcope of Essex, Conn.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mooney, 34 years old, is the education manager at Sports Illustrated for Kids magazine in New York.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a master's degree in teaching from Columbia University.
Her father, the late Robert P. Mooney, was an executive vice president of the General Reassurance Corporation in Greenwich, Conn.


Crime Course Includes Patrol Of Campus Area
In cooperation with the New York City Police Department, New York University is offering a course in fighting crime that includes on-the-job training.
In the one-credit course, called "Internship on Criminal Justice," the 23 students patrol the campus neighborhood as part of the university's Washington Square Watch Team and attend lectures by police officials.
They are also given selected readings on crime and the justice system and make trips to Police Headquarters, crime laboratories and criminal courts.
The university says that the course, offered in its Gallatin Division, is the first of its kind in New York State.


Wilder Seeks to Mix Black Support With Middle-Class Votes
At 7:15, the pale gray light of an early December morning found L. Douglas Wilder, Presidential candidate, standing in the cold outside a paper mill eagerly, and unsuccessfully, looking for warm hands to shake.
Arriving at the James River Corporation plant a half hour behind schedule, Mr.
Wilder had missed the 7 o'clock shift change when more than 200 workers report to work.
So Mr.
Wilder, who readily acknowledges that his campaign's main problem is that few people even know his name, missed a chance to meet anyone except a handful of stragglers.
The Wilder campaign seems disorganized, with few volunteers or paid workers in New Hampshire.
His fund raising has not met his own expectations.
He offers little more than slogans and a few details on important issues like health care and the economy.
The Presidential-campaign experience of his manager, Joe Johnson, consists of running Michael S. Dukakis's losing effort in Nevada in 1988.


Market Place; Radio Deal Would Link Drive-Time Rivals
TOGETHER, for the first time, Howard Stern and Don Imus.
Each weekday morning, these two radio stars battle for a share of the morning "drive time" market, along the way sometimes heaping abuse on each other.
Mr.
Stern ranked second in the market, with a 7.0 rating on WXRK-FM, in last summer's Arbitron ratings for morning drive time, the latest figures available.
Mr.
Imus ranked seventh, with a 4.0 rating, on WFAN-AM.
Overall, WXRK tied for 10th in the New York market, at 3.8; WFAN ranked 15th, with a 3.3 rating.


Accounts
*
Sony Music Entertainment to Slater Hanft Martin , New York, for a series of print projects to promote recordings by Sony artists.
Billings are $4.5 million.
The advertising had previously been handled by Sony Music's in-house advertising staff. *
International Automotive Corp., Atlanta, to Austin Kelley Advertising Inc., Atlanta, to advertise its National Tire Wholesale store chain in metropolitan Atlanta.
An agency spokeswoman said billings on the account, which had previously been handled by Earle Palmer Brown, Atlanta, totaled $2 million.


U.S. Health Bill Expected to Rise By 11% for '91
The Commerce Department plans to report today that it expects national spending on health to have increased 11 percent in 1991 over the previous year, the fifth consecutive year with a double-digit increase.
The report said spending on health care for 1991 was $738 billion, based on data collected for the first 11 months of 1991 and a projection for December.


Protesters Demand Justice for Kahane


Anti-Semitic Ad Rallied Campus Opposition; Remedy Is More Speech
To the Editor:
Shocked that my colleagues David M. Oshinsky and Michael Curtis would encourage prior restraint of speech based on the content of speech (Op-Ed, Dec. 11), I must disagree with their arguments and instead agree with Louis D. Brandeis, who wrote, as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, in Whitney v.
California in 1927: "If there be time to expose through discussion the falsehood and fallacies, to avert the evil by the processes of education, the remedy to be applied is more speech, not enforced silence."


Russell L. Ray: An Era Ends In Aviation
Shortly after Russell L. Ray Jr. took over as president and chief executive of Pan American World Airways in September he acknowledged that reshaping the carrier into a smaller airline whose flights were mostly to Latin America would be a daunting task.
Yet the executive rolled up his sleeves and began to hold a series of huddles with Delta executives, who offered assistance; labor union leaders, and creditors, who began to offer some support.


Anti-Semitic Ad Rallied Campus Opposition; Keep Memory Alive
To the Editor:
I was elated to see the intelligent article by David M. Oshinsky and Michael Curtis (Op-Ed, Dec. 11), regarding the despicable campaign to deny the existence of the Holocaust.


Officials Sought to Replace Security Agencies With CUNY Patrol
For years, the City University of New York has used outside agencies, among them Pinkerton Inc., to provide security on its 21 campuses.
But that practice has been questioned over the years by university officials and trustees, who say these groups have not always performed their functions adequately.
One of the officials is Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, who became chancellor of the university in September 1990 and who has made replacement of the agencies by a regular university security force one of her priorities.


Flood of Corporate Debt in the Offing
If the declines hold, investment bankers and economists say, the quarter-point drop in both short- and long-term interest rates since mid-December is likely to bring a torrent of corporate debt issues in the first weeks of the new year.
The holidays have prevented most companies from moving faster.
As the end of the year approaches, traditional buyers retreat to the sidelines, and many of the investment bankers who market the debt are on vacation.


Amid Dark Clouds of Gloom, Newspapers See Some Hope
FOR newspaper executives, this year has been a subject for black humor.
When several executives were asked if they could discern any good news for the newspaper business amid the current gloom, the initial response of virtually all was derisive laughter, ranging from a mordant chuckle to prolonged, acid-tinged guffaws.


Virginia Great Touts Welch and Blundin
Who did the best job of coaching in college football this season?
And which quarterback is the foremost prospect to be drafted first by the pros?
If you ask BILL DUDLEY, the answers are GEORGE WELCH and MATT BLUNDIN, both of the University of Virginia.
Never mind that the 70-year-old Dudley may be a little prejudiced because he is the Cavaliers' all-time football hero and a member of both the college and pro football halls of fame.


Amy S. Wallk, Student, Weds
Amy Susan Wallk, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Silas Wallk of Chicago, was married yesterday to Kenneth Phillip Katz, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Katz of Stamford, Conn.
Rabbi Seymour Cohen officiated at Anshe Emet Synagogue in Chicago.
Mrs.
Katz, 29 years old, attends the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York and is scheduled to be ordained as a rabbi in May.
She graduated from Barnard College, and has masters degrees in journalism from Northwestern University and in education from the University of Judaism in Los Angeles.
Her father is a dermatologist in Chicago.


Anti-Semitic Ad Rallied Campus Opposition
To the Editor:
As editor in chief of The Daily Targum, Rutgers University's student newspaper, I was disturbed by the Dec. 11 Op-Ed article by David M. Oshinsky and Michael Curtis, which was prompted in part by The Targum's decision to publish an anti-Semitic advertisement that presented discredited arguments that the Holocaust never occurred and the gas chambers were a hoax.


Russia in NATO, and Other Laughs
The silly season isn't limited to midsummer doldrums anymore.
It stretches out over the year, if you can believe what you read in the papers.
Some people say they never do, and it's getting harder to argue with them, considering the way 1991 is ending.
A lot of it is good news, but that doesn't make it more credible.
With a perfectly straight face, President Boris Yeltsin says he would like Russia to join NATO at some future date.
NATO is considering sending some troops to his country, to provide air and road transport for emergency relief donations from the West.
American airmen have been in Moscow unloading left-over food and medical supplies from the gulf war to distribute to hospitals, orphanages and old people's homes.


Penguins Stay Hot At Rangers' Expense
The Pittsburgh Penguins invited the Rangers to slash with them, to fight with them and to skate circles with them.
The Rangers, weary from three games in four nights, foolishly accepted on all counts.
Not surprisingly, they found themselves short-handed and short of breath during a 6-3 loss to the defending Stanley Cup champions.


Mosbacher Criticizes Japanese
Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher today became the first Administration official to say publicly that Japan was partly to blame for the lingering recession in the United States.
Mr.
Mosbacher's comments are especially significant because he will head Mr.
Bush's re-election campaign next year and serve as the chief fund-raiser.
The remarks came as President Bush prepared to leave Monday on a trip to Japan and three other Asian countries that will focus on trade issues.


Sports of The Times; The Cinderblock That Got Away From the Jets
IN the Astrodome catacombs, Freeman McNeil stared at the gray cinderblock wall behind his wire locker.
"It was about the size of that cinderblock," the Jets' old pro said.
"Only a little more than a foot."


Retired Judge Kills Wife, Son And Himself
A retired New York State judge shot and killed his wife and their son and then turned the gun on himself, the police said yesterday.
The judge was apparently despondent over the son's mental problems and concerned about who would care for him, the police said.
"He left a note," said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.
"And he expressed concern about his son's well-being after he and his wife had died. Apparently his son had a history of mental illness and was being treated for it."


Review/Television; In Aspen, Self-Improvement Vies With Skiing
When the residents of Frederick Wiseman's "Aspen" are not schussing they are searching.
Tonight's two-and-a-half-hour documentary, at 9 on Channels 13 and 49, traverses slopes and seminars, church services, classes and lectures.
Mr.
Wiseman, who is known for his disdain of narration, seems to be saying that many of the fashionably got-up skiers and party animals on view here are also strivers after knowledge, health, beauty and God; when not catering to the body, they are attending to the spirit.
These are some of the things you can join in on:


Theater in Review
What About Luv?
York Theater 2 East 90th Street Manhattan
Based on the comedy by Murray Schisgal; book by Jeffrey Sweet; music by Howard Marren; lyrics by Susan Birkenhead; directed by Patricia Birch; musical director, Tom Helm; scenery, James Morgan; costumes, Barbara Beccio; lighting, Mary Jo Dondlinger; technical director, John Miller; production stage manager, William J. Buckley.
Presented by the York Theater Company, in association with One World Arts Foundation, Janet Hayes Walker, producing director; Molly Pickering Grose, managing director.
WITH: David Green, Judy Kaye and Austin Pendleton.
With a running time of under two hours, a steady barrage of tepid witticisms (sample: "I'm being held captive in my own life") and a peppy score whose style filters Petula Clark hits through generic 50's show tunes, the York Theater's production of "What About Luv?" might be described as the diet shake of current musicals.
A revised version of the 1984 Off Broadway show "Love," which itself was adapted from Murray Shisgal's 1964 hit play "Luv," the three-character show evokes a neurotic New York City ambiance that in light of today's urban pressures seems almost utopian.


Ms. Harelick, Lawyer, Weds
Maxine Elizabeth Harelick, the daughter of Marlene and Stanley Harelick of Fair Lawn, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard Adam Levitan, a son of Shirley and Philip Levitan of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Moshe Kasinetz officiated at Bob Gilbert's Singers in Spring Valley, N.Y.
Mrs.
Levitan, 27 years old, is an associate in the law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father is the president of the H &amp; H Tomato Company in Passaic, N.J.


Tears of Joy for 'Weeping' Icon's Return in Queens


Kentucky Wins Cross-State Debate With Louisville
Until the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament in 1983, Kentucky had been accused of dodging its cross-state neighbor, Louisville.
Before that, the two teams hadn't played since a similarly forced matchup in another N.C.A.A. tournament, in 1959.
Louisville won the 1983 game, 80-68, in overtime, and suddenly the Wildcats were thirsting for revenge.
Kentucky, for the most part, has gained that revenge.


Quotation of the Day
"He loved music, television and all sports. He was always going to the Meadowlands. He liked all sports. That's why he got killed yesterday: he was there for the basketball." -- YVONNE DARGAN, speaking of her son Yul.  [ B3:1. ]


After Further Review, Parcells Says No to Bucs
The question of where, or if, Bill Parcells will coach next year took a stunning detour yesterday.
Hugh Culverhouse, the owner of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, said Parcells had agreed Thursday on a five-year, $6.5 million contract to coach and also run the entire football operation, then backed out Saturday night.
Parcells said he had never agreed to take the job, only to consider it.


Balancing Act; A special report.; One City's 30-Year Crusade for Integration
For 30 years now Shaker Heights, a suburban forest of Old World estates on the eastern border of Cleveland, has made racial integration something of a crusade.
It has tried to hold the races together even as they appear alienated outside its borders.
The city has found that integration is not only difficult to begin but also difficult to maintain.
If it is to occur at all, residents here say, it requires prodding and pampering and a kind of eternal vigilance and preoccupation with race.
The city goes so far as to provide financial incentives to those who move into neighborhoods dominated by the other race.


A Fearless Attitude At the Utne Reader
For some magazine publishers, 25 pages of articles critical of advertising might be considered commercial suicide, particularly when they are featured on the cover.
Then there is the Utne Reader.
The articles, in the magazine's January-February issue, decry the pervasiveness of advertising in everyday life.
But rather than see the editorial content as a source of indigestion for advertising executives, Craig Neal, the Utne Reader's publisher in Minneapolis, insisted that its frankness would make the magazine all the more appealing.
The magazine, which consists largely of articles reprinted from small magazines and alternative newspapers, guarantees advertisers a circulation of 260,000.


Essay; Office Pool, 1992
"Mikhail Gorbachev will be ousted by Yeltsin-Sobchak-Shevardnadze reformers following public revulsion after a bloody crackdown" was the prediction made in this space last year.
Never mind that I recanted under pressure of television lights, or foolishly dismissed Norman Schwarzkopf as Ethelred the Unready; in the Nostradamus dodge, you remember only the time you were right.


Correction
A front-page picture caption yesterday about the return of a stolen icon to a Greek Orthodox church in Queens referred incorrectly in some copies to the cleric holding the icon.
He was Archbishop Paisios.


Lydia Savoyka, 59, Social Worker, Dies; Assisted Immigrants
Lydia Ulana Savoyka, a Ukrainian-born social worker, who served 35 years as director of immigration counseling services for the United States Catholic Conference, died on Dec. 20 at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
She was 59 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of a heart attack after collapsing in her office, her sister, Vera Savoyka, said.


Theater in Review
Reno Once Removed
The Public Anspacher Theater 425 Lafayette Street Manhattan
Conceived, written and performed by Reno; directed by Evan Yionoulis; original music by Mike Yionoulis; lighting by Dan Kotlowitz.
Presented by I.P.A.
Presents and the New York Shakespeare Festival, JoAnne Akalaitis, artistic director; Jason Steven Cohen, producing director; Rosemarie Tichler, associate artistic director.
Among performance artists who have emerged from the East Village in the last decade, Reno may be the most physically uninhibited.
Her arms flailing, her jaw thrust out, her eyes darting with mischief, she spins around the stage in her new show like a perpetual motion machine.
Squirming around the floor while trying to find shade from an imaginary bonsai tree or demonstrating how she wrings out and saves her paper towels to protect the environment, Reno triumphantly joins a classic slapstick tradition.


POL POT COLLEAGUE BACK IN CAMBODIA
The president of the Khmer Rouge, who was attacked by an angry mob and driven from this city a month ago, returned this morning under heavy military security as Prince Norodom Sihanouk attempted to keep the peace process here from collapsing.
The Khmer Rouge leader, Khieu Samphan, was one of one of the chief architects of the regime that killed more than 1 million people here in the late 1970's, before it was overthrown by a Vietnamese invasion.
Now reconstituted as the most powerful of the guerrilla forces battling for domination of the country in a continuation of the civil wars that have wracked this impoverished country for two decades, representatives of the Khmer Rouge have returned again to the capital city.
This time they are one of four factions that are supposed to guide the country to free elections in 1993.


Arborcide or Preservation? Windmill Group Is Accused
Two trees were executed this weekend on the village green of Water Mill, a bucolic hamlet on eastern Long Island, and some angry residents are calling them martyrs on the shrine of tourism.
The officials who cut the trees down say they were taking action to preserve their hamlet's charm and one of its most historic structures.
But those unhappy about the change see a more sinister design.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND BASKETBALL National Basketball Association  CHICAGO BULLS -- Activated Bill Cartwright, center, from the injured list.
Waived Mark Randall, forward.
MIAMI HEAT -- Announced they have matched the Los Angeles Lakers' offer sheet for Sherman Douglas, guard.
Continental Basketball Association  RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Traded the rights to Lanard Copeland, guard, to the Yakima Sun Kings for second- and sixth-round 1992 draft picks.
Traded Derrick Chevious, forward, to the Quad City Thunder for 1992 first- and fourth-round draft picks.
Signed Rob Robbins, guard.
SIOUX FALLS SKYFORCE -- Traded Quintin Dailey, guard, to the Yakima Sun Kings for the rights to Bart Kofoed, guard, and future considerations.


Group Accuses U.S. Of Devaluing Rights In Its Foreign Policy
A major human rights coalition asserted yesterday that the Bush Administration had devalued rights issues in making foreign policy toward Kuwait, China, Haiti and other countries.
The independent group, Human Rights Watch, said in a comprehensive annual report that Washington had sacrificed human rights principles to its political interests, and that the State Department's Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs had been misused to defend abusive governments.


Staci Hersh and Bruce Lambert Are Married
Staci Eileen Hersh, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Hersh of Long Beach, L.I., was married yesterday to Bruce Howard Lambert, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Lambert of Williston Park, L.I.
Rabbi Amos Miller officiated at the Water's Edge at the East River Yacht Club in Long Island City, Queens.
Mrs.
Lambert, 28 years old, graduated from Northeastern University, as did her husband, 31.
She has an M.B.A. from Baruch College.
Her father is the director of merchandising services for the Switzerland Cheese Association in Valley Cottage, N.Y.
Mr.
Lambert is a first-year student at the Los Angeles College of Chiropractic.
His father heads his own sales representative company, dealing in gifts and decorative accessories, in Englewood, N.J.


Jets Cross Thin Blue Line From Playoffs to Layoffs
The Jets traveled a great distance this season to arrive at the American Football Conference wild-card playoff here, their first appearance in post-season play since 1986.
But once they got here they reached, in the words of 11-year veteran running back Freeman McNeil, "a shocking realization."
It took two failed second-half scoring attempts deep inside the Oilers' territory, a few of quarterback Ken O'Brien's desperation passes with the final seconds ticking away, and a resulting 17-10 loss to Houston, for the Jets to see that they have miles to go before they can say they have truly arrived.


Democratic Hopeful Debates the Senate Raise


Eccentricities on Ice
Now in its 54th year, the skating rink at Rockefeller Center has provided countless hours of slippery amusement for visitors from the metropolitan area and far beyond -- some 51,000 during the six-week holiday period.
For some ice fans, though, the rink is much more than just a seasonal outing.
"We call them our funny regulars," said Carol Olsen, the rink manager.
"You can't miss them. They're very colorful."


Philip M. Hawley: A Casualty Of Heavy Debt
Perhaps no retail executive better illustrates the plight of traditional department store merchants than Philip M. Hawley, the chairman of Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc.
The Los Angeles-based retailer, the largest department store chain on the West Coast, filed for bankruptcy in February, a casualty of its billion-dollar debt load and its failure to keeps its stores and merchandise fresh in the face of stiff competition from merchants like Nordstrom Inc.


Robert C. Stempel: Drastic Steps To Cut Losses
Robert C. Stempel, 58, was named chairman of the General Motors Corporation less than two years ago.
Since then, the domestic vehicle market has gone almost straight downhill: first came the Persian Gulf war, then a prolonged softness in consumer confidence.
Mr.
Stempel took a $3.3 billion pretax write-off of plants and personnel last year; last week he announced another wave of shutdowns, totaling 21 plants and 74,000 workers through 1995.
He said the effect on G.M.'s balance sheet would not be as high as $3.3 billion.


Anti-Semitic Ad Rallied Campus Opposition; Not Only Jews
To the Editor:
The Polish Association of Former Political Prisoners of Nazi and Soviet Concentration Camps, of which I am president, endorses the recommendation by David M. Oshinsky and Michael Curtis that college newspapers reject advertisements contending that the Holocaust never occurred.


DEADLINE CLOSING ON SALVADOR PACT
The United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, said today that El Salvador's Government and the rebel front had all but given up trying to conclude a peace settlement before the new year.
But Mr.
Perez de Cuellar, who is overseeing talks between the two sides, said the negotiators were still working to reach agreement that would assure swift success for the peace process before his term ends on Tuesday.


For Students in Outward Bound, Lessons on Urban Survival
Unity Park does not appear on any map of Melrose, but the little plot is etched in the consciousness of students at South Bronx High School.
A few weeks ago, a group of them carved a patch of green from the vacant lots and abandoned storefronts that surround the school by planting bushes, bulbs and three 16-foot-high ash saplings.
The next day, only two of the trees were still standing.
If "A Tree Grows in Brooklyn" was a snapshot of life in another New York slum, the story of the ash trees, including the one that was planted but that never had a chance to grow, might be a metaphor for life in what is now the city's poorest borough.
It is a story about faith and frustration, about caring and community.
It also suggests that people sometimes lose sight of the fact that individual trees can be nurtured to maturity even if it is impossible to create an entire forest overnight.


Anti-Semitic Ad Rallied Campus Opposition; Apologist for Nazis
To the Editor:
David M. Oshinsky and Michael Curtis (Op-Ed, Dec. 11) identify the high-sounding Institute for Historical Review as the principal promoter of the contention that the Holocaust never occurred.
The institute publishes the Journal of Historical Review and lists a number of Ph.D.'s as members of its advisory board.
One of the founding members was Austin J. App, a retired English professor.


Stolen Bonds Recovered
Acting on a tip, F.B.I. agents raided a Brooklyn apartment yesterday and recovered $2 billion in stolen bonds.
Two men, Louis Gillmore, 39 years old, and Henry Pinkney, 44, both of 99 Tompkins Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, were arrested.
The bonds, belonging to Publishers Clearing House, were non-negotiable.
The bonds were stolen along with a courier car belonging to Morgan Guaranty Trust early Christmas morning.
The company's courier had stopped at a delicatessen, leaving the engine running.
When she came out, the car and the bonds were gone.


CHRONICLE
PETER MARTINS, the Ballet Master of the New York City Ballet, and DARCI KISTLER, a principal dancer with the company, were married last week.
DAVID GRAY, a spokesman for the couple and for the New York City Ballet, said that the couple "wished to keep details of the ceremony private" but that he believed the couple was married in Denmark, though he could not say exactly where.
Miss Kistler, of Riverside, Calif., joined the New York City Ballet in 1980 and was promoted to the rank of principal dancer in 1982.
Mr.
Martins, of Copenhagen, joined the the ballet company in 1970 as principal dancer.
He retired from dancing in 1983, and became a co-director of the company with JEROME ROBBINS, after the death of George Balanchine.
Mr.
Martins assumed sole directorship after Mr.
Robbins' resignation in 1990.


Omnicon Sells Stake In Telerx Marketing
The Omnicom Group Inc. in New York has sold a 51 percent stake in Telerx Marketing Inc. to Medical Marketing Group Inc. of Montvale, N.J., an information and health-care marketing unit of Medco Containment Services Inc.
Terms were not disclosed.
Telerx provides telemarketing, interactive voice communications and direct-mail services to physicians and businesses.
Omnicom will retain the other 49 percent of Telerx through the BBDO Health &amp; Medical Communications unit of its BBDO Worldwide.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Dec. 29, 1991: THURSDAY Houston Inds Lubys Cafeterias Nevada Pwr PNC Finl Snyder Oil FRIDAY New York St.
Elec &amp; Gas Snap-on Tools SATURDAY Core Inds J. M. Smucker


CHRONICLE
Now that Christmas has passed, here is something to look forward to in the New Year: a film festival entitled "It Can't Happen Here: Films of the Great Depression." Thirty movies, some made during the Depression, others made years later, some familiar, some obscure, will be shown by the Film Society of Lincoln Center from Jan. 10 through Feb. 19 at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street.
SAYRE MAXFIELD, program associate with the society, had the idea for the festival about a year ago when it was her turn to suggest books for a literary group to which she belongs.
"I came up with two books of that era that couldn't have been more different from one another and that led to me think maybe there were different kinds of depression movies, comedies as well as serious ones."
She took the idea for a series to RICHARD PENA, program director, and they began collecting titles.
"We came up with lots that I had never heard of," Ms.
Maxfield said.
"For example, 'Gabriel Over the White House,' which was produced by William Randolph Hearst. Walter Huston plays a president who declares martial law and takes over the Government in ways that Franklin Delano Roosevelt never dreamed of. He decides that the rest of the world must disarm, so he calls in all war debts and rules the world."


Israelis Prepare a Mass Airlift of Immigrants
Israeli immigration officials said today that if conditions deteriorate rapidly in the former Soviet Union they are in a position to airlift as many as 100,000 Jews a month to Israel on direct flights or through transit points in Eastern Europe.
The officials said immigration from Russia and other new republics is running 25 percent higher this month than in November, but they cautioned that it is too early to tell if a clear new pattern has emerged.


G.M. to Show a High-Mileage Experimental Car
The latest experimental vehicle from the General Motors Corporation, a high-mileage four-passenger car with a body made of carbon fiber, promises to enliven the debate over fuel-efficiency legislation.
At the North American International Auto Show in Detroit next week, G.M. will show its Ultralite, which the company says can produce 100-mile-a-gallon fuel efficiency at 50-mile-an-hour highway speeds.


Neediest Cases Donors Reflect on '91
In the big picture, 1991 may well be remembered as the year the Soviet Union dissolved and the Persian Gulf war was won.
But for donors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund the year was highlighted by personal experiences that brought joy, sorrow, anxiety and the compassion to give to those less fortunate.
"As 1991 closes so too do the doors of adversity open and close," wrote Harriet and Stan Hendel of Highland Mills, N.Y., who gave $25.
"For the hostages now free the hard times are a memory. For those who serve the neediest of New York City, the difficult hours are ahead."


Jersey Sports Authority Passing Hat
Can Rutgers use a larger football stadium? Is more better?
Those are among the issues to be presented at public hearings next Monday in Trenton before the appropriations committee of the New Jersey State Senate.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-7  U.N.'S NEW LEADER AND NEW HOPES
Boutros Ghali of Egypt, about to take office as Secretary General of the United Nations, is eager to establish his credentials as a peacemaker.
He will play a pivotal role in determining whether the organization lives up to raised expectations.
Page A1  MEXICO RAISING ITS PROFILE IN U.S.
Abandoning a history of diplomatic and public relations restraint, the Government of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari is trying to transform Mexico's political presence in the United States.
A1  DOUBT ON QUICK SALVADORAN PACT
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations said mediators had effectively given up hopes of reaching a final settlement to El Salvador's civil war by the end of this year.A4  WHY MINSK?
NO PLACE BETTER.
Minsk is a gentle, long-suffering city, so the sudden occurrence of a bread panic made it seem a fitting headquarters for the fledgling Commonwealth of Independent States, whose leaders meet there today.
A3  RUSSIA'S SHAPE GRIM, YELTSIN SAYS
President Yeltsin acknowledged that Russians would be sorely tested as the state began to set the economy free.
But he insisted in a televised address that life would be improving by the end of 1992.
A3  Georgian troops drove rebels from the Parliament building.
A3  SECULAR ALGERIANS URGE TURNOUT
After Islamic fundamentalists won the first round of parliamentary elections, the Algerian Government, the press and secular political parties urged voters who abstained to vote in runoffs against turning the country into a religious state.
A7  ISRAEL OFFERS MORE IMMIGRATION
Israeli immigration officials said that if conditions deteriorate rapidly in the former Soviet Union, they are in a position to airlift as many as 100,000 Jews a month to Israel.
A7  KHMER ROUGE CHIEF RETURNS
The Khmer Rouge president, who was attacked by a mob in Phnom Penh a month ago, returned this morning under heavy military security for a third attempt to gather the Supreme National Council.
A7  IRAN BLOCKS SWISS ENVOY'S EXIT
Iran prevented a Swiss diplomat from leaving the country and restricted the movements of other Swiss envoys.
Switzerland closed its embassy in Teheran in protest.
A7  Calcutta Journal: Where taxis face the world's largest traffic jam.
A2  National A10-13  CENTRAL FOCUS ON RACE
For 30 years, Shaker Heights, Ohio, a Cleveland suburb, has made racial integration a crusade, treating it as a matter needing constant attention, prodding and pampering.
A1  REDISTRICTING BATTLE
After decades of complaining about being denied a fair share of Congressional seats by Democrats, Republicans may hold an early advantage in drawing district lines.
A1  A QUICK POLITICAL COUP
The City Council in Bell Gardens, Calif., passed an ordinance to control population density.
Now most of its members are out of office after Hispanic residents led a campaign that resulted in their recall.
A10  A DIMINISHING NEST EGG
The plummeting of interest rates may be good news for borrowers, but not for retirees who had counted on income from investments to let them continue enjoying the good life.
In retirement communities across Florida, the pinch is being felt.
A10  MOSBACHER BASHES JAPAN
Commerce Secretary Mosbacher became the first Administration official to say publicly that Japan was partly to blame for the lingering recession in the United States.
D1  OREGON ATTACKS FRAUD
While skyrocketing costs endanger workers' compensation insurance in many states, the SAIF Corporation of Salem, Ore., is a rare bird in the wilderness: a failing state-owned insurer that suddenly stopped its fall and rose to become a striking business success.
D1  WILDER'S QUEST
Despite disorganization in his Presidential campaign and weak fund raising, Gov.
Wilder of Virginia remains optimistic because he sees the other candidates for the Democratic Party's nomination as less than overpowering.
A12  For fifth consecutive year, a double-digit increase in health costs.
A10  Number of farm owners fell to its lowest number in this century.
A12  Metroplitan Digest, B1 SEEKING A CAUSE OF A STAMPEDE
Inquiries begin into a nightmarish stampede at a City College gymnasium that left eight people dead -- buried, crushed and smothered to death -- at what was to have been a charity basketball game featuring celebrity rap stars.
A1  CAUGHT IN A BOTTLENECK
A 20-year-old college student who had narrowly escaped death last September was one of eight young people killed as they were trapped against the doors of the gymnasium at City College, lured to a rap-star-studded basketball game.A1  Business Digest, D1  Arts/Entertainment C9-16  How arts group struggle and cope with recession.
C9  Hollywood screenwriter, angry.
C9  Theater: Theater in Review C14  Music: Music Notes C9  George Winston's new-age piano.
C14  Word and Image: "The World Is My Home," by James A. Michener.
C16  "Aspen," by Frederick Wiseman.
C9  "Age 7 in the U.S.S.R." C16  Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15  Editorials A14  Reciprocity on arms.
A14  Tonic for Commerce?
A14  Solid choice for health.
A14  Diane Camper: Refugees.
A14  Letters A14  William Safire: Office Pool, 1992.
A15  Sam Johnson and Chris Marcil: Crutch words.
A15  Martha Brill Olcott: Central Asia or bust.
A15  Flora Lewis: Russia in NATO, and other laughs.
A15 Sports C1-8  Basketball: Sweet victory for Kentucky.
C3  Big East preview.
C4  Sealy studies his craft well.
C4  Features: Sidelines.
C2  Question Box.
C2  Football: Oilers beat Jets, 17-10.
C1  Cowboys hold off Bears, 17-13.
C1  Georgia tops Arkansas.
C5  Alabama flanker stars in Blockbuster.
C5  Pressure on Moon isn't enough.
C6  It won't be Tampa Bay for Parcells.
C7  Hockey: Penguins beat Rangers, 6-3 C3  Capitals defeat Devils, 4-3 C3  Whalers top Islanders, 6-4 C3  Olympics: Sledders in disarray.
C2  Obituaries B10  Lydia Ulana Savoyka, social worker who assisted immigrants


Bridge
A sound guideline for a defender is to keep a matching length in dummy's suit, but a clever declarer can sometimes take advantage of this tendency.
Richard Cummings, who edits "World Bridge News" for the World Bridge Federation and has long been one of Australia's best players, had good reason to be pleased with the diagramed deal from a rubber bridge game.
He was South, and would normally have opened with one spade.
With a part-score of 60 for the opponents, he decided to exert some pressure with a three-spade pre-emptive move.


Yugoslav Forces Strike Karlovac From the Air
Yugoslav Air Force jets mounted fierce raids today on the city of Karlovac in the breakaway republic of Croatia, and fighting also raged in central Croatia, where Serbian irregulars were retreating.
A senior Yugoslav Army officer in Belgrade denied Croatian contentions that federal forces had used Soviet-built surface-to-surface rockets to attack two villages south of the Croatian capital, Zagreb, on Saturday.


Tide's Wee Palmer Rolls in Wee Hours
The Deuce was on the loose.
And the fervent followers of Alabama's Crimson Tide hope that their No. 2, tiny freshman David Palmer, continues to produce the type of thrilling moments that led the Tide to a Blockbuster Bowl victory.
Palmer, a 5-foot-9-inch, 170-pound 19-year-old, used his remarkable skills to score two memorable touchdowns in the 30-25 triumph over Colorado at Joe Robbie Stadium.


Books of The Times; Michener Memoir, 'World Is My Home'
The World Is My Home A Memoir By James A. Michener Illustrated. 520 pages.
Random House. $25.
In James A. Michener's captivating new memoir, "The World Is My Home," which could be described as a craftsman's autobiography, is this highly revealing statement:


Music Notes; Duo-Pianists Get a Chance to Reach for the Prize
The Soviet Union may be extinct as a world power, but the virtuosic, highly-polished keyboard style that Westerners have long referred to as Soviet pianism is as dominant a force as ever.
Last week, the jurors at the third Murray Dranoff Two-Piano Competition, in Miami, were so taken with the playing of a Ukrainian team and a Russian team that they voted to combine the $10,000 first prize and the $5,000 second prize, and to award a joint first prize of $7,500 each.
The winners, both husband-and-wife teams, are Valentina Lisitsa and Aleksei Kuznetsov, from Kiev and both in their early 20's, and Maksim and Irina Yeleznov, who now teach in Tashkent, Uzbekistan, but who said they considered Moscow their home.
The Yeleznovs, who are both 33 years old, also won a $1,000 prize for the best performance of a work composed for the competition, William Bolcom's "Recuerdos." An American team, Kathryn Lewis, of Washington, and Martin Perry, of Portland, Me., won the $2,500 third prize.


Capitals Fire Up in 3d as Devils Fizzle
The Devils were sailing along on Peter Stastny's hat trick and a two-goal lead going into the third period when things started going downhill for the home team tonight against the Capitals.
Washington scored three third-period goals, including two with less than three minutes left, and ended a losing streak at three games with a 4-3 triumph over the Devils, who have now gone eight games without a victory (0-4-4) in the Patrick Division.


'Weeping' Icon Returns To Prayers of Celebration
Parishioners welcomed home their missing icon yesterday with a procession through the rain-drenched streets of Queens, a fervid service of thanksgiving and offerings of wedding rings and other jewelry to replace the icon's gold-and-jewel-encrusted frame.
"I gave a ring," Oreanthe Lyaberatos said in Greek.
Her daughter-in-law, Angela Trioumoulis, translated, adding that her mother also gave a ring, "for the health of her 11 children."


Bell Gardens Journal; From the Blue Comes a Political Coup
The problem with Bell Gardens, a city official said not long ago, is that "we just have too many people."
With that in mind, the City Council passed a zoning ordinance last year to control population density.


Review/Pop; George Winston's Piano for an Eclectic Age
Slipped into the program for George Winston's solo concert at Avery Fisher Hall last Monday evening was a biography and discography of the new-age pianist that listed not only his own recordings, but also "recommended albums of some of the musicians who have been influences." High on the recommended list were several New Orleans keyboardists, among them James Booker, Dr.
John and Professor Longhair.
Also named were Teddy Wilson, Vince Guaraldi, Fats Waller and the composer Steve Reich.
The list offers a fairly comprehensive picture of Mr.
Winston's pianistic eclecticism.
A characteristic Winston piece is a semi-improvised solo that blends two or three of those influences into a style that might be described as minimalist folk impressionism.
Since Mr.
Winston has recorded four popular albums of seasonal music, the impressionism often has to do with evoking western landscapes at different times of the year.
His music is filled with falling leaves and flying snowflakes.


Sealy Studies His Craft Well
When Sidney and Ann Sealy's five children were growing up in the Bronx in the 1970's, there was a quality about the fourth child, Malik, that was so subtle that the mother did not notice it at first.
She had to have it pointed out.
As the older children would take part in family gatherings, playing with puzzles or trying to master games, Malik would sit on the outside and observe quietly until everyone else was done.


Tonic for a Tired Department?
When Barbara Franklin takes over as the new Commerce Secretary, she'll have a fundamental choice to make.
She can emulate her predecessor, Robert Mosbacher, promoting exports and taking care of technical responsibilities, like overseeing the census.
Or she can engage the Commerce Department in the problems that confront American business as it heads into the next century.
Targets of opportunity abound.
The Commerce Department could lead major new efforts to solve the crisis of skyrocketing medical costs facing small businesses; to create a tax code that rewards productivity-enhancing investment; to take high school dropouts and turn them into skilled workers.


At 100, Public Relations' Pioneer Criticizes Some of His Heirs
Edward L. Bernays recently turned 100 years old, giving him the most protracted view of the discipline that he is credited with creating in the 1920's.
But he is not happy with it now.
"Public relations today is horrible," he said in an interview at his home here.
"Any dope, any nitwit, any idiot can call him or herself a public relations practitioner."


Whenever Fans Gather in Force, Concerns About Crowd Safety Follow
Ever since what is generally considered the world's first rock 'n' roll concert, in Cleveland on March 21, 1952, controlling the crowd has been almost as much of a concern for promoters as what was on the program, who the warmup acts were or when the show would get started.
That first concert drew a crowd of about 25,000 fans to an arena with a legal capacity of 10,000.
Once all the seats were filled, the doors were closed, stranding many ticketholders outside.
A gate-crashing riot followed.
In its wake, the authorities charged Alan Freed, a radio disk jockey who had promoted the concert, with overselling it.
Those charges were later dropped.


Dr. Hamburg: Solid Choice for Health
Despite New York City's growing public health problems, it took Mayor David Dinkins more than six months to decide on a new health commissioner.
But there was a benefit to the delay: It gave Dr.
Margaret Hamburg, the acting Commissioner, the chance to display the skills that ultimately persuaded Mr.
Dinkins to select her for the job.
New York City's last Health Commissioner, Woodrow Myers, never regained his balance after early statements questioning the need to protect AIDS patients' anonymity enraged the city's often hotheaded community of AIDS activists.
And he seemed wholly overwhelmed by the crushing budget problems that set in soon after Mr.
Dinkins took office.


Oil Interests Sold to Dutch
Pacific Enterprises said Friday that it had sold its oil and gas interests in the North Sea, off the coast of the Netherlands, to a Dutch group.
The company said it would record a pretax gain of $21 million on the sale and use the proceeds to reduce corporate debt.
The holdings, operated by a subsidiary, the Pacific Enterprises Oil Company (Netherlands), were purchased jointly by Oranje-Nassau Energie Participatie Maatschappij of Amsterdam and Dyas of The Hague.


The Industry's Year of Exceptional Turbulence
In a tumultuous 12 months during which more large accounts and leading executives moved elsewhere than ever before, how well change was managed said a lot about how the year went.
Every year in advertising has peaks and valleys.
But 1991 was unusually intense, the swings magnified by the nation's economic slump.
Lost accounts were not easily replaced; new business produced a prosperity that contrasted sharply with the industry's pervasive gloom.


New U.N. Leader Is Taking Over At a Time of Great Expectations
Successful mediation in trouble spots around the world and the fading of the cold war have raised expectations that the United Nations may finally fulfill its lofty goals, helping to defuse threats to peace and security and offering a forum for addressing problems that no country can solve alone.
As the sixth Secretary General of the United Nations, Boutros Ghali, a 69-year-old Egyptian diplomat, will play a pivotal role in determining whether the organization lives up to these rejuvenated hopes over the next five years.
Mr.
Ghali, who is also a lawyer and a former Deputy Prime Minister, will assume the leadership of the United Nations on Jan. 1.


Bears Squander Their Possessions to Stingy Cowboys
CHICAGO, Dec. 29 -- The Chicago Bears' offense took the football and drove all over Soldier Field today, but something ugly kept happening nearly every time it approached the Dallas goal line.
The Cowboys might as well have posted a sign there that said, "Do Not Enter."
The Bears obliged, anyway.


Books of The Times; Michener Memoir, 'World Is My Home'
The World Is My Home A Memoir By James A. Michener Illustrated. 520 pages.
Random House. $25.
In James A. Michener's captivating new memoir, "The World Is My Home," which could be described as a craftsman's autobiography, is this highly revealing statement:


On L. Douglas Wilder


INSIDE
Minsk Becomes Crucial Site
A sudden bread panic made gentle, long-suffering Minsk a fitting headquarters for the commonwealth whose leaders meet today.
Page A3.
Pointing the Finger at Tokyo
Commerce Secretary Mosbacher became the first Administration official to blame Japan publicly for the United States's economic slump.
Page D1.
Texas Teams Advance
The Houston Oilers beat the Jets and the Dallas Cowboys beat the Bears in the National Football League playoffs.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Review/Dance; Cast Changes in 'Storyville'
"District Storyville," Donald McKayle's tribute to the early days of jazz in the streets and bordellos of New Orleans, looked as lively as ever when the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater presented it on Saturday afternoon at City Center.
Two previously unreviewed dancers portrayed major roles.
Their performances emphasized that "District Storyville" is in many ways a work about teaching and learning.


G.O.P. Strategy in Budget Battle In Albany Is Calculated Gamble
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has called the Republicans who run the State Senate obdurate, reckless and irresponsibly sluggish.
"They're playing chicken with the state of New York in the car," he said.
But if this is a game of chicken, then the Democratic Governor has already balked, and more than once, offering several major concessions from the budget plan he first advanced weeks ago.


A Writer So Angry He Plans To Direct
Lem Dobbs should be one of the happiest writers in town.
He was 31 years oldon Christmas Eve but spent most of the day working.
He is under contract to write a comedy for the director Ivan Reitman that will star Danny DeVito and to write a drama for the director Robert Zemeckis.
And he is set on directing his own screenplay for the producer David Lynch.
But Mr.
Dobbs, who acknowledges that being a successful screenwriter is "incredibly lucrative," is one of Hollywood's angrier young men.
He says he is angry that his latest movie, "Kafka," which has received mixed reviews and which is to open nationally in February, has been mangled.
He says he is angry about the "pitiful existence" of screenwriters in Hollywood, which he says is far worse than he imagined.
And he is angry, he says, that movies seem so "shallow and poor and infantile," especially compared with the ones made in the 1960's and 70's.


Man Charged In the Killing Of an Officer
A 25-year-old man with a record of six felony arrests and a long string of drug and fare-beating convictions was charged yesterday with killing an off-duty police officer who had tried to foil a robbery at a cash machine early Saturday.
The police said the man, Christopher Lewis of 71 West 128th Street, has been arrested 35 times and convicted 26 times.
Six of the arrests were for unspecified felonies and 29 were for misdemeanors, including 10 narcotics arrests.
Most of the other misdemeanor arrests were for fare beating, and Mr.
Lewis was wanted on a bench warrant on such a charge.


Auction Set By Treasury
For the New Year's holiday week, the Treasury plans to hold only its usual weekly auction of three- and six-month bills today.
Late Friday, the three-month bills were traded at a yield of 3.83 percent and the six-month bills were at 3.87 percent.
One fixed-income taxable issue, which was postponed last week, is scheduled for this week: The TFC Financial Corporation, a Minneapolis-based banking and financial-services company, plans to offer $30 million in capital notes, due in 2002, through Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood.


Let's Send All Our Missiles to the Sun
To the Editor:
"Nuclear Designers From East and West Plan Bomb Disposal" (Science Times, Dec. 17), on a meeting of scientists to discuss disposal of nuclear weapons, prompts me to offer a suggestion I've been thinking about for some time.
Let us mark the year 2000 with a worldwide celebration as we send all nuclear weapons to the sun, itself a nuclear entity.


Familiar Questions for Ancient Minsk
Ordinary people were wrestling for their daily bread here at the Yubilei supermarket today as the leaders of the former Soviet republics raced by in motorcades for another go at Lenin's eternally apt question: "What is to be done?"
"Look at this -- it's trench warfare in here," said the store manager, Vladimir Nerozya, watching his customers push, elbow and grab at the loaves across the counter, traditionally the last bastion against panic in the former Soviet empire.


RESULTS PLUS
N.B.A.
Orlando Slide Hits 14 David Robinson had 23 points and 16 rebounds for the visiting San Antonio Spurs, who scored a 96-87 victory over the Magic last night, sending Orlando to its 14th straight defeat.
The Magic's Jeff Turner hit two free throws with 4:33 left to tie the game, 79-79, but San Antonio went on an 8-0 spree. (AP) Bucks 110, Rockets 100: Dale Ellis scored 16 of his 22 points in the fourth quarter to rally Milwaukee past Houston.
The Bucks trailed, 85-83, early in the fourth quarter, but Ellis scored 11 of Milwaukee's next 13 points as the Bucks took a 96-92 lead. (AP) N.H.L.
Wings Outlast Hawks Brian Noonan had four goals for Chicago, but Jimmy Carson and Ray Sheppard each scored twice for Detroit as the Red Wings ended the Blackhawks' home unbeaten streak at 12 games with a 6-4 victory in Chicago.
Noonan also had all of Chicago's goals in a 3-3 tie with Winnipeg on Friday night and has 12 of his 15 goals since Dec. 5. (AP) Canadiens 3, Oilers 1: Montreal's Mike Keane scored at 4:39 of the third period to break a 1-1 tie, and the visiting Canadiens went on to the victory over Edmonton.
The Canadien rookie Gilbert Dionne, younger brother of the former star Marcel Dionne, scored his first National Hockey League goal at 8:10. (AP) Flames 6, Kings 2: Robert Reichel, Trent Yawney and Al MacInnis scored power-play goals in a 2:04 span of the third period as Calgary won on home ice. (AP) Bruins 6, Jets 3: Bob Carpenter scored two goals as Boston snapped a four-game winless streak on the road by overpowering the Jets in Winnipeg.
Jeff Lazaro, Steve Leach, Peter Douris and Dave Reid also scored for the Bruins. (AP) TENNIS France Advances Henri Leconte and Julie Halard combined to lift France to a 2-1 victory over Sweden yesterday in the first round of the Hopman Cup team tournament at the Perth Superdome in Australia.
Leconte beat Peter Lundgren, 6-4, 2-6, 6-3, and Halard beat Catarina Lindqvist, 6-4, 7-5.
The Swedish pair won the mixed doubles, 8-6, in a pro set.
France advanced to the quarterfinals against Boris Becker and Steffi Graf of Germany.
Other top pairings include the brother-and-sister Spanish team of Emilio Sanchez and Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and the American combination of Derrick Rostagno and Amy Frazier.
Those teams had byes into the second round. (AP) GOLF Geddes Triumphs Jane Geddes shot a three-under-par 71 yesterday and won the Daikyo Masters tournament in Gold Coast, Australia, for the second straight year.
Geddes, who won last year's tournament in a playoff with Kristal Parker, finished at 209 this year, 13 under par and three shots ahead of Corinne Dibnah of Australia, who finished second. (AP)


Gina Glasman and J. A. Karp Marry
Gina Glasman, a daughter of Rivie and Colman Glasman of London, was married yesterday to Jonathan Avram Karp, the son of Naomi and Martin Karp of New York.
Rabbi Emanuel Levy officiated at Brownlow Road Synagogue in London.
Mrs.
Karp, 28 years old, graduated from Cambridge University and is pursuing a master's degree in Jewish history at the Jewish Theological Seminary in New York.
Her father, who is retired, owned J. &amp; H. Glasman Ltd., a toy manufacturer in London.


Calcutta Journal; A Back Seat to Nobody In Fight Against Sexism
It is received wisdom in much of the world, or at least within that part between the Hudson and East Rivers, that the pilots of New York City's yellow taxis face the planet's most formidable challenges to their breed.
The people who believe this have never visited this city.
There are, it is said, streets here.
But these tracks of undulating asphalt, mud, brick and rock more often resemble dried riverbeds than urban thoroughfares.
And along them lurch improbable vehicles: delivery vans the shape of snapping turtles, wood-framed buses of indeterminate age and health, garishly painted trucks with brass horns sounded by squashing a rubber bulb, hand-pulled rickshaws and pushcarts crafted of bamboo latticework and discarded tires.


John F. Akers: A Costly Revamping At I.B.M.
Will John F. Akers be remembered as the Mikhail Gorbachev of I.B.M.?
After one of the roughest years in I.B.M.'s history, Mr.
Akers announced a radical new direction for the world's largest computer maker in November.
The company will be reorganized into more than a dozen highly independent businesses.
Some of them will even compete directly against each other, leaving the new International Business Machines Corporation looking somewhat more like a commonwealth than a union.
The shift includes plans to reduce the computer maker's workforce by at least another 20,000 workers next year and take a $3 billion charge in the fourth quarter of this year to cover the costs.
For Mr.
Akers, the former fighter pilot and I.B.M. marketing ace who took over the helm of the company in 1985, 1991 has been doubly tough.
In April, he gave some of his managers a private dressing down, saying he was expecting more from his employees and suggested that too many of them were standing around I.B.M. water coolers, only to find an electronic copy of an employee's notes taken at the meeting were leaked to the press.


Question Box
Mr. Mack vs. Mr. Huggins
Q.
Both Connie Mack of the Philadelphia Athletics and Miller Huggins of the New York Yankees are in the Baseball Hall of Fame for their achievements as managers.
How did they do against each other?
A.
More often, it was Miller time, a mismatch in favor of Huggins, whose Yankee teams beat the Athletics almost twice as much as they lost to them, 163 to 87.
Ironically, Huggins, who helped build the first Yankee dynasty while managing them from 1918-29, died on Sept. 29, 1929, just as Mack's final Athletics' dynasty was crystalizing.


Pakistan Chief's Son-in-Law Is Cleared in Gang-Rape Case
A judge cleared President Ghulam Ishaq Khan's son-in-law of blame today in the reported gang rape of a friend of the opposition leader Benazir Bhutto.
A report by Judge Abdul Rahim Kazi of the Sind Province high court also ruled out any political motive in the case, which brought widespread protests by opposition and human rights groups.
But the report blamed official investigation agencies for "culpable omissions and negligence."


Yearning for North End Trattorias
TED DONATO, a 21-year-old former captain of the Harvard hockey team from Dedham, Mass., has been on the road with Team U.S.A. since mid-August.
This is the squad from which the United States Olympic team will shortly be selected.


Profitably Policing Workers' Comp
While skyrocketing costs endanger workers' compensation insurance in many states, the SAIF Corporation of Salem, Ore., is a rare bird in the wilderness: a failing state-owned insurer that suddenly stopped its fall and rose to become a striking business success.
Three years after it was losing $1 million a week, the company reports that it expects to end 1991 more than $45 million in the black.
SAIF has reduced premiums to the company's 37,000 business clients by 23 percent in the last two years while doubling its payments to legitimately injured workers.
And in addition to rate reductions, it has refunded $37 million to policyholders.


Inquiries Begin Over City College Deaths
Stunned elected leaders and police, medical and City University officials began sweeping inquiries yesterday to try to explain a nightmarish stampede that left eight young people trampled or crushed to death and 29 others injured at the doorway of a City College gymnasium Saturday night at a charity basketball game featuring celebrity rap stars.
On a Sunday of winter gloom that seemed to reflect the mood of those who mourned, New Yorkers and their political and educational leaders tried to absorb the fearful images of a mob of pushing, shoving rap fans; of victims trapped in a small stairwell, screaming, passing out, being crushed while others sought autographs amid the carnage or laughed in their ignorance.


Miscellany
*
TDI International, New York, an out-of-home media network, will place the first cigarette ads on Moscow's mass-transit system, painting Camel cigarette advertisements on 10 buses.


METRO DIGEST
TRAGEDY AT CITY COLLEGE  CHARITY EVENT TURNED TRAGIC NIGHTMARE
As they tried to absorb the fearful images of a mob of pushing, shoving rap music fans trapped in a narrow stairway, city, police, medical and City University officials began sweeping inquiries to try to learn what caused a nightmarish stampede that left 8 people dead and 29 others injured near the doorway of a City College gymnasium at what was to have been a charity basketball game featuring rap stars.
A1.
THE VICTIMS: YOUNG, INDUSTRIOUS, HOPEFUL
The victims, whose ages ranged from 16 to 28, were intent on enjoying themselves for a few hours at a charity event among a veritable Who's Who of rap and rhythm and blues stars.
Many of them were industrious young adults who had set their eyes on a brighter future.
Their friends and families shared pangs of doubt and feelings of anger.
A1.
CROWD CONTROL AND RAP MUSIC
Ever since the world's first rock 'n' roll concert in 1952, controlling the boisterous fans has been one of promoters' biggest concerns.
As rap music evolved in the 1980's, it generated the same kind of emotional excitement -- and the same kinds of crowd-control issues -- as rock 'n' roll.
In New York City, there has been a virtual moratorium on rap performances since the death of a young fan at Nassau Veterans Memorial Colesium in 1988.
B3.
ISSUE OF SECURITY AT CUNY SCHOOLS
For years, the City University of New York has used outside agencies like Pinkerton Inc. to provide security on its 21 campuses.
But that practice has been questioned over the years by university officials and trustees, who say these groups have not always performed their functions adequately.
B2.
NEW YORK CITY BELOVED ICON WELCOMED HOME
Parishioners at St.
Irene Chrysovalantou Church in Queens welcomed back their missing icon with a procession through the rain-drenched streets of Astoria.
In a fervid service of joy and thanksgiving, they offered their own wedding rings and other jewelry to replace the gold-and-jewel-encrusted frame the icon lost after it was stolen last week.
B6.
MELEE AT IMMIGRATION DETENTION CENTER
A violent confrontation erupted among about 25 detainees and their guards at a detention center of the Federal Immigration and Naturalization Service in lower Manhattan.
Eight to 12 people suffered minor injuries in the clash.
The police and a relative of a detainee said it began after a hunger strike by some inmates, but officials with the immigration service said it was caused by ethnic squabbling among two groups of detainees.
B9.
JUDGE KILLS WIFE AND SON, THEN HIMSELF
A retired New York State judge shot and killed his elderly wife and their son in the family's apartment in Chelsea and then turned the gun on himself, apparently because he was despondent over the son's mental problems and concerned about who would take care of him, the police said.
B6.
A HARSH LESSON ON THE CITY'S NATURE
A few weeks ago a group of students at South Bronx High School planted bushes, bulbs and three 16-foot-high ash saplings.
What happened the next day might be a metaphor for life in the city's poorest borough.
Metro Matters, B6.
REGION AND THEN THERE WERE 2...
The Town of Southold, one of only three towns on Long Island without a fast-food restaurant, has agreed to permit a McDonald's, despite strenuous opposition.
Many residents had demanded the town remain fast-food free, like nearby East Hampton and Shelter Island.
The zoning board did refuse to permit a drive-through window.
Mattituck Journal, B8.
MARTYRS ON THE SHRINE OF TOURISM
Officials in Water Mill, a bucolic hamlet on eastern Long Island, chopped down two trees this weekend.
They did so, they said, to preserve the hamlet's charm and one of its most historic structures.
Some angry residents saw a more sinister design.
"They are trying to turn Water Mill in Disneyland," one said.
B9.
The Traffic Map B8  Neediest Cases B6  Chronicle B9


Joe D. Donates Boat to Hometown
In 1949 at Yankee Stadium, JOE DiMAGGIO was given a special day and a gift from the fans, a 22-foot Chris-Craft powerboat named Joltin' Joe.
Never one for boating, DiMaggio gave the boat to his brother VINCE, who eventually gave it to a cousin, a fisherman who died recently.
The vessel, suffering from lack of maintenance, is now beached at Martinez, Calif., the hometown of the DiMaggio family.


Europe Finds Some Barriers Still Stand in Way of Unity
Although European officials and executives see large payoffs for economic growth when trade barriers come down a year from now, they are currently preoccupied with the slowdown caused in large part by the Bundesbank's raising of interest rates against the wishes of the other nations of the European Community.
The decision by the German central bank to go its own way on Dec. 19, even though Britain, France and Italy wanted lower rates, shows that despite all the lofty rhetoric, European unity is easier said than done.


Illegal Aliens And Guards Hurt in Melee
A violent confrontation erupted among about 25 detainees and their guards at a detention center of the Federal Immigration and Naturalization Service in lower Manhattan Saturday night.
Eight to 12 people suffered minor injuries, the police and emergency medical workers said.
Police and one relative of a detainee said that the violence began after a hunger strike by some inmates, while an official of the immigration service said that it was caused by ethnic squabbling among the detainees.


Wal-Mart Is Making Supermarkets Edgy
Wal-Mart, which overtook K Mart and Sears to become the nation's largest retailer, now seems to be angling toward Safeway and Kroger in the grocery business.
In October, Wal-Mart Stores Inc. acquired a small Arkansas grocery chain, Phillips Companies, and is expanding its Super Center stores, which devote half of their space to groceries.
Wal-Mart is also stepping up its efforts to sell ground beef, freshly baked bread, heads of lettuce, and other fresh foods at its Sam's Clubs, the company's fast-growing warehouse-style stores.


No Small Talk: It's Conference Time
This week, the Big East Conference basketball teams will begin their 13th season of play against one another amid a number of provocative questions.
The questions have to do with what's expected to be an intense race for the conference championship among Connecticut, St.
John's, Seton Hall, Syracuse and Pittsburgh:


Arts Groups, Too, Struggle With Recession
As the recession tightens its grip, arts organizations across the country have found themselves jilted by the Government and by corporate and private patrons on which they had come to depend.
Consequently, productions are being canceled, exhibition hours reduced and staffs cut to the bone.
A few companies -- among them the six-year-old Los Angeles Theater Center, a $6 million, four-theater operation -- have gone out of business.
An even more prominent institution, the Detroit Institute of Arts, has threatened to close if the state of Michigan imposes any more substantial cuts beyond the 41 percent reduction it has already made in the subsidy that provides most of the museum's operating funds.


Despite Protests, the Golden Arches Are Coming
There are only three towns on Long Island without a fast-food restaurant.
Soon there may be only two.
Over the strenuous opposition of residents, the Town of Southold has agreed to permit a McDonald's here.
But the decision continues to generate debate, and the battle may not be over.


World Economies


REPUBLICANS GAIN AS STATES BATTLE OVER REDISTRICTING
Republicans are at least holding their own in the first stages of this decade's battles over Congressional redistricting and may have an early advantage in the effort to draw district lines in a way that may help them elect more representatives.
After decades of complaining that Democratic gerrymandering denied them their fair share of seats in the House of Representatives, Republicans are making progress this time with more Republican judges and the new demands of the Voting Rights Act, which make it harder for Democrats to spread minority voters around to help several candidates.
Shaping Election Victories
For years, Republicans have complained that while they get nearly half of the total national votes for House candidates, they rarely win more than about 40 percent of the seats, and they blame gerrymandering.
There are other reasons for this apparent anomaly, including low vote totals in many solidly Democratic big city districts.


Review/Television; Young Lives In a Time Of Change
Amid all the bad news from what was recently the Soviet Union comes reassurance that 7-year-olds in Moscow, Tbilisi, Vilnius and elsewhere are still cute and interesting and managing to have fun.
"Age 7 in the U.S.S.R.," tonight at 8 on Channel 13, consists of interviews that, it is promised, will be updated every seven years to see how these young residents of several republics are getting along.
Despite a stiff and sometimes elementary narration ("Lithuania is in the European part of the Soviet Union") and translations that sound a bit too formal for 7-year-olds, the youngsters' personalities keep the hour lively, and the colorfully photographed scenes offer the pleasures of a travelogue.


8 Lives That Came Together, Then Were Lost in a Crush
Dirk Swain had cheated death once this year, surviving a gunshot wound to the head when a fraternity party in Virginia turned violent last September.
Throughout the autumn, the 20-year-old college student recuperated among friends and family in Westchester.
Perhaps it was the restlessness of a young man wanting to get on with life, or his love of athletics, that lured him to the rap-star-studded basketball game at City College Saturday night.


Editorial Notebook; Europe, Fearful
"I can't even count the number of conferences on immigration I've been to in the last few months," said an international consultant on migration issues.
"There's a lot of talk about the subject, but nothing much is being done about it."
The speaker was one of about 45 people at a recent conference on "Immigration Policies in the Developed World," convened in England by the Ditchley Foundations, which have sponsored Anglo-American conferences for 30 years.
The participants were Western officials, demographic experts, academics and journalists.
They were encouraged to speak openly on the understanding that their remarks would not be attributed.


News Events Become Biggest Television Hits
In 1991, no situation comedy, ensemble drama, mini-series, movie or documentary dominated American television.
Nor was the biggest thing on television this year a for-sale sign, despite incessant rumors that one or two of the networks -- specifically NBC and CBS -- would be put up for sale.


Decline in Interest Rates Gives Retirees the Jitters
Any time David Schiller looks back to the early 1980's, he fondly recalls earning as much as 16 percent interest on the money he was then depositing in the bank.
Those were the days, he said, when he could afford to dream of a worry-free retirement in some sunny clime.
Mr.
Schiller is indeed retired now, and he and his wife, Ruth, own an apartment here.
But the 66-year-old New York City native also finds himself working for the minimum wage as a security guard at the entrance to Century Village, a retirement community where he lives, and worrying about the rapid drop in interest rates that has cut drastically into his income.


Mexico Is Trying Hard to Lift Its Political Profile in the U.S.
When Carlos Salinas de Gortari went to the United States recently, he did the sort of things that Mexican presidents have usually done on such visits.
He had breakfast with Henry A. Kissinger.
He had lunch with business leaders in New York.
And he met with President Bush.
But Mr.
Salinas also did things in connection with this trip that no Mexican President had done before -- like visiting with the president of the Mexican Soccer League of New Rochelle, N.Y., sending lobbyists all over Capitol Hill, and giving an award to a Mexican-American human rights advocate who has criticized the pace of Mr.
Salinas's political reforms.


Arbitrator to Plow Through Bobsledding Mess
The United States bobsled federation is still trying to sort out its team for the 1992 Olympics in Albertville, France, and it now appears that an independent arbitrator will have to help.
At issue is whether all aspiring bobsledders had a fair chance in Olympic trials held last July.
At least three athletes with better-known pasts in other sports -- Edwin Moses, the world champion hurdler, and two football players, Willie Gault and Greg Harrell -- claimed that, among other things, they were not properly notified of the trials schedule.


Try Reciprocity on Soviet Arms
Secretary of State Baker's attempt to round up all the loose Soviet nuclear arms was a qualified success.
He received assurances from five of the newly independent republics that all the nuclear arms on their soil would remain under firm central control.
But unless the weapons in outlying republics are dismantled, there's no guarantee that the world won't wake up some dreadful day with a bad case of instant proliferation.
The leaders of Ukraine and Belarus, aware that holding on to these arms would cause more grief than they're worth, have agreed to scrap them.
But Kazakhstan balked, declaring it would keep some nuclear arms as long as Russia does.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None Tuesday Leading Indicators...Nov.
Farm Prices...Dec.
New Home Sales...Nov.
Wednesday None Thursday Purchasing Managers' Report...Dec.
Construction Spending...Nov.
Weekly Jobless Claims Friday Factory Orders...Nov.
Productivity...3d Qtr.


Algerians Urged to Support A Secular State in Runoffs
Three days after elections for Parliament gave Islamic fundamentalists a significant victory, the Algerian Government, the press and secular political parties today urged the estimated 40 percent of Algerians who abstained in the first round to turn out for a second round Jan. 16 and vote against turning the country into a religious state.
While this second round is not expected to prevent the fundamentalist group, the Islamic Salvation Front, from winning a majority, the hope of the secular forces is that they can win enough seats to give them a voice in the new assembly.


Robert Maxwell: An Empire and Its Ruler Perish
Robert Maxwell loved to be portrayed as the savior of downtrodden newspaper companies like the New York Daily News and Britain's Mirror Group Newspapers P.L.C.
But soon after his mysterious death on Nov. 5 at age 68, it became clear that he was more the scourge of the companies he controlled.
The latest estimates are that he and perhaps a handful of others siphoned off at least $:867 million ($1.63 billion) from pension funds and the two flagship companies in his publishing empire: Mirror Group and Maxwell Communication Corporation.
Bankers, the public companies, the pension funds and other creditors will probably end up losing billions of dollars.


Yeltsin Tells Russia of Hardship to Come
In a somber New Year's address to his nation, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia acknowledged today that Russians will be sorely tested in coming months as the state begins to set the economy free.
But he insisted in a televised address that life would be improving by the end of 1992.
The address was Mr.
Yeltsin's first over nationwide television since he led other former republics out of the Soviet Union and into a new Commonwealth of Independent States, and it came on the eve of a critical meeting of Commonwealth leaders in Minsk.


No Helmets, but Plenty of ($:) Pounds
The high finance of professional sports is not exclusive to the United States.
There is word from Britain about a $658,000 bid for a rugby player, MARTIN OFFIAH of the Widnes team, that was spurned.
The offer came from Hull in Yorkshire for purchase of the player's contract.
But JIM MILLS, the Widnes chairman, said the sum was way off the mark and suggested $1.3 million might be tempting.


Bright Spots, Hot Products


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Robert Mosbacher said Japan was partly to blame for the lingering U.S. recession, becoming the first Administration official to blame Japan publicly.
The Commerce Secretary's comments are especially significant because he will head Mr.
Bush's re-election campaign.  [ Page D1. ]
SAIF is a rare bird in the wilderness of workers' compensation insurance: a failing state-owned insurer that suddenly stopped its fall and rose to become a striking business success.  [ D1. ]


Skiers Balk at Sight of Brown Ground
Although there has been little natural snow, skiing conditions in the Northeast are excellent thanks to snow-making equipment and grooming skills on trails and slopes.
But many ski areas are operating well below capacity for a variety of reasons.
One contention is the psychological effect of "brown ground," meaning no snow in the metropolitan areas where most of the customers reside.


Gone but Not Forgotten


Khmer Rouge Chief Returns
The Khmer Rouge president, Khieu Samphan, who was attacked in Phnom Penh a month ago, returned under heavy security for reconciliation talks.
Page A7.


No End in Sight for Tradition of Year-End Awards
There may be an awful lot of people who think that 1991 should be kissed off as quickly as possible.
But don't think magazine publishers are going to let them off that easily.
What's the end of the year, after all, without special year-end issues?


Kent Kresa: Weathering A Downturn
Battered by the end of the Cold War, Federal spending cuts and its own reputation, the Northrop Corporation found itself caught in a frenzy in 1991.
In April the Los Anglese-based military contractor lost out to the Lockheed Corporation in a high-stakes competition to build the next generation of Air Force fighters.
And this fall Congress all but killed Northrop's largest program, the B-2 Stealth bomber, voting not to order any more of the bat-winged planes beyond the 15 already in production.
Yet the company's chief executive, Kent Kresa, who over the past several years has succeeded in cleaning up Northrop's previously scandal-plagued image, can also point to improvements during 1991 that he said leave the company in good shape to weather the downturn in Pentagon spending.


Ms. Cropp Wed To Y. C. Cohen
Ellen Bette Cropp, the director of admissions for the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, and Yehuda Charles Cohen, the president of Amquest Residential Leasing and Sales in Chicago, were married yesterday in Highland Park, Ill.
Rabbi Burton Cohen, the bridegroom's father, officiated at North Suburban Synagogue Beth El.
The bride, 34 years old, graduated from Brown University and is the daughter of Jane Jamison of Canisteo, N.Y., and the late Irwin Cropp.
Her mother teaches mathematics at Hornell (N.Y.) Senior High School.


Criminal Courts Aren't Perfect, but Work
To the Editor:
Prof.
Harry Subin argues in "230,000 Cases, Zero Justice" (Op-Ed, Dec. 19) that the New York City Criminal Court "accomplishes very little" and should be replaced with neighborhood courts that use "simplified civil procedures" and "impose nonjail sanctions." Professor Subin's description of Criminal Court and his prescription for its replacement are far off the mark.


Lewis Gets to Moon and Then the Loss Gets to Lewis
Perhaps Jets rookie linebacker Mo Lewis will someday be able to tell his grandchildren about the time he sacked the great Houston quarterback, Warren Moon, three times in one season.
Or maybe one day wide receiver Al Toon can look back philosophically on how he caught his only touchdown pass of the year in today's wild-card playoff loss to Houston.
But tonight, it was time for both of them to go home and think about next year and what might have been.


Girl, 14, Is Charged In Boyfriend's Death
A 14-year-old Brooklyn girl was arrested yesterday and charged in the stabbing death of her 13-year-old boyfriend.
She stabbed the boy to death because he wanted to break up with her, the police said.
The girl, whose name was not given because she is a juvenile, was charged yesterday afternoon by the Brooklyn District Attorney's Office with first-degree manslaughter in the death of Freddie Reyes of 909 East Fifth Street in Parkville, Brooklyn.
The girl lives with her family on 41st Street in Borough Park.


Where Gorbachev Differs From Godunov
To the Editor:
I enjoyed "A Russian Is Swept Aside by Forces He Unleashed" (front page, Dec. 15), with its comparison of Mikhail S. Gorbachev to the portrait of Boris Godunov, Czar of Russia (1598-1605), in Pushkin's drama, "anguishing over his fate as the end drew near."


Owens-Corning Names Chairman
The Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corporation said yesterday that a General Electric executive, Glen H. Hiner, would succeed its chairman and chief executive, Max O. Weber, next month.
Mr.
Weber has cancer.
Mr.
Hiner, who is 57 years old and runs G.E.'s plastics operations, will be moving from one of the nation's strongest industrial giants to a company respected for its operations but saddled with a weak balance sheet and huge asbestos liabilities.


A Few Words About the Year
"At this stage, we are well on the path of actually achieving the type of goals which we've set out to achieve: a solid economic recovery with the unemployment rate moving down to its lowest sustainable long-term rate, with growth at or close to its maximum long-term sustainable pace, with inflation wholly under control."  Alan Greenspan testifying in July before a House Banking subcomittee on the state of the economy.
"The upturn in business activity that began earlier this year clearly has faltered."  Mr.
Greenspan testifying in December before the House Ways and Means Committee on the state of the economy.
"We've been hit hard; there's no doubt of that. It would have been hard to think of a worse atmosphere to bring up a banking bill."  Edward Yingling, chief lobbyist of the American Bankers Association, discussing Congress's decision not to enact a measure overhauling the banking system.
"The failure to report is, in my view, inexplicable and inexcusable."  Warren E. Buffett, the interim chairman of Salomon Brothers Inc., discussing John H. Gutfreund's failure to inform the Government about illegal bidding.
"The culture of the bank is criminal."  Robin Leigh-Pemberton, governor of the Bank of England, explaining why regulators seized the Bank of Credit and Commerce International in July.
"I'm looking for disciplined people, realistic people, people who are not afraid to fail."  Kathy Birk, a branch manager for Dean Witter Reynolds, on hiring.
"To be competitive in the 90's, you've got to have a set of skills that are different from those that were required to be successful in the 70's and 80's."  Jon C. Madonna, KPMG Peat Marwick's chairman, on the firm's decision to lay off 300 partners.


The Penny Plague; For Many New Yorkers, They Just Don't Add Up
"Take a penny, or leave a penny," the sign suggests with indifference.
It sits by a dish on the sales counter of the Barnes and Noble bookstore on Broadway near 73d Street.
Some customers look pleased and weed out their change.
"People come in and give us whole bunches of pennies," says Chandra Muguercia, a clerk at the bookstore.
"They say, 'I don't like them.' "


Devils Continue to Give More Than They Receive
Inconsistency has been a dangerous opponent for the Devils, but one thing they have mastered with consistency in their 10 years in New Jersey is the art of losing in December and January.
The Devils' trademark is that they have been a gift-giving team around this time of the year, and this year is no exception.
Their most gracious gift this year was to the Capitals on Sunday night.


Capturing the Essence of a Play For Lincoln Center's Posters
James McMullan's signature is just about everywhere again.
It's in New York City subway stations from Riverdale to Brooklyn Heights.
It's on Amtrak platforms from Philadelphia to Boston.
It's in ticket-brokers' offices and in dozens of newspaper advertisements.
And it adorns the cover of the Playbill for "Two Shakespearean Actors," the Lincoln Center Theater production of a play by Richard Nelson, now in previews at the Cort Theater and opening on Jan. 16.
Yet Mr.
McMullan's signature has, as always, been upstaged by the bold, theatrical 7-by-3 1/2-foot poster that bears his name.
The image he created for "Two Shakespearean Actors," at once both enigmatic and provocative, depicts an actor caught in a private moment while dressing before a mirror.
The backstage comedy stars Brian Bedford and Victor Garber as dueling thespians who performed competing versions of "Macbeth" on the same night in 1849.


2 Hostages, Slain in Beirut, Are Buried in U.S.
William Buckley, an officer with the Central Intelligence Agency, and Lieut.
Col.
William R. Higgins of the Marines, two hostages slain by their captors in Beirut, were buried today with elaborate military honors.
Senior officials who paid tribute to the two men said the arrival of their coffins at their final resting places marked the end of a painful era of hostage taking in Beirut.
It was shortly after Mr.
Buckley's killing in 1985 that President Ronald Reagan made the release of five other American hostages then being held in Lebanon a top national priority, a decision that led to a series of covert operations that culminated in the Iran-contra affair.


Corrections
An article yesterday about Congressional redistricting referred incorrectly to the legal status of a plan in Texas.
It was found constitutional by a Federal court on Dec. 24.
The article also referred incorrectly to the Democratic Party control of redistricting in Indiana.
Republicans control the State Senate; Democrats control the governorship, the state House and the redistricting commission that took over when the House and Senate did not agree.


Cemetery Owner in Animal Dumping Case Is Hospitalized
The co-owner of a Long Island pet cemetery, who is awaiting trial on charges that he illegally dumped thousands of pets and bilked their owners of burial fees, has been committed to a state psychiatric hospital, the authorities said today.
Jury selection in the trial of Alan J. Strauss was to have begun today, but it was postponed until Friday by Judge Thomas C. Platt of Federal District Court in Brooklyn at a hearing this morning.
Prosecutors told the judge that Mr.
Strauss had been confined to the Kings Park State Psychiatric Center in Suffolk County and would not be released until Thursday.


In a Publishing Coup, Books in 'Unwritten' Languages
JESUS SALINAS PEDRAZA, a rural schoolteacher in the Mexican state of Hidalgo, sat down to a word processor a few years back and produced a monumental book, a 250,000-word description of his own Indian culture written in the Nahnu language.
Nothing seems to be left out: folktales and traditional religious beliefs, the practical uses of plants and minerals and the daily flow of life in field and village.
But it is more than the content that makes the book a remarkable publishing event, for Mr.
Salinas is neither a professional anthropologist nor a literary stylist.
He is, though, the first person to write a book in Nahnu (NYAW-hnyu), the native tongue of several hundred thousand Indians but a previously unwritten language.
Such a use of microcomputers and desktop publishing for languages with no literary tradition is now being encouraged by anthropologists for recording ethnographies from an insider's perspective.
They see this as a means of preserving cultural diversity and a wealth of human knowledge.
With even greater urgency, linguists are promoting the techniques as a way of saving some of the world's languages from imminent extinction.
Half of the world's 6,000 languages are considered by linguists to be endangered.
These are the languages spoken by small societies that are dwindling with the encroachment of larger, more dynamic cultures.
Young people feel economic pressure to learn only the language of the dominant culture, and as the older people die, the non-written language vanishes, unlike languages with a history of writing, like Latin.
Dr.
H.
Russell Bernard, the anthropologist at the University of Florida at Gainesville who taught Mr.
Salinas to read and write his native language, said: "Languages have always come and gone. Neither the language of Jesus nor that of Caesar are spoken today. But languages seem to be disappearing faster than ever before."
In 30 years of field studies, Dr.
Kenneth Hale, a linguist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a leader in efforts to preserve endangered languages, said he had worked with at least eight that have become extinct and many others that are "seriously imperiled."
Dr.
Michael E. Krauss, the director of the Alaska Native Language Center at the University of Alaska in Fairbanks, estimates that 300 of the 900 indigenous languages in the Americas are moribund.
That is, they are no longer being spoken by children, and so could disappear in a generation or two.
Only two of the 20 native languages in Alaska are still being learned by children.
"Languages no longer being learned as mother-tongue by children are beyond endangerment," Dr.
Krauss said.
Unless the current course is somehow reserved, he added, these languages "are already doomed to extinction, like species lacking reproductive capacity."
Dr.
Krauss asks: "Should we mourn the loss of Eyak or Ubykh any less than the loss of the panda or California condor?"
At a symposium a few years ago in Mexico on "The Politics of Linguistic Revitalization," representatives of Latin American Indians passed a resolution saying, "The loss of a language in the world means the disappearance of the cultural heritage transmitted by it, and the truncation of an alternate route of cultural development for humankind."
In an effort to preserve language diversity in Mexico, Dr.
Bernard and Mr.
Salinas decided in 1987 on a plan to teach the Indian people to read and write their own languages using microcomputers.
They established a native literacy center in Oaxaca, Mexico, where others could follow in the footsteps of Mr.
Salinas and write books in other Indian languages.
The Oaxaca center goes beyond most bilingual education programs, which concentrate on teaching people to speak and read their native languages.
Instead, it operates on the premise that, as Dr.
Bernard decided, what most native languages lack is native authors who write books in their own languages.
"Without popular literacy, all but a few endangered languages will soon disappear," Dr.
Bernard said."And when non-written languages disappear, they disappear forever."
Mr.
Salinas set the example.
He had grown up speaking both Spanish and Nahnu, one of the more widely spoken of the 56 Indian languages in Mexico.
The Nahnu Indians are also known as the Otomi, a name they now reject because of its pejorative connotations in Mexican Spanish.
While conducting research in Mexico in the 1970's, Dr.
Bernard taught Mr.
Salinas to read and write the Nahnu language, using a modified version of an alphabet that had been developed by missionaries.
The Summer Institute of Linguistics, a worldwide evangelical Protestant organization based in Dallas, has for decades developed the alphabets for hundreds of Indian languages.
Virtually all indigenous languages now have rudimentary writing systems, including alphabets, a dictionary and some grammar.
In Nahnu and many other languages, however, the only book is a Bible translation.
Next Dr.
Bernard adapted computer software for writing Nahnu on a word processor and for printing manuscripts and books, which would not have been affordable through traditional publishing.
In this way, Mr.
Salinas first produced a book of Nahnu folktales and, two years ago, his magnum opus on Nahnu culture.
A translation in English, by Dr.
Bernard, is entitled, "Native Ethnography: A Mexican Indian Describes His Culture."  As-Told-to Autobiographies
He wrote of the trapping and cooking of squirrels, which many people still believe were first human beings who sinned and so are symbols of bad luck; the uses of the mineral lime in medicine ( for burning off warts) and in making tortillas and cooking vegetables; the arrival of foreigners, as remembered in oral histories; rituals of passage; music, and local fiestas.
There is a long tradition of training people of a remote culture to be what anthropologists call informants.
These people would describe the legends and customs and sometimes dictate their autobiographies.
But these were usually taped interviews with an anthropologist and not the direct work of an indigenous person.
At the Oaxaca center, run by Mr.
Salinas, Indians spend up to three months learning the technology for producing works in their previously nonwritten languages.
They are mostly bilingual schoolteachers, such as Mixtecs learning to use a Mixtec-Spanish word processor.
Josefa Gonzalez, the wife of Mr.
Salinas, is a Mixtec Indian who is writing her own book on Mixtec culture.
The center is supported by the Jessie Ball du Pont Foundation and sponsored by Mexico's Ministry of Education, the Inter-American Indian Institute of the Organization of American States, the Center for Advanced Studies in Social Anthropology in Oaxaca and the University of Florida at Gainesville.
So far, the Oaxaca authors have produced works in Chatino, Amuzgo, Chinantec and Mazatec, as well as Nahnu and Mixtec.
Other books in Tzotzil and Zapotec are in the works.
In every case, the trainees wrote directly in their own languages, using word processors with specially developed computer programs.
Such microcomputer technology is available at relatively low cost, Dr.
Bernard said, "so that virtually every nonliterate people of the world can develop their own machine-readable data bank about their own culture, and can have their own independent publishing capability in support of native ethnography."
The Oaxaca project's influence is spreading.
Impressed by the work of Mr.
Salinas and others, Dr.
Norman Whitten, an anthropologist at the University of Illinois, arranged for schoolteachers from Ecuador to visit Oaxaca and learn the techniques.
Now Ecuadorian Indians have begun writing about their cultures in the Quichua and Shwara languages.
Others from Bolivia and Peru are learning to use the computers to write their languages, including Quecha, the tongue of the ancient Incas, still spoken by about 12 million Andean Indians.
Anthropologists in Cameroon have introduced the technology in that African country of more than 200 tribal languages.
At the end of a two-week training course, Dr.
Bernard said, each of the five speakers of the Kom language would turn on the computer in the morning and start typing Kom without hesitation.
Anything they could say, they could write.
Dr.
Bernard emphasized that these native literacy programs are not intended to discourage people from learning the dominant language of their country as well.
"I see nothing useful or charming about remaining monolingual in any Indian language if that results in being shut out of the national economy," he said.
Anthropologists acknowledge that bilingualism can be a sensitive political issue.
In places strugging to create a workable nation, the preservation of separate languages can be seen as potentially divisive, setting one group against another.
But anthropologists and leaders of native cultures generally favor bilingualism because it preserves a distinctive culture, which often gives the people more power than if they were completely assimilated.
A distinctive language can be a strong force in establishing cultural uniqueness, or ethnicity, which in turn can reinforce a group's claim to a share of power.
Such efforts may be too late for hundreds of languages and dwindling cultures, anthropologists and linguists say, but in time to help preserve some of the cultural heterogeneity of the planet.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY Quebec Tops Toronto  Doug Smail had a goal and two assists as the Quebec Nordiques downed the Toronto Maple Leafs, 5-2, last night in Quebec. (AP) TENNIS U.S.
Team Loses Karel Novacek and Helena Sukova defeated Derrick Rostagno and Amy Frazier, 6-2, 6-1, yesterday in mixed doubles to give fifth-seeded Czechoslovakia a 2-1 victory over the third-seeded United States in the quarterfinals of the Hopman Cup at Perth, Australia.
Sukova defeated Frazier, 7-6 (7-3), 6-7 (5-7), 6-2, and Rostagno routed Novacek, 6-0, 6-3, in singles.
The two Czechoslovaks will play in the semifinals against the German team of Boris Becker and Steffi Graf, which defeated Henri Leconte and Julie Halard of France.
Carrying 114 pounds and ridden by Chris Antley, the winner covered a mile and five-eighths in 2:47. (AP)


Factions Meeting in Phnom Penh Appeal to U.N. for Peacekeepers
After weeks of delays marked by violence and threats, the factions that have fought a 12-year-old civil war met today for the first time in Cambodia.
They appealed to the United Nations to speed the deployment of a large peacekeeping force here before fighting resumes.
The meeting of the Supreme National Council included Khieu Samphan, a senior official of the Khmer Rouge, who was attacked by a mob of Cambodians last month.
Mr.
Khieu Samphan was an architect of the policies that killed more than one million Cambodians in the 1970's, and there were widespread fears that revenge-seekers would again track him down upon his return to the city that the Khmer Rouge terrorized for four years.


Nets Fight Back for 4th Straight Victory
Now that winning has become routine, the Nets have established a goal of improving the aesthetic quality of their performance.
At worst, it's wishful thinking.
At best, it's a New Year's resolution.
Who at this point can say how high is up, now that New Jersey, in chaos as recently as Dec. 10 when the team was routed by the Knicks, ended 1991 tonight with its most successful month since November of 1985?
By hanging on to defeat the free-falling Orlando Magic, 122-112, at Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the Nets won their fourth straight game and eighth in their last 14, which was their December record.


Yankees Nearly Reach Their Hour of Power
With the hours until Robert Nederlander's departure as managing general partner of the Yankees rapidly dwindling, the organization apparently does not yet know who will officially be in power at 12:01 A.M. tomorrow.
Although the agreement governing the Yankees' partnership allows for a 60-day grace period in which to replace the managing partner, major league baseball requires that each team have a managing partner in place at all times.


Classical Music in Review
Matt Haimovitz
Cellist Metropolitan Museum of Art
At 21 years old, Matt Haimovitz is trying to make the tricky transition from prodigious childhood feats to a major performing career.
If he were to play a bit safe at this stage, he could perhaps be forgiven.


Soweto Journal; Gangs of Random Killers Stalk Commuter Trains
When Bethuel Masetla rides the morning train to work in Johannesburg, he faithfully telephones his wife back in Soweto to reassure her that he arrived alive.
Such a telephone call does not seem superfluous to thousands of commuters who travel by trains to and from the segregated black townships bordering Johannesburg.
In the last 16 months, more than 80 commuters have been shot, axed or stabbed to death, or simply flung off moving trains, and several hundred more have been injured by mysterious raiders who rampage through the coaches or onto the station platforms and then vanish.


For Clues to Antarctica's Health, Ask a Penguin
AS two gentle hands raised her from her nest, a nine-pound Adelie penguin cocked an eye, sized up the intruder and jabbed her sharp beak at an exposed wrist.
Without stopping to daub the blood from his wound, Brent R. Houston quickly slipped a numbered aluminum band around one of the bird's flippers and restored her to the pair of eggs in her pebble nest.
"They're not exactly the cute little critters most people think," said Mr.
Houston, a wildlife biologist from Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Va.
"They lead hard lives, they're survivors and they may have something important to tell us about the state of the world. You can't help but respect them."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Korea Development Bank, a financial institution of the South Korean Government, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a shelf offering of up to $1 billion of debt securities and warrants to buy debt securities.
Proceeds from the securities' sale will be used to repay foreign currency obligations, to make foreign currency loans and to finance general operations. *
U.S.
Bancorp, Portland, Ore., has filed for up to $300 million in subordinated debt securities.
Ratings  *
El Paso Electric Co.'s first-mortgage-bond rating has been lowered to B-3, from B-1, by Moody's Investors Service, which also lowered the rating of some debt issued by its financing subsidiaries.
The rating of Del Norte Funding Corp.'s secured lease obligation bonds was cut to Caa, from B-2, and El Paso Funding Corp.'s unsecured lease obligation rating was cut to Caa, from B-3.


A Clean Sweep Predicted for Times Square in the New Year


Union County Jail Inmate Is Found Hanged in Shower
The 21-year-old man who Federal officials said led a vicious gang that once controlled cocaine trafficking in this city was found hanged in the Union County Jail on Sunday evening.
The authorities said the man, Bilal Pretlow, apparently committed suicide by hanging himself with a strip of bedsheet.
Mr.
Pretlow, who had been serving a 20-year sentence in Trenton State Prison for drug violations, was transferred to the county jail on Nov. 4 to be near the courtroom in Newark where prosecutors were asking that he be executed under a recent Federal law that carries the death penalty for drug kingpins who commit murders to protect their illegal businesses.


Chemical Bonds
Chemists at Stanford University have succeeded in breaking specifically targeted chemical bonds within water molecules, rather than merely breaking bonds randomly.
Aside from advancing scientific understanding of the nature of chemical bonds, the achievement might eventually lead to immensely improved chemical processing techniques.


David Greenspan, Film Narrator, 68
David Greenspan, who spent 40 years as a narrator for film projects ranging from Olympic documentaries to the television program "Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous," died Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 68 years old.
His family said he had been suffering from lung cancer.
Using the professional name David Perry, Mr.
Greenspan became known to many as the voice of the Olympics after narrating movies on the Games made by his brother, Bud Greenspan.


Philadelphia Journal; The Frivolous Reigns at This Parade
About 60 men, many wearing baseball caps and work boots, scrambled out of their cars and pick-up trucks, and gathered in a parking lot, which was hemmed in by a truck depot, a chemical factory and railroad yard in the Bridesburg section of northeast Philadelphia.
But instead of playing ball or working on their engines, they came to rehearse with the Joseph A. Ferko String Band for the annual Mummers Parade on New Year's Day, one of the nation's oldest and strangest festivals.


Sanderson Sidelined
Right wing TOMAS SANDSTROM of the Los Angeles Kings will be sidelined a minimum of three to four weeks because of a partial dislocation of the right shoulder suffered in Saturday night's game at Edmonton.


Tiny Lasers Break Speed Record
SCIENTISTS at Cornell University have developed a new generation of lasers that are not only incredibly small -- no longer than the diameter of a human hair -- but also the fastest lasers ever developed.
They operate at the breathtaking speed of 28 gigahertz, which means the laser turns on and off 28 billion times a second.


Zale Jewelers Will Close 400 Outlets
The Zale Corporation, a Dallas-based jewelry retailer, has become an early victim of the recession and the dismal holiday selling season.
It said yesterday that it would close 400 of its nearly 2,000 stores and halt all payments to banks, bondholders and suppliers while it devised a plan to rebuild its faltering business.
About 2,500 employees, or 20 percent of Zale's work force, are likely to lose their jobs as part of the closings.
Zale has stores throughout the country, and in addition to those operating under the Zale's name, it owns the Bailey Banks &amp; Biddle, Gordon's and Corrigan's jewelry chains.
It was not clear yesterday, however, how many stores in each chain would be closed.


Car Bomb Kills 20 in Beirut, Shattering City's New Calm
A powerful explosion caused by a car bomb ripped through a densely populated quarter of the Lebanese capital today, killing 20 people and wounding 82 others, the police said, in the most devastating attack since Lebanon began a peace process a year ago after 16 years of civil war.
The motive for the bombing was not immediately known; no group or person took responsibility.
A police spokesman at the scene said the purpose appeared to be to kill and wound as many people as possible.


Administration's Census Shuffle Goes On
To the Editor:
The refusal by Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher to comply with a Congressional subpoena to produce corrected population data prepared by the Census Bureau or even to appear before the House of Representatives subcommittee on Census and Population, as you report in "Panel Steps Up Census Dispute With Bush Official" (news article, Dec. 11), is remarkable.


Hypertension Research Challenges Role of Salt
MANY people who have dutifully given up soy sauce, pickles and pretzels in an attempt to prevent high blood pressure by limiting salt may be sacrificing needlessly, a growing number of researchers now believe.
For about half of those with hypertension, they say, restricting salt has little effect; for many of the others, the benefits are slim.
And just as salt, or sodium, has been downgraded as a culprit in the genesis of high blood pressure, other dietary suspects are gaining ground: Recent studies suggest that for some people it is not too much salt, but too little calcium, that sets the stage for hypertension.


Money Movers Caught in the Turbulent Times of the 90's; Clark M. Clifford: Bank Scandal Ends Career
A poker-playing buddy of President Truman and the Secretary of Defense for President Johnson, Clark M. Clifford was the classic Washington insider.
His resume glittered and his recent memoir, "Counsel to the President," was a best-seller.
Today, there are four letters the 85-year-old Mr.
Clifford would love to erase from his otherwise sterling resume: B.C.C.I.


Albany G.O.P. Offers to Work To Hold Transit Fare to $1.25
In a significant breakthrough, Republican leaders of the New York State Senate offered yesterday to help limit an increase in the New York City subway and bus fare to $1.25, from the current $1.15, according to many officials involved in the negotiations.
But whether the Republicans' offer would produce a final accord on the fare rested on negotiations between transit officials and the Dinkins administration late last night.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.50
6.50
9.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.50
3.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.75
4.14
2.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.91
3.85
6.52
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.91
3.89
6.48
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
6.36
6.45
7.97
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.44
7.51
8.24
TELEPHONE BONDS
8.60
8.65
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.67
6.70
7.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Observer; A Hunger For Enemies
Japan, be warned: America has an enemy habit.
It has just spent a quarter of its lifetime cultivating this habit and, with Soviet Communism dead, it is suddenly like the cigarette fiend in need of smoke.
You know how desperate a smoker may be?
You've seen those anti-smoking films where he wakes in the night craving smoke, only to find his pack empty.
What does he do?
Gets up, dresses, gets the car out -- and in history's worst blizzard, too -- and goes hunting cigarettes.


Money Movers Caught in the Turbulent Times of the 90's; John H. Gutfreund: A Sudden Fall From Grace
For John H. Gutfreund, 1991 was the year of the great turnaround.
The once proclaimed "King of Wall Street" began the year on a high note, seeing his work crystalize with the kind of success and recognition he had always craved.
After several years of stumbling under failed investment banking efforts, Salomon Brothers Inc., the firm he guided to become one of the biggest powers on Wall Street, was turning in the most successful returns in its history.
And Mr.
Gutfreund's place in the social world was being solidified, as he served as a leader for some prestigious events, like the John V. Lindsay Prize fundraising dinner in February, where he was selected as the event's chairman.


That Black Coffee Won't Make You Sober
To the Editor:
Each New Year's Eve, well-meaning groups set up checkpoints along highways and offer black coffee to motorists.
Unfortunately, this sends the wrong message to drivers who may have been drinking.


Birth Rates Plummeting in Some Ex-Communist Regions of Eastern Europe
Across the former Communist empire of Eastern Europe and the defunct Soviet Union, increasing numbers of women are choosing not to have children now, sending birth rates plummeting in eastern Germany, Romania, Ukraine and parts of Russia.
At the same time, birth rates in Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia are continuing the steady declines of the last decade, in a climate of general economic uncertainty marked by growing unemployment and inflation.


Bonds Rally on December Data
Long-term interest rates moved lower again yesterday, as investors moved out of shorter-term notes and bills in favor of higher-yielding fixed-income securities.
The rally in bonds was helped by reports that bolstered the sense that economic conditions were weak in December, as well as by another big drop in commodity prices, a downtick that does little to alter the prevailing view that inflationary trends are tame.


In Algeria, Clear Plans to Lay Down Islamic Law
The Islamic Salvation Front, which has won a major victory and is close to securing a majority of seats in Algeria's first multiparty Parliament, has based its political and economic programs on vague outlines of economic and social austerity.
But it firmly asserts that Islamic law will have an immediate effect on daily life in this country.
While the Muslim fundamentalist movement has several strains of thought within its ranks, its leading figures have been explicit on several issues that profoundly touch the lives of Algerian families, particularly the status of women.


Chess
Wilhelm Steinitz, who dominated chess from 1866 to 1894, believed that a cramped yet sound position should be invulnerable and he worked tirelessly in innumerable games to substantiate his point.
But his outlook has steadily lost support in the last 20 years.
The prevailing view seems to be that the defense of such formations is too difficult in practice and will be wrecked by errors.
So it is rare indeed to find anyone willing to endure the Steinitzian agony of undertaking the stifling defense of a promising gambit.
But the United States champion, 17-year-old Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn, did exactly that in his game with the Soviet grandmaster Aleksandr Belyavsky in the fourth round of the elite Investbanka International Tournament in Belgrade in late November.
And he showed that the incredible Steinitzian zeal for resistance could prevail, if one threw enormous diligence and effort into the task.


Owners of Times Sq. Tower Seek Bankruptcy Protection
After three years in which they signed only one tenant for their 42-story tower in the theater district of Manhattan, the owners of 1585 Broadway have filed for reorganization under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
The silvery skyscraper, between 47th and 48th Streets, is owned by 1585 Broadway Associates, a partnership controlled by David S. Solomon.
He also developed a nearby tower at 750 Seventh Avenue, which lost its sole office tenant in mid-November.


2d Thoughts About Thinking Small
PEOPLE shopping for their first computer should realize that sometimes computers get carried away, especially the new notebook models.
As notebook PC's get more powerful and less expensive, some people are choosing a lightweight portable as their first and only computer.
In most cases, though, the sacrifices required are substantial.
The smaller the computer, though, the more sacrifices must be made in power, convenience and dollars.
Unless portability itself is a top requirement, the first-time buyer is probably going to be happier with a desktop system.


Officer Slain in Holdup Attempt Is Buried


Steinbrenner's Return Far From a Sure Thing
It was never meant to be a lifetime sentence, or the death of George Steinbrenner's stewardship as the head of the Yankees.
The punishment the Yankees' owner agreed to accept as the result of dealings with an admitted gambler was originally drawn up as a two-year suspension.
Two years have not even passed yet on Steinbrenner's partially self-imposed banishment.
But New York is rife with talk of his return, especially since the Yankees are seemingly careening toward an abyss, what with Steinbrenner's successor, Robert Nederlander, set to step down today.


Classical Music in Review
New York Cornet and Sacbut Ensemble
Merkin Concert Hall
The New York Cornet and Sacbut Ensemble has been a mainstay of the period-instrument world for nearly 20 years.
Zephyrus, a vocal quintet, was founded three years ago.
On Sunday evening, the two groups joined forces for a holiday program that included sacred and secular works along with a group of Schutz madrigals that offered a glance ahead at spring.


Traffic Alert
NEW YEAR'S EVE 42d to 48th Streets between Broadway and Seventh Avenue will be closed from 9 P.M. tonight to 2 A.M. tomorrow.


Cough Drops For Hushed Hall
The Concertgebouw, one of the world's renowned symphony halls, is giving away throat lozenges to keep coughing concert-goers from disturbing performances.
The 103-year-old concert hall began distributing the eucalyptus and lemon-favored pastilles last week in hopes of suppressing a level of coughing, hacking and throat clearing that had begun to bother the musicians.


Windows Near Bird Feeders Can Pose a Deadly Threat
THE very windows bird lovers use to see who feasts at backyard feeders can be hazardous for their feathered friends, a survey of feeder-watchers has found.
When startled by a potential predator or chased by a more aggressive diner, birds at feeders often beat a hasty retreat headlong into windows they mistake for a clear path to safety.
Though some are only temporarily stunned by the collision, for many others the feeder feast becomes a last meal.
During the winter of 1989-90, the Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology asked the 5,500 participants in its home-based FeederWatch program to record all incidents of birds crashing into windows.
In an earlier report, the laboratory had described 946 incidents of predation at feeders, mostly by hawks and house cats.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-10  SEPARATE ARMIES FOR REPUBLICS
Eleven former Soviet republics agreed that individual members of their new commonwealth could form separate armies, though strategic nuclear weapons would remain under a single command.
A1  Rebels continued to battle troops loyal to Georgia's President.
A6  BIRTHS DIP IN EX-COMMUNIST LANDS
Across the former Communist empire of Eastern Europe and the defunct Soviet Union, increasing numbers of women are choosing not to have children now, sending birth rates plummeting.
A3  SAUDIS CRITICIZE MUSLIM MILITANTS
Saudi Arabia's chief religious official and a senior member of the royal family have made scathing attacks on militant religious fundamentalists who have been criticizing Government policies.
A1  CAR BOMB KILLS 20 IN BEIRUT
A car bomb ripped through a densely populated quarter of Beirut, killing 20 people and wounding 82 in the most devastating attack since Lebanon began peace efforts a year ago after 16 years of civil war.
A10  Two slain American hostages were buried with military honors.
A10  ALGERIAN PARTY'S PROGRAM
Algeria's Islamic Salvation Front has based its program on vague outlines of economic and social austerity but a firm determination that Islamic law will have an immediate effect on daily life.
A10  CAMBODIAN FACTIONS MEET
After weeks of delays marked by violence and threats, the factions that have fought a 12-year-old civil war met for the first time in Cambodia and called for a United Nations peacekeeping force.
A2  VIOLENCE ON SOUTH AFRICAN TRAINS
Soweto Journal: Commuters who travel by train to and from the segregated black townships near Johannesburg have been victims of violent attacks in the last 16 months.
A4 NATIONAL A12-16  RIGHTS LAW NOT RETROACTIVE
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ruled that the new civil rights law does not apply to thousands of cases filed by people who say they suffered job discrimination before the measure was signed by the President.
A1  BIAS IN ALABAMA COLLEGES
A Federal judge has found that vestiges of discrimination remain in Alabama's state university system, and he ordered extensive remedies to bring the historically black universities more on a par with predominantly white institutions.
A12  DRINKING AND DYING ON CAMPUS
Drinking alcohol is becoming less common on college campuses, but abusing alcohol in binges is on the rise, officials say.
They say the practice, sometimes fatal, is encouraged by peer pressure, social worries and even the increase in the legal drinking age.
A1  KERREY SELLS HIS WAR STORY
Bob Kerrey recounts his journey from cocky Navy commando to wounded Vietnam veteran to show voters he understands pain, struggle and what it takes to improve the plight of the people.
But he's encountering the pitfalls of running a charisma-based race for President.
A16  PERSISTENCE PAYS OFF
When Lenora Fulani captured a major share of Federal matching money she also garnered attention for her New Alliance Party, a highly unusual political movement.
A16  FINES IN CHICKEN-PLANT FIRE
After a fire that killed 25 people, North Carolina fined owners of a chicken-processing plant $808,150 for "willful" safety violations.
Survivors called the amount a slap on the wrist.
A12  ACCUSATIONS ABOUT IMPLANTS
The leading maker of silicone breast implants has been making false statements on its consumer hotline, Federal officials said.
A12  Working men don ostrich feathers and march.
A12  METROPOLITAN Digest, B1 DISPUTE OVER PLASTICS BAN
As Suffolk County begins its ban on the use of plastic plates, cups and take-out containers by food stores and restaurants, the landmark law is causing self-doubt among some environmentalists.
A1  AFTERMATH OF FATAL CRUSH
As many as 5,000 tickets may have been sold for the celebrity basketball game at City College at which eight people died, city officials say.
A1  LIMITING FARE INCREASE
Republican State Senators have offered to help limit an increase in the New York City transit fare to $1.25, several officials say.
A1  Neediest Cases B3  BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Science Times C1-8  Research on high blood pressure challenges role of salt.
C1  For clues to Antarctica's health, ask a penguin.
C1  In a publishing coup, books in 'unwritten' languages.
C1  Studies of cell death trace a complex dance.
C3  Peripherals C2  Q&amp;A C4  Personal Computers C5  Science Watch C6 Arts/Entertainment C9-21  Distilling a play's essence for Lincoln Center theater posters.
C9  Music: "Ghosts of Versailles" as anti-opera.
C9  Classical Music in Review C12  Photography: Work from Walker Evans.
C9  Word and Image: "Wise Children," a novel of tall tales by Angela Carter.
C16 Fashion Page A19  In 1991, a mixture of caution and elan.
Patterns  By Design Obituaries A18  Larry Josephs, writer Sports B7-13  Baseball: Yankees' hour of power draws near.
B9  Basketball: Nets top Magic.
B7  Arizona beats Rutgers.
B8  Bulls beat Pacers.
B8  Tarkanian sues.
B13  Columns: Berkow on 1991.
B7  On Pro Football B9  On Baseball B9  TV Sports B11  Football: Coslet packs up.
B7  Miami on its best behavior.
B7  Health is issue for Parcells.
B9  Florida free and clear.
B10  Bowl preview.
B10  Huskies happy with depth at quarterback.
B11  B.Y.U. and Iowa tie in Holiday Bowl.
B11  Sports People.
B11 Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21  Editorials A20  Wrong diplomacy on Japan.
No way to raise the fare.
The carnage at City College.
Topics: Better than bubbly.
Letters A20  A. M. Rosenthal: The age of contempt.
A21  Russell Baker: A hunger for enemies.
A21  Allan Gurganus: Relax, it's almost over.
A21


Holiday Tomorrow
Tomorrow is New Year's Day.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Sunday rules in effect.
SANITATION: No pickups or street cleanings.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
Long Island Rail Road on weekend schedule.
Metro-North on holiday schedule.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: N.J.
Transit on Sunday schedule.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Express Mail and special delivery only.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
TRANSPORTATION: Metro-North on holiday schedule.


Q&amp;A
Spacesuits
Q.
Why doesn't a spacesuit explode in the vacuum of space?
A.
The spacesuits worn by United States astronauts are made of several layers of superstrong fibers and other materials that are tough enough not to rupture in the vacuum of space, according to National Aeronautics and Space Administration spokesmen, but the pull of the vacuum is not the main threat they are guarding against.


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony
92d Street Y
The New York Chamber Symphony was formed from a group of musicians gathered for performances of Bach's "Brandenburg" Concertos some 15 years ago.
As the orchestra has grown and prospered, year-end recitals of these six rich and demanding pieces have remained a constant at the Y. Saturday evening's performances, led by Jaime Laredo, had a character best described as "interim authenticity": slimmed down from full-orchestra versions of the past, yet using the instruments and instrumental techniques that were to become anathema for the early-music movement.


Guided Tour of the Body With Byte and Cursor
LEARNING the elements of human anatomy can be an onerous job, but Bodyworks can teach them.
It doesn't flinch in the face of technical terms; posterior femoral cutaneous nerve and cerebellum are all parts of its vocabulary, and its definitions are exact, not watered down.
Bodyworks puts an image of a human body on the screen, and you can select many views, from the full form to a detail in cross-section.
Each view is accompanied by a listing of the bodily parts, the ones a student would learn to name and identify in a class, and there is sufficient explanation to enable you to fit the parts into the whole.


In 1991, a Mixture Of Caution and Elan
The state of the hemline was a subject agitating both designers and retailers during the last year.
Consumers seemed relatively unconcerned.
During the five-year run of the miniskirt they had done pretty much what they wanted.
If they liked the way they looked in short skirts, they wore them.
If they felt they were too old, too serious or too fat, they avoided them.
As simple as that.


Lover's Rage Is Tied To 3 Deaths on L.I.
An unemployed printer shot and killed the father and brother of a woman who had left him a few days before, and then fatally shot himself in the chest, the police said today.
About 10:15 P.M.
Sunday, the police said, the printer, Dennis Carney, brandishing a shotgun, kicked in the front door of a house at 29 Bayview Avenue here, searching for Doreen Ferrante, who had just ended a nine-year relationship with him.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  STAMPEDE AT CITY COLLEGE  CELEBRITY GAME CALLED OVERSOLD
As many as 5,000 tickets were sold for the celebrity basketball game at City College on Saturday night, officials said -- nearly twice the number of seats in the gymnasium where the game was held.
Yesterday was a day for blame and fury, but few answers as evidence mounted that the eight deaths and the many injuries could have been avoided.
A1.
STUDENTS RAN EVENTS ON THEIR OWN
City College officials said that students had been allowed virtually a free hand in running their own activities, even events as potentially perilous as Saturday's game.
B4.
CROWD CONTROL MEASURES CRITICIZED
Security experts and rap music promoters said that the way everything from guards to two-way radios was handled at City College was a recipe for disaster.
B4.
NEW YORK CITY  AGREEMENT NEARS ON FARE INCREASE
An agreement to raise the New York City subway and bus fare to $1.25 from the current $1.15 appeared at hand after a flurry of last-minute phone conversations between transit officials, Republican state senators and the Cuomo and Dinkins administrations.
A1.
DAILY NEWS HAS PLENTY OF CASH
The paper's executives told unions and creditors that $8 million in annual expenses had been cut and it was in no immediate danger of running out of money.
B3.
PRINCIPAL SELECTION QUESTIONED IN BRONX
The Schools Chancellor ordered a Bronx school district with a history of corruption to postpone the appointment of seven principals.
B3.
For selling papers, English helps, but a little Serbo-Croatian doesn't hurt.
B3.
REGION SOUL SEARCHING IN PLASTICS BAN
After years of litigation and more recent pangs of self-doubt, Suffolk County is finally putting into effect a landmark law banning plastic bags and take-out containers in food stores and restaurants.
When the law was passed in 1988, the idea was that cardboard and paper were better for the environment.
Now even environmentalists are not so sure.
A1.
NANNY CHARGED IN DEATH RELEASED
The Swiss nanny charged with arson and murder in the death of a baby in Valhalla, N.Y., was released from jail after her parents posted her $350,000 bail.
B5.
REPUTED DRUG KINGPIN DEAD IN JAIL
A 21-year-old man who officials said controlled cocaine trafficking in Elizabeth, N.J., was found hanged on Sunday in the Union County Jail.
B5.
NO AID FOR STORM DAMAGE TO COAST
New Jersey was denied a request for $23 million in Federal disaster aid to pay for damage from a storm on Oct. 31, Gov.
Jim Florio said.
B5.
Fire destroys New Rochelle businesses.
B5 A politically correct answer to unwanted guests.
Our Towns.
B5.
Owner of Long Island pet cemetery committed to psychiatric hospital.
B6.
Neediest Cases B3  Holiday Schedules B6


Images Tarnished During 1991


Big Donations Lift Neediest Total, but Small Gifts Count, Too
The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund is closing out the year with a bang.
The fund recorded $390,042.78 in donations yesterday, more than twice the amount received on any previous day during the 80th annual appeal.
That total catapulted the campaign past the pace of last year's record-setting drive.
But with total receipts of $2.9 million, this year's appeal must raise an additional $1.5 million to match last year's total of $4.4 million.
This year's appeal has been bolstered by several large donations -- including $150,000 from the Starr Foundation of New York and $100,000 from Newman's Own, the food company started by the actor Paul Newman -- but most of the money has come from donations of less than $500.
Many of those contributors said they compiled their gifts a penny at a time.


Survey of Confidence Shows Little Change
Consumer spirits, which tumbled in October and November to recession lows, did not worsen in December, according to the latest survey of consumer confidence by the Conference Board.
"We've leveled off," Fabian Linden, executive director of the Conference Board's Consumer Research Center, said yesterday.
"The bad news is that we're still a very disenchanted population."


With Promise Not to Flee, Swiss Nanny Is Released
The Swiss nanny charged with arson and murder in the death of a 3-month-old girl in her care was released today from the county jail here into the arms of her parents after they posted her $350,000 bail.
The nanny, 20-year-old Olivia Riner, smiled excitedly as she embraced first her father and then her mother, kissing them each twice.


5 Nations May Aid Salvador Pact
In a final attempt to push El Salvador's warring parties to a cease-fire, countries involved in the negotiations have offered to help guarantee that peace accords are carried out and to lead a major international effort to rebuild the country.
Diplomats disclosed the plan as talks between the conservative Salvadoran Government and leftist guerrillas approached a crucial point without a clear breakthrough.


Money Movers Caught in the Turbulent Times of the 90's; Donald J. Trump: Bargaining To Stay Afloat
Both his private life and financial troubles captured the headlines in 1991.
But for Donald J. Trump, the 45-year-old real estate developer, that's nothing new.
From sealing his multimillion dollar divorce to watching teams of bankers, lawyers and bondholders carve away pieces of his empire, Mr.
Trump has rarely been out of the public eye.


How Early Muslims Treated Prisoners
To the Editor:
In "Since the Caliphs" (letter, Dec. 15), Arvind Ghosh states:
"Taking hostages is an ancient Bedouin custom. The practice was refined in its application by no less a person than the Prophet Mohammed. Taking hostages thus became a powerful tool in his time to make the enemy shrink in fear."


INSIDE
Best December Ever For Blue-Chip Stocks
The stock market's year-end rally accelerated, with the Dow Jones industrial average surging 62.39 points to a new record of 3,163.91.
The Dow has added 530.25 points this month, or 9.3 percent, making it the best December ever.
Analysts again credited low interest rates.
Page D1.
Car Bomb Kills 20 in Beirut
A powerful explosion caused by a car bomb ripped through a densely populated quarter of Beirut, killing 20 people and wounding 82.
Page A10.
Is Salt Really the Villain?
For many, too much sodium may not be the culprit in high blood pressure.
The new suspect: too little calcium.
Science Times, page C1.
Bias in Alabama Colleges
A Federal judge said Alabama must take extensive measures to eradicate racial discrimination in its state university system.
Page A12.
Minor Party Enters Majors
Lenora Fulani wins election money and attention for her multimillion-dollar New Alliance Party.
Page A16.
Money Movers Who Lost
Top financial figures, from John Gutfreund to John Reed, had difficult times in 1991.
Page D5.


APPETIZERS AND ENTREES: THE FEAST ON NEW YEAR'S DAY
Four months ago, against the consensus that proclaimed Florida State the No. 1 team, The New York Times Top 20 compiled by Michael Sisak predicted Washington would finish No. 1.
Tomorrow's games will provide the answer.
Washington leads the United Press International poll, trails top-ranked Miami by only 14 points in The Associated Press writers' poll and by .077 percentage points in The New York Times computer ranking.
The teams are tied for No. 1 in the USA Today-CNN coaches' poll.


Ex-Soviet States Allow Separate Armies
After a long day of disputes, the former Soviet republics agreed today that individual members of their new Commonwealth of Independent States could form separate armies, though strategic weapons would remain under a single command.
The decision to let the states decide on whether to build their own forces or to remain part of a common defense was agreed to in a bargaining session of sharp differences and private compromise that let each of the 11 former republics decide its own military fate.


Foundation Health Buys Dental Plan
The Foundation Health Corporation, a health maintenance organization based in Sacramento, Calif., said it had acquired National Health Care Systems Inc., the state's fourth-largest prepaid dental care plan, in a tax-free stock deal that the companies valued at about $22.8 million.
Holders of National Health Care Systems common stock will receive $3.30 worth of Foundation Health common for each share of National Health Care.
They will then own about 4.9 percent of Foundation Health.


Relax, It's Almost Over
"Whenever people talk about the weather," Oscar Wilde wrote in 1895, "I always think they mean something else." Now that 1991 has almost left the room, may I vary the form?
"Whenever people talk about something else, I think they mean the news."
So, Happy New Year!
It's your Hit Parade: Who can ever forget 1991 (fast enough)?
The Persian Gulf war (at last an opponent with the grace to just sit there and be targets so we could, as we were told, "feel good about ourselves again"!).
The Crown Heights race war.
The Great Ozone Leak (White House denies knowing, White Flower Farm does not).
Who can block out the L.A.P.D.'s "They did it their way" guest spot on the ultimate Candid Camera?
David Duke's best shot at the gubernatorial, Jeffrey Dahmer's idea of a date.
The Russian coup and then the Soviet Union's meltdown.
Dan Quayle claiming, "All environmentalists are extremists," as the Exxon oil spillers get a slap on the wrist?
President Bush fails for another year to seriously mention AIDS, except in barring from home soil an international conference devoted to its cure (130,000 Americans dead so far) -- plus, The Clarence Thomas Show . . . something for everybody's worst fears.


Car Bomb Kills 20 in Beirut, Shattering City's New Calm
A powerful explosion caused by a car bomb ripped through a densely populated quarter of the Lebanese capital today, killing 20 people and wounding 82 others, the police said, in the most devastating attack since Lebanon began a peace process a year ago after 16 years of civil war.
The motive for the bombing was not immediately known; no group or person took responsibility.
A police spokesman at the scene said the purpose appeared to be to kill and wound as many people as possible.


Rightful Names
To the Editor:
Sara Nicoll (letter, Dec. 12) complains that when she appeared for a job interview with two young men, the interviewer addressed the men as "Mister," but called her "Sara." Perhaps the interviewer did not know whether to address her as Miss, Mrs. or Ms., and so compromised on her first name.


Skepticism on AIDS Report
A LONDON newspaper reported Sunday that treatment combining the drug AZT with another antiviral drug, acyclovir, dramatically improved survival prospects for people with AIDS.
But AIDS researchers are greeting the report with skepticism, and the maker of the drug called such conclusions premature.
The article, in The Sunday Times of London, said a study involving the two drugs was halted prematurely because of the striking results.


Capitals Sign Beaupre
The Washington Capitals ended months of haggling with goalie DON BEAUPRE by signing him to a four-year contract yesterday.
Terms were not disclosed.
Beaupre walked out of training camp Sept. 17 and did not return until the regular season was well under way.
He has a 13-7 record since his 1991 debut, which was a shutout of the defending champion Pittsburgh Penguins on Oct. 29.


Sports of The Times; For Auld Lang Syne, And So On
MOMENTS and flip sides, in 1991, to remember:
January: Uniformed men in SWAT teams on the roof of Tampa Stadium during the Super Bowl (and during the Persian Gulf War), while down below 73,813 fans watch other uniformed men swatting one another on the field.
The Giants win it by 20-19 -- kinder to say than the Bills lost it -- when Scott Norwood of Buffalo, kicking from his own 47-yard line, sent a field-goal attempt six feet wide right in the final 4 seconds of the game.
Soon the stadium was empty.
But then a few kids were seen on the darkened field.
They found their way to the Buffalo 47.
One of them knelt to take an imaginary snap from center, another kicked.
A third threw up his arms: Good!
Good!
Another triumph of sports fantasy over reality.


U.S. Rejects Florio's Appeal for $23 Million to Fix Storm Damage
Gov.
Jim Florio said today that the Federal Government had denied New Jersey's request for nearly $23 million in disaster aid to help pay for coastline damage caused by the Halloween storm.
"I am both puzzled and troubled by this decision," Mr.
Florio said in a statement.
"Clearly, our state's beaches suffered serious damage from this storm and should be entitled to Federal assistance."


Amid the Bowl Game, a High-Stakes Mind Game
Why are you watching the Federal Express Orange Bowl?
A chance to see Miami secure a national college football championship against the Nebraska Cornhuskers?
Or the opportunity to see the Hurricanes get knocked off so that the Washington Huskies, playing Michigan in the Rose Bowl, can take the unofficial title?
Admirable intentions shared by many.
But one party will eye the Orange Bowl from an altogether different perspective.
Federal Express wants the most out of its $2.5 million investment in the game.
The victor is irrelevant.
The firm wants exposure so that its name will remind people of its message: send your package with us (not with DHL or UPS!).


Kerrey Retells War Story in Effort to Connect With the Voters
His audience could be the jobless, the elderly, high school students or business executives, but Senator Bob Kerrey always stops midway through his basic Presidential campaign speech, lowers his voice, and confides the central selling point of his campaign.


An Even-Handed Collector Of Labor Statistics Retires
After 13 1/2 years as head of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Janet L. Norwood retires from the Government Tuesday with a fax machine presented by 325 admiring colleagues, a near-legendary reputation for nonpartisanship, and plaudits that include one senator's designation of her as a "national treasure."
If an informed public is essential for democracy, Dr.
Norwood says, solid data are essential for an informed public.
"You can't have a democratic society without having a good data base," she said.


Affluent Suburbanites?
To the Editor:
Your Dec. 5 news analysis of Metropolitan Transportation Authority plans to increase the New York City subway fare asks, referring to New York's Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo: "Can a Democrat who speaks on behalf of large cities afford blame for a large subway increase when more affluent suburbanites have been spared?"


Politically Correct Answer to Unwanted Guests
IT'S not an uncommon problem in large public buildings with many people coming and going.
But it is embarrassing.
If word got out, you could have families, lawyers and health officials making complaints, endless charges and studies.
That would get in the newspapers with humorous headlines about what the big, tough police officers couldn't do.
It could even get on the evening news with a well-dressed reporter, a little too tanned for December, earnestly addressing a camera crew in blue jeans while a portable transmitter urgently dispatched the weighty words to a waiting world "Live from Morristown."
Sheriff John M. Fox could imagine the media playing with that story, especially during the news-somnolent holidays when official announcements dry up.
So it was no small matter when Chief Deputy Charles W. Kranz walked into the sheriff's office and announced, "We have mice in the jail."
You laugh.
But you don't have to run for office every 36 months as the most prominent law-enforcement officer presiding over the 400 square miles and 420,000 people of affluent Morris County.
In Washington, the sheriff's comprehensive cat-and-mouse game would be called spin control.
Out here in the real world, it's old-fashioned common sense.
A rodent eradication study was ordered.
Mice may be tiny critters, terrified of light and ready to run very quickly at the slightest provocation.
But they don't go away cheap.
A professional exterminator would charge thousands to rid the large jail of these little guys.
But the current budget includes nothing for rodent extermination.
And good luck trying for extra money so near year's end.
The sheriff puts many prisoners to work on public or nonprofit projects, saving a million dollars a year, he figures.
He also has the phone company pay the jail 16 percent of all the collect-call charges made on prison pay phones.
But the sheriff's jail budget is already squeezed tight housing all the men and women that angry juries and judges send to the 60-year-old building.
The current jail population is 310, down from 358 but more than twice what the structure was built for.
Even if money were available, there might be a health risk to prisoners and staff from the poisonous chemicals necessary to dispatch an unknown number of unwelcome guests.
And what about the risk of later lawsuits?
More headlines.
But without some action, just imagine how many cute little Mickey and Minnie Mouses would be running around everywhere after a few dozen fecund rodents pass the New Jersey winter warmly indoors, enjoying the hospitality of Morris County taxpayers and each other.
Something had to be done.
Now, the sheriff hasn't been elected six times because he lacks smarts.
He looked at his staff and issued the orders: "Let's get some cats in here."
Cats?
In a public building?
Doing to mice what the Morris County Sheriff did to murderers back in colonial times?
The idea was so crazy, so simple, it just might work.
Environmentally correct.
No chemical poisons.
No animal-rights protests over inhumane traps.
The cats would just do their own felonious feline thing.
Nature working for a better Morris County Jail.
Ah, but that was just the beginning. Here's how COPS (Cats On Patrol) happened:
Sheriff Fox contacts a local animal shelter.
He rescues two stray cats from uncertain futures.
Dr.
Stephen Hodes, a local veterinarian, donates spaying and vaccinations.
K &amp; D's Feed &amp; Tack Emporium donates kitty litter, canned food, grooming gear and scratching posts.
A police support group chips in kitty beds and kitty dishes.
Mayor Norman Block waives the town's pet-licensing requirements.
The sheriff even holds a kitty-naming contest among inmates.
The winners: Princess and Max (later amended to Maxine).
Of course, the cats, to be joined next month by a third mousebuster, wander and snooze wherever they please.
Prisoners, some with criminal records as thick as their tattoos, vie for the animals' affections.
Many inmates talk to the cats, who do not talk back.
Mouse sightings plunge.
So, strangely, do prisoner assaults and disciplinary problems.
Jail rules prohibit taking food from the dining hall.
But both cats gain weight.
Another mystery.
Actually, Sheriff Fox is allergic to cats.
They make him sneeze and sniffle miserably.
However, being an elected official, he loves them.
In fact, he has two at home -- Frisky and Tiger.
And a dog named Flair.
Also, he adds, a bird feeder.
The savvy sheriff may have mentioned much of this story to local reporters, possibly underlining the absolute absence of any cost to the public.
Coincidentally, the next election is 10 months away.


William Wichman, 85, Retired G.E. Executive
William C. Wichman, a retired vice president of the General Electric Company, died on Dec. 24 at the Caleb Hitchcock Health Care Center in Bloomfield, Conn.
A former resident of Manhattan and Greenwich, Conn., he was 85 years old.
Born in Waterloo, Iowa, he joined General Electric in 1928, the year he was graduated from Iowa State College.
He became a vice president in 1953 and headed several divisions in succession.
After retiring from G.E. in 1966, he was a professor of business administration at the University of Rochester, a visiting lecturer at the Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh, and a volunteer consultant for the International Executive Service Corps, traveling on overseas assignments.


Detmer's Era Passes With 13-13 Tie Against Iowa
Ty Detmer's final night as the Brigham Young University quarterback was spectacularly so-so.
He was superb, as usual, but in the end, everything seemed less than fulfilling.
Detmer moved the Cougars continually with his passing, but they were still left with a 13-13 tie with the Iowa in the Holiday Bowl at San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium.


CHRONICLE
Because of a skiing accident, PETER ALLEN, the singer and songwriter, will not perform at the annual New Year's Eve ball at the Waldorf-Astoria tonight.
RITA MORENO will replace him as the headliner for the party.


Suffolk County's Ban on Plastics Loses Allies
At Phil's Porterhouse Deli, "the only drive-in deli in town," the plastic plates, cups and take-out containers are stacked high over the steam table like so many white-capped mountains, and the thought that they will soon be banished makes Camille Porter, Phil's wife, boil with rage.
"It's nothing but hypocrisy, a sham," she said as her robust arm waved a foam coffee cup to punctuate her points.
"People are being deceived. If I thought it would help the environment I would be the first one to support it."


Electronic Monopoly
Parker Brothers said today that it would bring out an electronic version of its popular Monopoly board game that can be used on the Nintendo Company's Game Boy system.
The hand-held version of Monopoly will be introduced on Jan 9 at the consumer electronics show in Las Vegas, Nev., Parker Brothers said.
Game Boy Monopoly sells for about $29.99.
Parker Brothers is a subsidiary of Hasbro Inc.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with a theater review of "Reno Once Removed" was published in error.
It showed Mary Shultz in "Mad Forest" at the Perry Street Theater.


Money Movers Caught in the Turbulent Times of the 90's; Setsuya Tabuchi: Nomura's Loss Of Credibility
After the Tokyo stock market crashed in 1990, most securities executives expected 1991 to be a year of rebuilding.
As Setsuya Tabuchi knows better than anyone in Japan, those guesses were wrong.
Mr.
Tabuchi entered the year as the baronial chairman of the Nomura Securities Company, the most powerful force in Japan's financial markets.
He will exit the year having been humiliated and his career ruined by the worst scandals to hit the markets in the post-war era.


Topics of The Times; Better Than Bubbly
New Yorkers who wish to celebrate the New Year -- but avoid the rowdy crush in Times Square -- have a festive, alcohol-free alternative.
They can spend the final hours of 1991 waltzing tonight in Grand Central Terminal, the culmination of an elaborate daylong party called First Night New York.
Sponsored by the Grand Central Partnership, a nonprofit group that manages the business improvement district for the 50-block area around the terminal, the celebration will feature more than 40 performances and participatory events at 20 locations in midtown Manhattan, beginning at 11:30 A.M.


Fatal Alcohol Abuse Persists On Campus, but Fewer Drink
Drinking among college students has declined over the past decade, studies show, as society has grown less tolerant of alcohol.
But that decline masks a trend that is proving both stubborn and lethal: the persistence of abusive or "binge" drinking.
"More students are drinking abusively," said Thomas G. Goodale, vice president for student affairs at Virginia Polytechnic Institue here.
"I've never seen it like I've seen it in the last 10 years, with the last five years worse than the first five."


Jockey Strike Averted
A strike by the nation's thoroughbred jockeys apparently was averted last night when the Jockeys' Guild reached a tentative agreement on a contract with the Thoroughbred Racing Associations.
A Guild spokesman, BRIAN MEARA, said a walkout threatened for tomorrow had been canceled and that final details of the pact would be worked out today.


Poll-Conscious Hurricanes Try Some Charm Before the Storm
Their colorful ties tightly knotted and conservative suits cleaned and pressed, the Miami Hurricanes are presenting themselves as a group picture of political correctness as they approach the 58th Orange Bowl.
As they prepare for the Nebraska Cornhuskers, and the decisive political intrigue that is virtually certain to follow in the selection of the nation's No. 1 team, the Hurricanes appear equally ready to escort their dates to the spring formal.


Roy C. Macridis, 72, A Professor of Politics
Prof.
Roy C. Macridis, a retired political scientist at Brandeis University, died on Dec. 20 at New England Deaconess Hospital in Boston.
He was 72 years old and lived in Belmont, Mass.
He died of cancer, an announcement from Brandeis said.


Minor Candidate's Fund-Raising Success Turns Spotlight on Party
When Lenora B. Fulani, the Presidential candidate of the New Alliance Party, qualified last week for more Federal matching money than any other candidate except President Bush and Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, she may have done more than surprise almost everyone in politics.
She may finally have focused more than passing attention on a small political movement that has managed over 25 years to turn itself into a complex multimillion-dollar enterprise despite accusations that it operates like a cult and is anti-Semitic.


Patterns
Notes from All Over
Just because it was a so-so year in fashion doesn't mean it wasn't a great year in history.
An empire crumbled, a bloody tyrant was humbled.
The world seemed breathless.
There was no time to shop.


Roy Dince, 66, Aide At the U.S. Treasury
Roy R. Dince, a deputy Controller of the Currency in the Carter Administration and retired professor of banking and finance at the University of Georgia, died last Thursday at his home in Athens, Ga.
He was 66 years old and lived in Athens.
His family said he died of Lou Gehrig's disease.


That Black Coffee Won't Make You Sober; Begins at Home
To the Editor:
Responding to Surgeon General Antonia Novello's call for the alcohol beverage industry's voluntary withdrawal of certain types of advertising, Anna Quindlen noted not long ago that "For most of our children, the most powerful advertisement for alcohol may be sitting at the kitchen table" ("The War on Drinks," column, Nov. 6).


Florida Puts Woes Far, Far Away
Last season at this time, the Florida Gators were more eager than most to bring in the New Year: 1990 had been a downer.
Despite winning nine games under their first-year coach, Steve Spurrier, and finishing with the best record in the Southeastern Conference (9-2), the Gators had been banned from post-season bowl games.


North Carolina Plant Is Fined $808,150 in Fatal Fire
The North Carolina Department of Labor today levied fines totaling $808,150 against a chicken-processing plant for safety violations that it said contributed to the deaths of 25 people in a fire last September at the Hamlet, N.C., plant.
The amount was quickly criticized by survivors and relatives of the fire victims as little more than "a slap on the wrist" for the plant's operator, the Imperial Food Products Company of Cummings, Ga.


Quotation of the Day
"The 21 drinking age law is the most unenforced law in the country. Frankly, it's a nightmare." ARTHUR SANDEEN, a University of Florida administrator.  [ A14:1. ]


Threat of More Flooding Keeps Texans on Guard


2 Big Retailers Reach Out to Minorities
HOPING to stimulate sales among minority shoppers, two of the largest retailers, the K Mart Corporation and Toys "R" Us Inc., have hired advertising agencies that specialize in marketing to blacks or Hispanic Americans.
K Mart, the second-largest retailer, after Wal-Mart Stores Inc., has appointed Burrell Advertising Inc. in Chicago for black-oriented advertising and the Castor Advertising Corporation in New York for Hispanic-oriented advertising.
Toys "R" Us, the largest toy retailer, has appointed the Mingo Group Inc. in New York for its black-oriented advertising.


Dinkins Plans Steps to Spur City Economy
Mayor David N. Dinkins, confronting growing budget deficits and a lingering recession as he nears the midpoint of his term, will use his State of the City address Thursday night to announce several measures to invigorate New York City's ailing local economy.
Speaking to a city troubled by economic stagnation, Mr.
Dinkins will focus on actions his government can take to stimulate the private sector, like speeding payments to companies that do business with the city, relaxing licensing rules and pushing some capital projects ahead of schedule, mayoral aides said.


BRIEFS
*
Cable and Wireless Communications, a unit of Cable and Wireless P.L.C., London, said it had agreed to purchase Network Services, a unit of Wang Laboratories Inc., Lowell, Mass., for approximately $11 million. *
Fletcher Challenge Canada Ltd., Vancouver, British Columbia, a unit of Fletcher Challenge Ltd. of New Zealand, said it would sell its stake in a Quebec pulp and lumber company to Donohue Inc., Quebec, for $120 million (Canadian).


Money Movers Caught in the Turbulent Times of the 90's; Nicholas F. Brady: A Legislative Agenda Fails
Last December, when Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady was asked on a Sunday television news show about the prospect of a recession, he shrugged it off, saying that it was "no big deal."
Now curing the economic slump has become a matter of self-preservation for the Bush Administration, and Mr.
Brady has become enmeshed in an internal struggle over what to do, if anything at all.


Ernst &amp; Young In U.S. Inquiry
Frustrated by the lack of cooperation of a large accounting firm under investigation for its role in connection with the failure of many large savings associations, the Government today took the highly unusual step of making the investigation public.
The Office of Thrift Supervision, which regulates the nation's savings associations, said in court papers and in a news release that it was investigating the possibility that Ernst &amp; Young helped cause the failures of 23 institutions, including Gibraltar Savings; Lincoln Savings and Loan; Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan; Vernon Savings and Loan, and Western Federal Savings and Loan.


The Grind of the Gridiron: Has Parcells Had Enough?
With his rejection of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers' offer to become the richest head football coach in history, Bill Parcells is down to two options.
He will soon become the Green Bay Packers' coach or he will stay at least one more year with what had appeared to be a temporary job as a football studio host and analyst for NBC television.


Toledo Blade To Add Parade
Parade, the Sunday newspaper magazine, said yesterday that it had added another large-market newspaper to its distribution, reaching a record of 337 across the country.
The Toledo (Ohio) Blade, with a Sunday circulation of 215,490, will start carrying the magazine in March, bringing Parade's total circulation to 36.5 million, up about 1 percent from last year.


Douglas's Offer Sheet Is Matched by Heat
Point guard SHERMAN DOUGLAS returned to the Miami Heat yesterday after the club matched a seven-year, $17 million offer sheet he had signed Dec. 13 with the Los Angeles Lakers.
At a news conference in Miami yesterday, Douglas didn't hide his desire to play elsewhere or his bitterness about contract negotiations with the Heat.


People
*
William Robertson, a group account supervisor at William Douglas McAdams Inc. in New York, has been promoted to senior vice president from vice president. *
Jeffry L. Perlman has been named vice president-government affairs at the American Advertising Federation in Washington, succeeding Wallace S. Snyder, who has become president.
Mr.
Perlman had directed the legal and regulatory affairs for the United States Chamber of Commerce.


Alabama Colleges Ordered To Remedy Vestiges of Bias
In one of several important desegregation lawsuits in higher education, a Federal judge ruled yesterday that Alabama and its state universities must change financing and admission policies and hire more black faculty members and administrators.
The district judge, Harold Murphy of Rome, Ga., ruled that vestiges of racial discrimination remained in Alabama's higher education system.
He ordered Alabama and its universities to devise plans to remedy those problems, and said he would retain jurisdiction over the case for 10 years to insure that the ruling was carried out.
Judge Murphy's decision could become moot, however, because the United States Supreme Court is considering a similar case in Mississippi, the first time the Court will address the desegregation issue in higher education.
Repercussions in South
The Supreme Court's ruling is likely to affect not only Alabama, but also Louisiana and several other states in the South that are wrestling with the legacy of a dual higher education system, one black and one white.
Historically, the black colleges have received far less money than the white ones.
The lawsuits raise complex issues about how far states should go to end the remnants of official segregation and the fate of historically black institutions, which some blacks now argue should be allowed to stay predominantly black but be given the same financing as historically white colleges.
In the Alabama case, which began in 1983, Judge Murphy found that the two historically black institutions, Alabama State University at Montgomery and Alabama A&amp;M University at Huntsville, had been shortchanged by about $10 million each in financing for buildings and equipment.
He told the state to submit a plan to remedy those deficiencies.
Judge Murphy told Auburn University, which remains predominantly white, to change admission policies that he said appeared to discriminate against blacks.
But he also told Alabama State University, which is largely black, to draw up a plan to recruit more white students.
He ordered several universities to come up with plans to increase the number of black faculty members and administrators.
In addition, he demanded an end to the duplication of programs at some black and white universities.
Judge Murphy said he expected progress to be made on these changes within three years, although his law clerk, Carlos Gonzalez, said the judge had imposed no quotas or specific hiring obligations.
He also charged the state and the universities to come up with specific plans on some of the changes within 90 days.
"The court is of the opinion that the institutions and the officials of the State of Alabama are in a much better position to develop educational policy than is the court," Mr.
Gonzalez said.
"This court is not at all hesitant to make a very detailed and specific remedial decree if these parties cannot get their act together and come up with a solution." No Decision on Appeal
Lawyers for defendants in the case said they had not yet decided whether to appeal the ruling by Judge Murphy, who was appointed by President Jimmy Carter in 1977.
James U. Blacksher, the lawyer for the plaintiffs, refused to comment on the ruling.
Joe Whatley, the lawyer who represents Alabama A&amp;M University, one of the historically black universities, said: "The judge didn't go as far as we had hoped, but he very definitely is requiring the state to improve these institutions. What we got here is recognition that there continue to be vestiges of discrimination and segregation. The state was never willing to come forward and provide the kind of relief that is now ordered by Judge Murphy."
Although the decision appears sweeping, several lawyers for the defendants appeared to minimize its potential effects.
In fact, they said Judge Murphy was requiring changes that were already under way.
"The things the court wants us to do are in general the things we've been wanting to do," said Rob Hunter, the lawyer for several of the state defendants, including Gov.
Guy Hunt, a Republican, and the Alabama Commission on Higher Education.
"By no means is this a sweeping upheaval."
Mr.
Hunter said the commission had unsuccessfully asked the State Legislature for even more money for the two historically black colleges than Judge Murphy had estimated that they needed.
"Today, the schools in Alabama are treated without regard to their racial heritage or racial composition," he said.
"The majority of black students in Alabama attend schools other than the historically black institutions." Governor Is Pleased
Sixty percent of black students in Alabama attend predominantly white institutions.
But some universities remain racially skewed; the University of Alabama at Tuscaloosa is 9 percent black and Auburn University is 4 percent black.
Alabama State University at Montgomery and Alabama A&amp;M University at Huntsville are predominantly black.
In a statement issued by his office yesterday, Governor Hunt said, "We are pleased the court found no current violations of law by the Governor, the Legislature, the Alabama Commission on Higher Education, or any of the state defendants." Governor Hunt said he would await the Supreme Court decision.
Judge Murphy's ruling came after a six-month trial and years of legal maneuvering.
The Federal Government originally filed suit in 1983.
A Federal judge, U. W. Clemon, ruled in 1985 that Alabama's higher education system remained segregated, but his ruling was reversed by a Federal appeals court in 1987 on the ground that Judge Clemon should not have presided over the case because as a member of the State Senate he had helped to determine the makeup of the historically black colleges' boards of trustees.


Panel Faults Guards in May Prison Disturbance
An uprising in May at a new high-security prison in upstate New York might have been avoided if seven guards had not left their posts to have lunch or take breaks, an oversight agency said yesterday.
But the agency, the State Correction Commission, also said that prison officials contributed to the problems at the prison, the Southport Correctional Facility near Elmira, through inadequate training of guards and poor planning.


Studies of Cell Death As a Key Life Process Trace a Complex Dance
FOR any animal to live, enormous numbers of its cells must die.
Each day immune cells that would mistakenly assault the body's own tissue must be destroyed.
The vestigial webbing that grows between a human fetus's fingers must be dissolved away before birth.
As the baby's brain develops, about 80 percent of the nerve cells end up perishing within hours of their creation, their lacy tendrils of no use to the final organ.
Universal though cell death is to life, researchers have long either neglected the problem, or found it too overwhelming to approach.
Now, in a burst of furious activity and a flurry of papers, they are identifying some of the intricate biochemical and molecular steps that underlie cell death in a broad array of circumstances.


Miss Benford Has Wedding
Melissa Ann Nixon Benford, the daughter of Mrs.
Ralph R. Jenney of McLean, Va., and the late David M. Benford, was married yesterday to David William Bosted, a son of Mrs.
Nicholas J. Bosted of Lake Park, Fla., and the late Mr.
Bosted.
Mayor Marvin Reed of Princeton, N.J., officiated at Princeton Borough Hall.
Mrs.
Bosted, 31 years old, is the manager of The Gipsy Horse, a clothing store in Princeton.
She graduated from Wittenburg University.
Her mother, Olivia Jenney, is a real estate agent with Prudential Preferred Properties in McLean.


Fire Guts Row of Businesses in Downtown New Rochelle
A fire that began in a liquor store in New Rochelle destroyed a whole swath of buildings in the heart of the city's business district last night, fire officials said.
The fire, which was reported at 9:08 P.M., was not yet under control four hours later.
No one was killed in the blaze.
One firefighter suffered minor injuries, said Fire Commissioner Raymond Kiernan.


Careers; One School's Graduates Getting Jobs
"MOST of our seniors had jobs at graduation time this year," Sandra Delson said last week.
She is the public relations consultant for the alumni association of the United States Merchant Marine Academy, whose graduates are trained for careers at sea when they leave the campus at Kings Point, on the North Shore of Long Island.
Her statement comes at a time when some 1991 graduates could not find jobs, and many more in the class of '92 worry about their chances.


On Bob Kerrey


Poetry Marathon To Celebrate New Year
A marathon poetry reading, an annual event, is planned to celebrate the beginning of the new year.
Tomorrow, on New Year's Day, from 2 P.M. to midnight, more than 100 writers, artists and performers are to participate in a reading and performance at St.
Mark's Church in the Bowery, 10th Street and Second Avenue, Manhattan.
Among those to appear are Allen Ginsberg, Richard Hell, Yoshiko Chuma, Spalding Gray, Richard Foreman, Douglas Dunn, Larry Rivers and Taylor Mead.


Selling Papers From Out of Town
Anderson Celius spent the first 15 years of his life in Haiti and the last five in Brooklyn.
These days, as a clerk at Hotaling's News Agency on 42d Street, he spends a lot of time getting incredulous looks, like the one the other day from a middle-aged man with a thick Slavic accent.
"Where did you learn to speak Serbian?" the man asked.


No Way to Raise the Fare
New York City's bus and subway riders are awaiting the outcome of a cruel cliffhanger: How high will their transit fare go in the New Year?
It is likely that the Metropolitan Transportation Authority board will increase the fare from $1.15 to $1.25 today, but that wouldn't be the end of it.
State leaders would still have to close the rest of the Transit Authority's $263 million budget gap.
Otherwise the fare that millions pay, including some of the state's poorest people, will go up again in 1992 to a prohibitive $1.40, and probably again in 1993.
This year-to-year agony is no way to run a mass transit system.
The only sensible alternative is a long-range strategy that would provide more stability and fairness and would force elected officials to face up to their responsibilities.
The last five-year plan has just run out, leaving the delicate fare negotiations especially vulnerable to narrow calculations of political self-interest.


Books of The Times; The Tall Family Tales of the Chances and Hazards
Wise Children By Angela Carter 234 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $21.
With her latest heroine, an aging song-and-dance star named Dora Chance, the British novelist Angela Carter has found the ideal narrator: a narrator who shares her own penchant for the extravagant, the whimsical, the Rabelaisian and the grotesque, a narrator capable of turning her own taste for richly embroidered prose into a rollicking tall tale of romance and familial intrigue.


Larry Josephs, 34, Writer About AIDS, Dies of the Disease
Larry Josephs, a writer who described his harrowing, day-to-day struggle against AIDS with journalistic detachment and clarity in two articles for The New York Times Magazine, died Sunday evening at his brother's home in Freeport, L.I.
Mr. Josephs, who was 34 years old, died of complications from AIDS, his mother said.


The Rally In Stocks Accelerates
The stock market's year-end rally accelerated yesterday as investors eagerly joined a buying rush, and several market indicators set records for the third consecutive session.
The benchmark Dow Jones industrial average surged 62.39 points, to a new high of 3,163.91.
In December, the Dow has soared 269.23 points -- or 9.3 percent -- making this month the best December ever.
The previous December record of 8.4 percent was set in 1924.


Crowd Control Mishandled, Security Specialists Assert
Security experts and concert promoters said yesterday that the way everything from guards to communications was handled at a City College gymnasium on Saturday was a recipe for disaster.
"It had all the ingredients of a problem: overselling, poor configuration of the physical facilities and a lack of communication" between security workers inside the gym and the police outside, said John Fruin, an engineer who was a consultant to the Cincinnati task force that investigated the 1979 stampede that killed 11 people at a rock concert by the Who.


Excess Ticket Sale May Have Caused Fatal Crush at Gym
As many as 5,000 tickets may have been sold for the charity basketball game at City College where eight people died Saturday night, a senior city official said yesterday -- nearly twice the capacity of the underground gymnasium where the game was played.
"It is clear that adequate measures were not taken," Milton Mollen, Deputy Mayor for Public Safety, said at a news conference last night.
"Apparently, there was no control by the college as to the distribution and sale of tickets."


Bridge
Beginners quickly learn that a singleton or a doubleton in the dummy offers a ruffing chance if the closed hand has more cards.
But even intermediate players frequently have a blind spot when dummy has three cards and the declarer has four.
The instinct to draw trumps, with no short suit in the dummy, must then be resisted.
A fine example is the diagramed deal from a New England team event, reported by Charles Coon of Gloucester, Mass.
The South player was Dave Spatz of Lexington, Mass., an octogenarian who in his youth made his mark in national championships with Sidney Aronson, a winner of many major titles.
After many years of retirement, Spatz returned to tournament play and demonstrated that his card-playing skill had not rusted.


Japan's Economic Steps: Soothing U.S.
In a display of fresh anxiety over its sagging economy and American trade pressures, Japan has unveiled steps in the last few days to spur economic growth at home and drive up the value of the yen in world currency markets.
The steps were seen as an attempt to defuse American anger and impatience over Japan's mounting trade surpluses before President Bush's visit Jan. 7-10.


That Black Coffee Won't Make You Sober; Don't Curtail Ads
To the Editor:
Demands by two Federal officials for limits and mandatory warnings on beer advertising smacks of Government paternalism at its worst.
Surgeon General Antonia Novello wants the beer industry to withdraw advertising she claims targets young people.
And Representative Joseph P. Kennedy 2d of Massachusetts urges resurrection of his bill requiring ads to carry blatant warning messages.


Ross Offered Post
The San Diego Chargers have offered the head coaching job to Georgia Tech Coach BOBBY ROSS, the Charger's general manager, BOBBY BEATHARD, said yesterday.
"He's thinking of a coaching staff, and I gave him a book that lists every member in the league," Beathard said.


Topics of The Times; A Banner Yet Waves
They haven't yet flown a new flag at the white brick building on East 67th Street in Manhattan that houses the former Soviet Mission to the U.N.
But three spanking new brass plaques now flank the front door.
In place of the old plaque announcing the presence of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, a new one says in Russian and English that this is the mission of "the Russian Federation." Below it, a second one says it's the mission of the Republic of Belarus, too.
And the third says it's the mission of Ukraine.


APPETIZERS AND ENTREES: THE FEAST ON NEW YEAR'S DAY
Four months ago, against the consensus that proclaimed Florida State the No. 1 team, The New York Times Top 20 compiled by Michael Sisak predicted Washington would finish No. 1.
Tomorrow's games will provide the answer.
Washington leads the United Press International poll, trails top-ranked Miami by only 14 points in The Associated Press writers' poll and by .077 percentage points in The New York Times computer ranking.
The teams are tied for No. 1 in the USA Today-CNN coaches' poll.


Business Scene; Creating a Market In Yeltsin's Image
ALTHOUGH the Soviet Union no longer exists, its national economy limps on, with Boris N. Yeltsin, Russia's president, pretty much at the helm.
And now a battle royal is developing over these questions: Should he share control with the 11 other independent republics?
If the republics cannot agree on common policies, should the national economy, like the union itself, be chopped up into pieces?
The first answers to these bedrock questions are coming this week with Mr.
Yeltsin's decision to lift price ceilings in Russia.
Unless he changes his mind, or the other republics take vigorous counteraction, rising prices in Mr.
Yeltsin's republic will set off a chain of events that will force up prices throughout the old union.


2 Shot to Death in Astoria
A man and a woman were shot and killed as they sat in a car in Astoria, Queens, late last night, the police said.
Charles Bland, 25 years old, whose address the police did not know, and Cherry Walker, 20, of 31-76 50th Street in Astoria, were found by police officers in the parking lot of Woodside Houses at the corner of 51st Street and Broadway.
Both had been shot several times.
No weapon was recovered, but as many as 15 shots may have been fired, a police spokeswoman said.
The parking lot is known as a drug location, the police said.
Investigators are looking for two male suspects in their 20's.


APPETIZERS AND ENTREES: THE FEAST ON NEW YEAR'S DAY
Four months ago, against the consensus that proclaimed Florida State the No. 1 team, The New York Times Top 20 compiled by Michael Sisak predicted Washington would finish No. 1.
Tomorrow's games will provide the answer.
Washington leads the United Press International poll, trails top-ranked Miami by only 14 points in The Associated Press writers' poll and by .077 percentage points in The New York Times computer ranking.
The teams are tied for No. 1 in the USA Today-CNN coaches' poll.


Medical Training's Ties to Public Hospitals Need Strengthening
To the Editor:
You report that Long Island Jewish Medical Center has decided to sever its ties to Queens Hospital Center to "strengthen its residency program by reducing primary care" (news article, Dec. 16).
This is a dramatic step in the wrong direction.
In the Dec. 15 Annals of Internal Medicine, Jeremiah A. Barondess writes that academic health centers need to re-examine their mission for providing services to the public.
Traditionally, these institutions have focused their priorities on basic science research and highly specialized tertiary care.


AGENCY PROHIBITS USE OF NEW LAW IN OLD BIAS CASES
In an authoritative statement of policy, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission declared today that the new civil rights law did not apply to thousands of cases filed by people who said they suffered job discrimination before the measure was signed by President Bush on Nov. 21.
The ruling means that workers who filed complaints of discrimination before that date must try to prevail under the old rules, which made it much harder to prove discrimination and limited the compensation they could obtain if they won.


The Saudis Are Fearful, Too, As Islam's Militant Tide Rises
Saudi Arabia's religious and political leaders are concerned about militant religious fundamentalists who are using mosques and religious universities to stir up opposition.
The senior religious leader, Sheik Abdelaziz ibn Baz, who in the past was generally assumed to be at least tacitly opposed to the modernization policies of the Government, made a speech over the weekend attacking the militant fundamentalists.


Review/Photography; What Walker Evans Saw on His Subway Rides
By 1938, the year he began the series of subway portraits on view at the National Gallery of Art, Walker Evans had already made most of the great photographs on which his reputation is based.
Two years earlier, he spent the summer photographing the sharecroppers whose daily lives became the subject of "Let Us Now Praise Famous Men," his collaboration with the writer James Agee, published in 1941.
In the summer of 1938, Evans carried out his last assignment for the Farm Security Administration, where along with Dorothea Lange, Russell Lee and other photographers he helped define a distinctive documentary style and social purpose for the medium.
At the end of the year, 100 of his photographs were presented at the Museum of Modern Art, in its first one-person show given to a photographer; his seminal book "American Photographs" was published to accompany the exhibition.


On My Mind; The Age Of Contempt
The leaders of the just-born commonwealth of republics face a daunting collection of problems, but all are solvable if enough of them find the courage to face one of the biggest -- themselves.
The presidents of the republics came to power in the Soviet Union, climbing up the system.
They learned to govern not only through fear but contempt -- the contempt of the Communist system and rulers for the opinions, thoughts, happiness, rights, even the lives, of the people under their control.


A Radical New Leaf for Salomon
At Salomon Brothers, what began as a housecleaning in the wake of the Treasury market scandal has evolved into a big renovation from the foundation up.
At stake in the transformation of the firm into a leaner, more selective operation is its survival as a major force on Wall Street.
No longer can the firm support pet strategies pushed by top executives that fail to bring in sufficient profits.
Personal fiefs are breaking up, and every business group has to prove its worth to the firm -- steps some Salomon executives say are long overdue.


Ms. Bernstein Is Married
Julie Lynn Bernstein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin J. Bernstein of Flushing, Queens, was married yesterday to Joel Slawotsky, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Slawotsky.
Rabbi Dr.
Manfred Fulda officiated at the Manhattan Beach Jewish Center in Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Slawotsky, 24 years old, is an actuarial associate with the T.I.A.A.-CREF pension fund in New York.
She graduated from Queens College, where she also received a master's degree in applied mathematics.
Her father teaches mathematics at the Forest Hills High School in Queens.
Her mother, Bertha H. Bernstein, is a travel agent with the M &amp; M Travel Agency in Forest Hills.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a skit performed in blackface at the Monmouth County Bar Association's Christmas show in New Jersey misstated Prof.
Anita Hill's law school affiliation.
She is at the University of Oklahoma, not Oklahoma State University.


Market Place; Hobbled Carolco To Buy Back Debt
HAVING produced the biggest box-office hit of the year, "Terminator 2: Judgment Day," Carolco Pictures Inc. should have been feeling good about 1991 and looking forward to 1992.
Instead, it is going into the new year struggling to come up with enough cash to continue making movies and paying its debts.
Carolco said yesterday that it wants to buy back some of its bonds at 65 cents on the dollar to reduce its debt payments.
And it disclosed the departure of its chief executive, Peter M. Hoffman, a significant change that most of Hollywood had expected for a month.
Mr.
Hoffman is leaving after clashing over the company's direction with Carolco's chairman, Mario F. Kassar, who is steering the studio back to its core business of making a handful of relatively big-budget films each year.


After Cuts, News Says, It Has Room To Breathe
Daily News executives told representatives of the bankrupt paper's unions and creditors yesterday that $8 million in annual expenses had been cut from operating costs and that the paper was in no immediate danger of running out of money.
The paper's board met yesterday morning with union representatives in a planning committee aimed at balancing the paper's costs with revenues; yesterday afternoon, the board met for the first time with the committee representing the paper's creditors.


Money Movers Caught in the Turbulent Times of the 90's; John S. Reed: Brazen Image Is Tarnished
When John S. Reed became chairman of Citicorp in 1984, he inherited the nation's largest banking company, and one that was so confident of its abilities that it did not shy from risks that other bankers would not even consider.
Today, with the economy in the first recession of his tenure, Citicorp is a more humble place.
Its image has been badly tarnished by increasing loan losses, particularly the more risky kinds of loans for commercial real estate projects and corporate take-overs.
A few months ago, the financial strain from bad loans forced the company to eliminate its common stock dividend.


The Carnage at City College
People were just going crazy.
They shoved and shoved and shoved.
They were on top of me, and I couldn't breathe.
That's how Sharmayne Jones, 20 years old, of the Bronx describes her personal moment of horror during Saturday night's catastrophic human stampede at City College in New York.
When too many people tried to push their way into a gymnasium, 8 people were crushed or trampled to death and 29 others were seriously injured.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association  CHARLOTTE HORNETS -- Signed Ron Grandison, forward.
Continental Basketball Association  RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Traded Demetrius Calip, guard, to the Yakima Sun Kings for a 1992 second-round draft pick and cash.
Signed Nikita Wilson, forward.
YAKIMA SUN KINGS -- Signed Quintin Dailey, guard.
Hockey  National Hockey League  WASHINGTON CAPITALS -- Signed Don Beaupre, goalie, to a four-year contract.
WINNIPEG JETS -- Traded Warren Rychel, left wing, to the Minnesota North Stars for Tony Joseph, right wing, and future considerations.
International Hockey League  IHL -- Named Michael G. McCall marketing director.
East Coast Hockey League  LOUISVILLE ICEHAWKS -- Claimed Ron Majic, forward, off waivers from the Nashville Knights.


Business Digest
Markets
The stock market's record-breaking rally accelerated, with the Dow Jones industrial average surging 62.39 points to a high of 3,163.91.
In December, the Dow has soared 269.23 points, or 9.3 percent, topping the December 1924 record of 8.4 percent.  [ D1. ]


Distorted Diplomacy on Japan
President Bush belatedly set off for Asia yesterday, taking along the chiefs of 21 major American corporations, including the Big Three auto makers.
Regrettably, Mr.
Bush seems to be leaving his own best foreign policy instincts and free trade principles behind.
Originally, this trip to Australia, Singapore, South Korea and Japan was meant to revitalize key Asia-Pacific alliances for the post-cold-war era.
But domestic political concerns brought a panicky postponement, and then a hasty recasting of the trip as a Japan-bashing crusade for American jobs.


Critic's Notebook; 'The Ghosts of Versailles' Fills The Tumbrels With Conventions
I have a word for "The Ghosts of Versailles": subversive.
Subversion happens when one goes to the bottom of a thing and turns it on its head.
The Metropolitan Opera's premiere performances of the new opera by John Corigliano, with libretto by William Hoffman, give opera a salutary kick in the pants by denying our expectations, by making us see them upside down.
Opera's implicit advertising has not been honored.
I would be surprised if the Better Business Bureau hasn't had a phone call or two.
Specifically, "The Ghosts of Versailles" is an exercise in bait-and-switch.
The plot involves the playwright Beaumarchais, who entertains the ghosts of a decapitated French court and enters his own play in an attempt to change history and save his love, Marie Antoinette.
Frilly costumes and Baroque interiors promise Richard Strauss, the Turkish scene advertises continuations of Mozart's "Abduction From the Seraglio." Icy instrumental glissandos threaten sober post-Romantic drama.


Depth at Quarterback Suits Huskies Just Fine
It had rained all night and all day, but practice didn't stop.
The marching band played on, the boosters huddled under dark clouds, and Billy Joe Hobert, who will be the University of Washington's quarterback Wednesday against Michigan in the Rose Bowl at Pasadena, kept passing the ball.
Hobert has passed it all season -- for 22 touchdowns and more than 2,000 yards -- but more rain was coming.
Surely he was worried.
Or was he?


By Design; Choices for Tough Times
When times are tough on the budget, it's smart to be cautious.
But don't completely clam up to new ideas.
Fashion can give you a lift, so consider -- carefully, of course -- some options for 1992.
What about a longer skirt?
Try one in a slithery knit or a slim style made of fabric with stretch fiber in it.
You may find that it not only feels sexy but elongates your silhouette.
If, however, the short skirt is truly you, go for one that has some flair or swing to it.


Bush Avoids Criticism of Japanese
President Bush, on a brief stopover here on the way to Australia, where he is beginning a four-nation Pacific region trip, was asked today if he agreed with a comment by Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher that the Japanese were partly responsible for the American recession.
He replied obliquely: "We need to get more access to more markets abroad. I think we will."


Coslet Packs Up And Offers Predictions
The plane ride back home from Houston was not as wild as the ride back from Miami last week.
Nothing could match the giddy feeling of taking the Dolphins into overtime, then beating them and getting into the playoffs.
But when the Jets put down their landing gear to conclude the 1991 season, they could still hold their heads in the air.
At least that's what Bruce Coslet told them this morning when he made his second farewell address.


New Campaigns
*
A garbled message is the key to the commercials for U S West's voice messaging service.
One of the two spots, created by Campbell-Mithun-Esty in Minneapolis, shows answering machines squeaking and beeping, generally distorting messages, and then offers the company's voice messaging service as an alternative.
The tagline is "U S West. Making the Most of Your Time." The campaign began yesterday in Arizona and will roll out through 1992 in the 13 other states where U S West offers the service.


Breast Implant Maker Is Accused Of Misleading Telephone Callers
The Food and Drug Administration said yesterday that the leading maker of silicone breast implants had been making false statements on its consumer information telephone line, and it told the company to stop at once or face disciplinary measures.
The accusations, made in a letter to the manufacturer, the Dow Corning Wright Company, involved statements that were being made by its employees on a consumer line it established to provide information about the gel-filled implants.
The letter was made public yesterday by the F.D.A.


Chancellor Stops District From Naming Teachers
Hours before it planned to appoint seven new elementary and middle-school principals, a Bronx school district with a history of corruption and mismanagement was ordered by the New York City Schools Chancellor yesterday to indefinitely postpone the move.
The Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez, said he had issued the order to the board of Community District 12 in the south-central Bronx because of charges of anti-Semitism and other irregularities in selecting candidates for the jobs at four elementary schools and three middle schools.


CHINA'S FOREIGNERS WATCHED CLOSELY
When an American correspondent applied this year to interview Zhang Wei, a former senior official in the city of Tianjin, the authorities rejected the request on the ground that Mr.
Zhang was very busy.
That was not very plausible, since Mr.
Zhang had supported the 1989 democracy movement and had consequently spent much of the time since then under house arrest.
Still, the reporter had not really expected the interview to be granted and put the matter out of his mind.


Cowboys Have Turned Road Into Rodeo
Give Coach Jimmy Johnson, offensive coordinator Norv Turner and defensive coordinator Dave Wannstedt an edge in coaching strategy in the Dallas Cowboys' six-game winning streak that has produced victories at Washington, at Philadelphia and, now, at Chicago.
The three have devised superior game plans that the players have deftly executed.


Coke Seeks to Be The Bubbly This Eve
When revelers pour into Times Square tonight, cups of Coca-Cola may outnumber glasses of champagne, courtesy of a promotional blitz from the soft-drink company.
The hoopla is tied to the initial lighting of the Coca-Cola Company's $3 million, three-dimensional sign at 2 Times Square, where Broadway and Seventh Avenue meet at 47th Street.
The company will give away soft drinks, in souvenir cups, to those visiting 17 neighborhood restaurants, and will run two commercials during ABC's "New Year's Rockin' Eve," with Edward I. Koch, the former New York Mayor, appearing as pitchman.


CHRONICLE
When the New Year's ball descends in Times Square tonight, it will be for the second time this week.
The first was a practice ceremony yesterday supervised by TAMA STARR, the timekeeper for the event.
Ms.
Starr, the president of Artkraft Strauss Sign Corporation, is following in the footsteps of her grandfather Jacob Starr, who built the first New Year's ball in 1908.
She will repeat the performance tonight.
The ball is operated by a line and pulleys, and Ms.
Starr is assisted by a crew including two electricians, two sign hangers and a sheet-metal worker.
The ball begins its 77-foot descent at 11:59 P.M.


Privacy Law Stops Information to Parents
Under the 1974 Family Education Rights and Privacy Act, colleges and universities are barred from passing on any information about a student, even to parents, without the student's permission.
As a result, the law precludes institutions from enlisting parental help in treating a student's drinking problem, college administrators say.
The privacy law was passed by Congress because of concern over the disclosure of sensitive test results and potentially damaging comments by teachers that could later taint students' records or reputations.


Student Groups Run Events With Little Supervision, College Officials Concede
City College officials said yesterday that student groups in recent years had been allowed virtually a free hand in running their own activities, even events as potentially perilous as the celebrity basketball game where eight young people were crushed to death Saturday night.
As a result, these officials said, private promoters and community organizations have learned that it is to their benefit to associate with student groups, who can rent them space on campus for a fraction of the cost for private facilities.


