Tax-Exempt Yields Rise as Taxables Dip
Yields of money market funds were mixed for the week ended yesterday, with tax-exempt funds moving higher and the taxable ones declining.
Walter S. Frank, chief economist at IBC/Donoghue, which regularly monitors funds, said that the yields on tax-free funds rose considerably, because of the increased supply of municipals offered recently.
He mentioned the large offerings yesterday by New York State and New York City.


Laughing at Big Government, and Crying, Too
P.
J.
O'Rourke, dressed in a blue-striped shirt and chinos, was standing in the driveway of the imposing, wood-paneled 18th-century house he recently bought here.
The writer, surrounded by all that rural peace and elegance, had more the look of a country squire than of a humorist, particularly a humorist whose main effort lately has been to lampoon a zany, uselessly busy, mentally cluttered world as far from the green hills of New Hampshire as it is possible to be.
But Mr.
O'Rourke, when he is not supervising authentic antique renovations, is certainly a humorist.
Moreover, he can afford the renovations because he is reveling in best-sellerdom.
His latest book, not very subtly entitled "A Parliament of Whores," can only be described as a funnily savage attack on the political authorities of the United States, a book that talks about how Government has inured Americans to "vapor trails of zeroes," meaning huge sums of money spent counterproductively, and that has chapter titles like "The Dictatorship of Boredom" and "Would You Kill Your Mother to Pave I-95?"


It's Not the Golden Gate, but So What?
ON Monday, the garden of the Cooper-Hewitt Museum in Manhattan received a new ornament -- a 36-foot-long model of a suspension bridge, built over a pond.
Twenty junior high school students from New York City made the bridge, which is on exhibit through Oct. 13 at the museum, 2 East 91st Street.
"I got to mix cement, learn how to measure the land and how to make a lake," said Jonathan Acosta, 13 years old, who attends Isaac Newton Junior High School in Manhattan.
The students built the bridge under the direction of Dr.
Mario Salvadori, 84, a professor emeritus of civil engineering and architecture at Columbia University, and the Salvadori Educational Center on the Built Environment.
Dr.
Salvadori founded the nonprofit group in 1987 to teach children math, science and design through hands-on experiments and to maintain their interest in school.


New Jersey Insurer Sets Sale of Unit
The Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company, the huge Newark-based insurer that was taken over by New Jersey regulators earlier this month, said yesterday that it had agreed to sell its group-insurance operations to a Dutch-Belgian insurance conglomerate for $500 million in cash and notes.
The deal will allow Mutual Benefit to raise cash and will increase its capital, or cushion against loss, by about one-third.
Company executives said, however, that the addition was not likely to be enough to eliminate policyholders' concerns over Mutual Benefit's huge portfolio of troubled real estate loans.
So it is still unclear when Samuel F. Fortunato, New Jersey's Insurance Commissioner, will be able to lift his order barring policyholders from cashing in their policies.


Pain, Limited.  Bases, Closed.
Swiftly and convincingly, the House has approved the closing of 34 unneeded military bases.
Barring unforeseen new twists in this tormented process, the deed is done.
And done well.
Base closings are an essential but painful part of downsizing the post-cold-war Pentagon.
To spare itself the agony of deciding which bases, and in whose constituencies, Congress turned the job over to a special commission.
The commission reviewed Pentagon proposals and recommended that most of them proceed.
Congress can stop them only if both houses disapprove the entire list.


Workers on Strike Deserve Job Protection
To the Editor:
"Strike at Your Own Risk" by Prof.
David Westfall of Harvard (Op-Ed, July 16), opposing the workplace fairness bill that has been passed by the House of Representatives (news article, July 18), is loaded with misconceptions and false conclusions.
The permanent replacement of strikers, although declared legal by a 1938 court decision, is anything but a "long-established practice." Indeed, it was almost unheard of before the Reagan Administration used it to crush the air traffic controllers' union in 1981.


Noted Scientist And Staff Leave Rockefeller U.
Dr.
Anthony Cerami, a leading scientist at Rockefeller University and a prominent opponent of Dr.
David Baltimore's appointment as president of the institution on the Upper East Side, is leaving the university along with his entire 30-member research team, it was announced yesterday.
Dr.
Cerami, an internationally known medical biochemist whose research specialties include age-related illnesses and infectious diseases, will take his team to a newly established biomedical institution, the Picower Institute for Medical Research, in Manhasset, L.I.
He is a former dean of graduate studies at Rockefeller and will be the Picower Institute's first president.


In Atlanta, Tumbling Pirates Are Going South in a Hurry
Making his farewell baseball appearance of the season, Deion Sanders hit a three-run homer in a six-run fifth inning tonight as the Atlanta Braves beat the Pittsburgh Pirates, 8-6, for a sweep of their four-game series.
It was the fifth consecutive loss for the Pirates, who still have the best record in baseball at 60-39.
They lost 9 of the 12 games in their season series with Atlanta.


Laughing at Big Government, and Crying, Too
P.
J.
O'Rourke, dressed in a blue-striped shirt and chinos, was standing in the driveway of the imposing, wood-paneled 18th-century house he recently bought here.
The writer, surrounded by all that rural peace and elegance, had more the look of a country squire than of a humorist, particularly a humorist whose main effort lately has been to lampoon a zany, uselessly busy, mentally cluttered world as far from the green hills of New Hampshire as it is possible to be.
But Mr.
O'Rourke, when he is not supervising authentic antique renovations, is certainly a humorist.
Moreover, he can afford the renovations because he is reveling in best-sellerdom.
His latest book, not very subtly entitled "A Parliament of Whores," can only be described as a funnily savage attack on the political authorities of the United States, a book that talks about how Government has inured Americans to "vapor trails of zeroes," meaning huge sums of money spent counterproductively, and that has chapter titles like "The Dictatorship of Boredom" and "Would You Kill Your Mother to Pave I-95?"


B.C.C.I.'s Flashy Man in Argentina
After I understood the country, the people and the culture," Ghaith R. Pharaon once said after arriving in Argentina in 1981, "I realized that the future was right here, and I decided to stay."
For a while, it seemed his perfect homeland.
The Saudi-born, Harvard-educated financier arrived with an impressive bankroll backed by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which, American investigors say, used him as one of its leading front men in a host of acquisitions.


F. Brantley Scott, 61, Urologist Who Developed Penile Prosthesis
Dr.
F.
Brantley Scott, a urologist who developed the inflatable penile prosthesis to treat impotence in men, died Saturday when a light airplane he was piloting crashed while trying to land near his vacation home in San Marcos, Tex.
He was 61 years old and lived in Houston.
Dr.
Scott was a professor at the Baylor University College of Medicine and chief of the urology service at St.
Luke's Episcopal Hospital in Houston.
At a symposium in his honor last month, which drew medical specialists from around the world, he announced his intention to retire.


Drug Suspect Killed by Police
A suspected drug dealer was shot and killed by a police officer yesterday in the Bronx after undercover narcotics detectives purchased cocaine from him outside an abandoned house known as a hangout for addicts, the police said.
After the buy, backup officers moved in about 4:20 P.M. to arrest the man in front of 1219 Gilbert Place, in the Hunts Point section, but he wrested a gun away from Detective Ernesto Gonzalez, the police said.
The detective shot the suspect five times in the chest, the police said.
He was not immediately identified.


In the Nation; Big Ticket Blues
Many an American is happy that the cold war is over and the astronomical cost of the military must therefore be coming down.
Many others are unhappy to discover that their states and municipalities no longer have the money to pay for libraries, schools, parks, public services and other accustomed amenities.
Both kinds of Americans may be shocked to discover that by the reckoning of the Senate Budget Committee chairman, the Pentagon still seeks more than $500 billion for "about 100 major weapons acquisitions programs." Targets for these weapons seem mostly to be in the eyes of their supporters.


Pierre Brunet, a Champion Skater In 1920's and 30's, Is Dead at 89
Pierre Brunet, a French figure skater and Olympic champion who was equally renowned as a skating teacher, died on Saturday at his home in Boyne City, Mich.
He was 89 years old, and according to friends had been suffering from Parkinson's disease.


Senate Passes 'Star Wars' Bill
The Senate voted to begin deploying an anti-missile defense system by 1996 and rejected an amendment limiting it to one site.
Page A11.


Centerville Journal; Spinning Their Wheels On Courthouse Square
In Italy they have piazzas: antique squares in the center of town, where day in and day out old men in suits and ties stand around on well-worn stones to talk about politics and sports and the lottery and watch what's going on.
In small Southern towns like this one, an hour and a half southwest of Nashville, they have similar places.
But here they are called squares.
The streets surrounding them, where people likewise gather, are paved with asphalt, covered with oil spots, and surrounded by brick storefronts built in the heyday of the American hamlet.
Populating them, for the most part, are young people in jeans and black T-shirts that extol various heavy metal bands.
Each evening the teen-agers (and a few restless elders) gather to talk, drink, flirt, smoke, or simply drive around the courthouse.


Edward C. Prehn, Education Professor, 81
Edward C. Prehn, a professor of education and author of economics textbooks for high-school students, died on Saturday at his home on Staten Island.
He was 81 years old.
He died of a heart attack, a friend, Michael Rosenfeld, said.


Submarine Contract Is Voided
A Federal judge yesterday voided the Pentagon's award of a submarine-building contract to the General Dynamics Corporation's Electric Boat division and ordered the Navy to hold a new competition on terms more favorable to a competitor, Tenneco Inc.'s Newport News shipyard.
The ruling, by Judge Robert Doumar of the United States District Court in Norfolk, Va., gives Newport News another shot at winning the contract to build the second SSN-22 Seawolf attack submarine.


L.A. Gear's Banks Revamp Its Credit
L.A.
Gear Inc. said today that its bankers have cut the company's line of credit from $300 million to $200 million, but will take no other immediate action against the company for defaulting on its lending agreement by losing money in the second quarter.
L.A.
Gear, which previously claimed to have earned money in the quarter, last week revised its financial statement to show a loss after the Securities and Exchange Commission studied the company's books.


Award-Winning Furniture
TABLES made of newspapers or with feathered legs are among 17 objects in "Furniture of the 90's" at the Franklin Parrasch Gallery, 584 Broadway, near Prince Street in Manhattan.
The pieces were among the 25 winners in the first juried exhibition of art furniture, organized by the American Society of Furniture Artists in Houston in April.
There were 700 entries by some 400 artists.
The stylistic influences in the show include the designers Ettore Sottsass and Philippe Starck and the architect Michael Graves, and the works range from quirky to derivative, from well-executed to slightly sloppy.


Golf, Not Olympics, Is Lure for Jordan
MICHAEL JORDAN, playing in his first competitive golf tournament, has ended speculation about whether he would seek a spot on the United States Olympic basketball team next year.
"I think there are a lot of professionals who want to play and, being that there are a lot of professionals that haven't played and I've played, I don't mind giving the other guys an opportunity," he said in Benton Harbor, Mich., where he shot an 85 yesterday in the first round of the Western Amateur.


Japanese Agree to Limits On Car Exports to Europe
After more than a year of discussion, the European Community and Japan agreed today on a formula that would allow Japanese cars to fill 16 percent of the expected European car market by 1999.
The extension of what both sides call a voluntary agreement would expand Japan's share of the market from 11 percent, assuming that demand for cars in the 12 members of the European Community reached the 15.1 million units in 1999 that Japanese manufacturers project.


Imelda Marcos Assails Manila's Terms for Return
Calling it "unbelievable and cruel," Imelda Marcos, the widow of former President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines, said yesterday that she would decline an offer by the Manila Government to return from exile unless she can bring her husband's remains back with her.
The Government of President Corazon C. Aquino lifted its five-year-ban on her return Tuesday.
But in doing so, it also announced that it would not permit the return of the remains of Mr.
Marcos and that it would charge Mrs.
Marcos in 25 criminal cases.


Lending a Hand to the Small Latin Entrepreneur
Flecked with bronze dust from burnishing guitar parts, Luis Ibanez switched off a buffing machine in his backyard metal shop here and praised the magic wrought by small-business loans that were once nearly impossible to get.
Using past loans, he hired his son-in-law, Jeremia Eremias Perez, as an assistant and started exporting banjo and guitar parts to Venezuela.
With new credit he has applied for, he is planning to buy more machinery and to hire two more workers.


New Questions in Misconduct Cases Prompt Withdrawal of Health Official
The new director of the National Institutes of Health, after forcing the agency's chief fraud investigator to resign, has now excused herself from making any further decisions about any misconduct cases to come before her agency.
The disputes raise again the question of whether scientists can effectively police themselves, said Represenative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan and chairman of the subcommittee that will hold a hearing Thursday into the actions by Dr.
Bernadine Healy, the health institutes' director.
"We are concerned that there is an attempt at N.I.H. to dismantle the Office of Scientific Integrity and to interfere with its inquiries."


Trading Has a Way of Proving the Last Shall Be First and Vice Versa
Earlier this month, Brook Jacoby started only one game and played briefly in three others in an 11-game stretch.
After that, he related: "I was asked would I like to sit on the bench or would I like to be traded. It was a very easy question to answer."
Whereupon Jacoby was liberated from the lower depths of the standing and catapulted into a pennant race.
The Cleveland Indians traded him to the Oakland Athletics last Friday, and he instantly gained four places and 18 1/2 games in the standing.


Woeful Mets Lose; Fernandez Is Injured
The game came apart in a circus of errors, poor judgment and inept relief, and so the trip that started with a sweep ended with a game that could make the Mets weep.
In a game that began with the absence of Vince Coleman and that included the alarming departure of Sid Fernandez, the Mets lost to the Dodgers, 6-3, tonight after holding a 3-1 lead.
They concluded their nine-game swing through California in chaos and with a pathetic 2-7 record.


Ryan on Disabled List
NOLAN RYAN is going back on the disabled list because of an aching right shoulder and it is uncertain when the 44-year-old Texas Rangers pitcher might return.
"I haven't talked to anybody yet to figure out what timetable to go by," said Ryan, who took himself out of Sunday's 10-6 victory over Detroit in the sixth inning because of a recurring ache in his right shoulder.


Consumer Group Says LaRoche Withheld Data on Drug's Safety
The drug company F. Hoffmann-La Roche criminally withheld crucial safety data on its anesthetic drug Versed from the Food and Drug Administration, a consumer advocate said today, citing internal company documents he had obtained.
Dr.
Sidney Wolfe, who directs the Public Citizen Health Research Group, made the internal documents public in Washington yesterday and asked Dr.
David Kessler, the commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, to open an investigation of Roche immediately.
"If justice prevails," Dr.
Wolfe wrote in a letter to the agency, the investigation will "result in criminal conviction of Roche for violation of the laws and regulations concerning the prompt reporting to the F.D.A. of drug safety problems."


Who Lives There Anyway?
COVETING thy neighbor's real estate may be one of New Yorkers' favorite pastimes.
Since there are few high fences or daunting distances to shield the homes of the very privileged and the very lucky from the rest of humanity, those prone to envy can bask in happy longing as they roam the streets.
They may be attracted to a glittering chandelier on the ceiling of a brownstone's front parlor, a flawless lawn on a rundown block or an oversize stretch of windows high in a Manhattan apartment tower.
These glimpses can be a source of thrills, the same thrill that Stella Dallas enjoyed in that 1937 movie as she stood in the rain and watched, through a window, her daughter marry a rich man's son.
They can also be a source of cheap decorating ideas.
For the fortunate enough to live behind these desirable walls, life is not always as easy as it looks from the outside.
Residents say that while they often find themselves sighing contentedly as they gaze around their rooms, they also face all the hazards of fame: namely, jealous friends and far worse, tourists gathered on the doorstep begging to come in.
On page C6, entry is granted to the six special corners of New York City pictured here.
Stay as long as you like.


Who Lives There, Anyway? Faces Behind the Walls: Spuyten Duyvil; Above the Water, Atop 100-Foot Cliff
FOR relaxation at sunset, Maxine and Arthur Brennan pull up chairs to their living-room windows.
From their vantage point, an apartment building that seems to be precariously perched on a sheer 100-foot cliff at the southwestern tip of the Bronx, they can observe hawks, gulls, barges, oil tankers, yachts and Amtrak and Metro-North trains.
Known as Villa Victoria, their six-story building overlooks Spuyten Duyvil, the turbulent intersection of the Harlem and Hudson Rivers.
To motorists on the Henry Hudson Parkway, its pointed tower is the signal that they are about to make the leap between Manhattan and the Bronx.
The Brennans often gloat as they watch parkway traffic jams from their windows.
"Better them than me," said Mr.
Brennan, a lawyer.


Iraqi Accused in Plot to Kill In U.S. Is Arrested by F.B.I.
An Iraqi who prosecutors say was hired by President Saddam Hussein's Government to kill a political dissident in California was arrested on Tuesday night as he arrived on a flight from Jordan, the F.B.I.'s New York office said yesterday.
Andri Esha Khoshaba, a former driver for the Iraqi Mission to the United Nations, was described by the Federal authorities as a "known Iraqi terrorist." A Federal magistrate in Brooklyn ordered yesterday that Mr.
Khoshaba be returned to Sacramento, Calif., where he was indicted by a Federal grand jury in April 1990.


New Questions in Misconduct Cases Prompt Withdrawal of Health Official
The new director of the National Institutes of Health, after forcing the agency's chief fraud investigator to resign, has now excused herself from making any further decisions about any misconduct cases to come before her agency.
The disputes raise again the question of whether scientists can effectively police themselves, said Represenative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan and chairman of the subcommittee that will hold a hearing Thursday into the actions by Dr.
Bernadine Healy, the health institutes' director.
"We are concerned that there is an attempt at N.I.H. to dismantle the Office of Scientific Integrity and to interfere with its inquiries."


Quotation of the Day
"Thank God, as we say in Russian, that we stopped this." -- Mikhail S. Gorbachev, declaring an end to the arms race.  [ A1:6. ]


Budget Talks Break Down
Negotiations aimed at producing a budget based on an income tax broke down last night amid disagreement over how big the new tax should be.
The breakdown marked another failed effort to end Connecticut's 32-day-old budget impasse, which threatens to last through the weekend, raising the possibility of another partial shutdown of state government next week.


Judge Postpones Rape Trial of Kennedy Nephew
The judge in the rape case of William K. Smith today postponed the start of the trial.
She also said she would rule soon on defense requests that she prohibit televising the trial and limit the public disclosure of court documents.
The judge, Mary E. Lupo, did not set a new date for the trial, saying that could be determined later in consultation with both sides.
But the defense had sought a 90-day delay, arguing that the trial could not start Monday as scheduled because Mr.
Smith's legal team had not had sufficient time to prepare his defense or to investigate new allegations that surfaced against him last week.


CHRONICLE
NORMAN MAILER has just completed an interview with his friend WARREN BEATTY for Vanity Fair.
Mr.
Mailer's long-awaited novel "Harlot's Ghost" will be published in October by Random House.
Mr.
Beatty's movie "Bugsy," about the gangster Bugsy Siegel, will be released at Christmas.
The timing means that the two star tracks should cross on the magazine's cover sometime in the middle of both events.
Perhaps Mr.
Beatty will star in a film version of Mr.
Mailer's novel, which is about two generations of C.I.A. agents and has lots of comedy, sex and politics.


7 Killed in South Carolina In Crash of an Amtrak Train
Seven people were killed and as many as 125 were injured today when an Amtrak passenger train traveling from Miami to New York derailed near this central South Carolina city and crashed into freight cars sitting on a factory railroad siding.
The predawn crash of the Silver Star pinned some of the 426 passengers in their seats.
Many were sleeping when the train crashed.
Howard Robertson, a spokesman for Amtrak, said that all of the seven people were declared dead by officials at the scene of the crash.


Sony Buys Site
The Sony Corporation of America said it had acquired a 38-acre parcel of land from the Ford Motor Company in San Jose, Calif., for about $22.8 million.
The site will be developed into an office for Sony's computer, professional broadcasting equipment and other non-consumer businesses.
The company plans to complete a 500,000-square-foot building by 1993.


Singer Maker Going Public
The company that manufactures Singer sewing machines is going public again, two years after it was bought by International Semi-Tech Microelectronics Inc. of Toronto.
A total of 15.6 million shares in SSMC Inc. will be sold at a price expected to be between $14 and $16 a share, said Monica Prihoda, a spokeswoman for Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, which is underwriting the stock sale.


Fore! Nicklaus Beware of Teen-Ager
While Jack Nicklaus was adding another laurel to the greatest career in golf with his victory at the United States Senior Open last weekend, the most precocious golfer in the modern history of the game gained his greatest victory.
At the age of 15 years 7 months, Eldrick (Tiger) Woods became the youngest winner in the 44-year history of the United States Junior Amateur championship on Sunday, sweeping through six match-play victories at the Bay Hill Club in Orlando, Fla.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday, about a ceremony aboard the Intrepid Sea- Air-Space Museum to commemorate the first anniversary of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, referred incorrectly to the 142d Aviation Brigade.
While the brigade lent equipment to the fighting forces, it did not serve in the gulf war.
It donated a helicopter to the museum and helped restore it aboard the carrier.


Shipping Executive Gets A.T.&amp;T. Post
The American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company named as its new chief financial officer Alex J. Mandl, head of one of the world's largest shipping companies who also has an extensive background in applying telecommunications technology to business.
Mr.
Mandl, 47 years old, has been chairman and chief executive of Sea-Land Services Inc., based in Edison, N.J.
Mr.
Mandl was hired through an executive search service and has no previous experience with A.T.&amp; T.


Review/Dance; Lucinda Childs and Her Ghost Mingle on Stage
Lucinda Childs has become a master at creating luminous, continuously shifting dancescapes in which the outside world seems never to intrude.
But another world does make itself felt in "Dance," created in 1979 and presented on Tuesday night as part of the Serious Fun festival at Alice Tully Hall.
Filmed images of dancers, huge and small, filling the stage or occupying corners or small insets, are projected on a scrim so that they appear to race across the surface of the dance performed live just beyond.
The 35-millimeter black-and-white film, designed by Sol LeWitt and shot by Lisa Rinzler, is juxtaposed with the live images in ways that alter perception slightly but intriguingly.


A Time to Search for Fall's Treasures
For many gardeners, late July and early August are the time for nursery hunting.
Heat, and prolonged drought in much of the Northeast, bring a lull in the garden.
Fall looms ahead, with the cool nights and soft rains that make it the best time to plant new perennials.
Plants will have a few months to establish vigorous root systems to get them through winter, ready to flourish next spring.
Nursery hunting, a rewarding sport, is a game that falls into three rough categories.
There are the purely local nurseries, often very good.
Treasures are more likely to be found in those nurseries with national reputations, which put out lists or catalogues but do not sell by mail order.
Excellent examples of such nurseries are Hillside in Norfolk, Conn., Weston in Hopkinton, Mass., and Wells-Medina outside Seattle.


Icahn Has a Truce but a Long March Lies Ahead
Carl C. Icahn's troubles are far from over.
The agreement he reached with T.W.A.'s creditors on Tuesday goes a long way toward putting the ailing carrier on solid financial footing, possibly even giving it more of a shine as a takeover candidate, industry analysts and consultants say.
But, they add, for Mr.
Icahn true peace of mind is still a far-off dream.
Clearly, the agreement provides Mr.
Icahn with the rare opportunity to fix a problem of his own making: the crushing debt load he piled on T.W.A. in 1988 to take it private.
If approved, the agreement will shore up the balance sheet, sharply reduce interest costs and shave the amount of time the company would ultimately have to spend in bankruptcy court renegotiating its contracts.


Accounts By STUART ELLIOTT
*
NBO Stores Inc., a chain of men's clothing shops in New York and Washington, to Deutsch Inc., New York.
The agency said billings were about $7.5 million on the account, which was previously handled in house.
A new campaign is planned for early fall.
Federated Enterprises International, New York, a new computer on-line services software company, to Ahern &amp; Heussner Advertising, New York, for its $4 million consumer-advertising account.
The agency said AC&amp;R Advertising Inc., Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster and Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, all of New York, were the other finalists in the company's review.


CRITICISM LEVELED AT MEDICARE PLAN
An independent Federal advisory committee said today that a new Medicare fee schedule would substantially cut payments to doctors and could make it harder for elderly people to gain access to health care.
In a report to Congress, the 13-member panel, the Physician Payment Review Commission, sharply criticized details of the nationwide fee schedule that the Bush Administration plans to put into effect in January of next year.


Riley Is Sanguine About Ewing
Pat Riley is aware of all the trade talk surrounding Patrick Ewing, but he said yesterday that he expected to open his first season as the Knicks' coach with Ewing as his starting center.
"I believe Patrick Ewing will be a formidable asset for the Knicks," Riley said by telephone from Los Angeles International Airport before a flight to New York.
"I haven't spoken to Patrick since the arbitration award came down, but I plan to in the next several days.


Books of The Times; A Hybrid of Biography and Criticism of Brando
Brando A Life in Our Times By Richard Schickel Illustrated. 218 pages.
Atheneum. $21.95.


U.S. Has to Back Human Rights in Peru
To the Editor:
Your July 14 Week in Review article "10 Die a Day, or Disappear, and Peru Goes Numb" evokes the tragedy of innocents caught in the crossfire between two brutal adversaries -- the Shining Path guerrillas and Peruvian security forces.
You quote the father of Carlos Rodriguez, a slain medical student, on the bitter reality: "There is no difference between the police and the Shining Path when both are the ones who kill us."


Seven Are Killed in Amtrak Crash in South Carolina


New Campaigns
*
A series of subway and taxi billboards are giving new meaning to the idea of a wild ride.
The New York Zoological Society has introduced a campaign that includes posters of a rhinoceros bursting through a subway map, a shark smacking against a subway window and a giraffe's head popping through the roof of a taxi.
The ads, which bear the tag line "Where imaginations run wild," were created by Geer, DuBois, New York, to promote visits to the New York Aquarium and the Bronx Zoo.


LaFontaine to Islanders: No New Owner, No Pact
Pat LaFontaine, the high-scoring center for the Islanders, will not play for the team again unless there is a change in ownership, his agent, Don Meehan, said yesterday.
"Both Pat and I have made that statement publicly on several occasions," Meehan said from his office in Toronto.
"Most recently, I reminded Bill Torrey, the Islanders' general manager, about two weeks ago in Toronto. He told me that Salomon Brothers Inc., the investment firm, is engaged in the ongoing process of the sale. Beyond that, I have no information about the sale."


Judge Postpones Rape Trial of Kennedy Nephew
The judge in the rape case of William K. Smith today postponed the start of the trial.
She also said she would rule soon on defense requests that she prohibit televising the trial and limit the public disclosure of court documents.
The judge, Mary E. Lupo, did not set a new date for the trial, saying that could be determined later in consultation with both sides.
But the defense had sought a 90-day delay, arguing that the trial could not start Monday as scheduled because Mr.
Smith's legal team had not had sufficient time to prepare his defense or to investigate new allegations that surfaced against him last week.


Senate Votes to Deploy 'Star Wars'
The Senate voted tonight to begin deploying an anti-missile defense system by 1996, rejecting an amendment to restrict the "Star Wars" program to research and development.
By a 60 to 39 vote, the Senate approved a single anti-missile site near Grand Forks, N.D., that would use up to 100 missiles to defend against a limited missile attack fired by a rogue Soviet commander or by a hostile country with newly acquired nuclear weapons.


Designs of Nature, by the Potato Man
THEY assembled on a misty morning at Sapore di Mare, an Italian restaurant in this Hamptons village, to "create an original centerpiece" under the auspices of Gerd Verschoor, collagist extraordinaire.
Among the first to arrive were Ellen Malaboff, who said she was in the floral-arrangement business ("I do centerpieces in Oyster Bay, but these days people want something different") and Idee Schoenheimer, an antique jewelry dealer in Manhattan ("I don't feel so guilty about being out here if I think I'm going to school").


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Seles Defeats Shriver  Off-court commotion aside, Monica Seles says she is playing good tennis.
Seles, who skipped Wimbledon because of a leg injury, said she now feels fine, then defeated Pam Shriver, 6-2, 6-2, in a second-round match yesterday in the Mazda Classic in Carlsbad, Calif.


Harrelson Intervenes On Coleman-Cubbage
Manager Bud Harrelson, in an effort to end a personal dispute between center fielder Vince Coleman and third- base coach Mike Cubbage as well as short-circuit what he contended were overheated reports of the affair, today reversed his approach and held a closed meeting with the principals.
"Your articles changed my mind," Harrelson told reporters after he met with Coleman and Cubbage for 15 minutes before tonight's game against the Dodgers.


Next Reports Revenue Rise
Next Computer Inc., reporting its financial performance for the first time, said today that it had recorded revenues of $46 million for the second quarter of this year, an increase of 86 percent from the first quarter.
Next, based in Redwood City, Calif., is a private company that was started by Steven P. Jobs, the former chairman of Apple Computer Inc.
The company said it was doing well enough to decide to publicize its revenues, in hopes of convincing potential customers that it is a company with good long-term prospects.


Russell Carpenter, 89, Zoologist and Professor
Russell LeGrand Carpenter, a zoologist and professor emeritus at Tufts University in Medford, Mass., died Sunday at Sweetbrook Nursing Home in Williamstown, Mass.
He was 89 years old and lived in Williamstown.
He died of respiratory failure, said his daughter, Cynthia.


Dingell's Sweeping Claims About Citicorp's Solvency
In a sweeping accusation that was quickly repudiated by a top banking regulator, Representative John D. Dingell asserted yesterday that Citicorp was "technically insolvent" and "struggling to survive."
The claims by Representative Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, were made at a hearing of the House Energy and Commerce Committee's Subcommittee on Telecommunication and Finance about granting banks authority to enter new businesses.


Upper West Side Journal; A Muslim Leader Visits, And a Hotel Is Reeling
In a city of immigrants, the Senegalese say they have found their niche.
They drive cabs, vend goods, work in offices.
What they have not found is a community; their few thousands are scattered throughout New York City.


Books of The Times; A Hybrid of Biography and Criticism of Brando
Brando A Life in Our Times By Richard Schickel Illustrated. 218 pages.
Atheneum. $21.95.
Don't be put off by the "Dear Marlon Brando" with which Richard Schickel starts his deeply engaging cinematic study, "Brando: A Life in Our Times."


Yale Study Reports Clean Needle Project Helps Check AIDS
A program here to give intravenous drug users new needles for old ones is helping to curb the spread of the AIDS virus, a new study says.
The study, released today by Yale University researchers and the New Haven Health Department, estimates that the eight-month-old needle-exchange program has reduced new infections with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, by 33 percent among participants.
The sharing of contaminated needles is the major way that the virus is transmitted in New Haven, New York City and other urban areas.


Joseph Insalaco Sr., 80, Construction Executive
Joseph Insalaco Sr., a builder who took part in the construction of more than 1,500 high-rise buildings, including the World Trade Center, Co-op City and the Pan Am Building, died on Tuesday at North Shore Hospital in Great Neck, L.I.
He was 80 years old and lived in East Meadow, L.I.
He died of complications of prostate cancer, said his son Anthony.


Talking Deals; At Time Warner, Surprised Board
AS soon the news of Time Warner Inc.'s rights offering was made public in early June, investors reacted vehemently, sending the stock down $21.25 a share, to $95.75, within a week.
The company's directors did not know what hit them.
Several people close to the situation said the board had little idea the response would be so negative.
The board, which includes executives who have headed corporations like I.B.M., Xerox, Macy and Borg-Warner, also did not foresee that the opposition would last so long or that there would be such serious objections from the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Topics of The Times; Season's Cheatings
In a sonnet to his coy mistress, Andrew Marvell spoke of "time's winged chariot." His admonition has been taken to heart by the World Wildlife Fund, whose Christmas gift catalogue reached a startled friend in Connecticut last week.
Those impatient for seasonal change thus can place their orders now for a "Peace on Earth" sweatshirt, a Tropical Fish Napkin Holder and Snow Animal Tree Ornaments.
And with matching zeal, a book club catalogue arriving the same day offered an Original Peter Rabbit Calendar for 1992.
These are hardly the only assaults on the seasonal fitness of things.
Seed catalogues now arrive in December.
Brochures touting August holidays turn up in January.
And subscription renewal forms for magazines come to readers six months in advance -- with the result that absent-minded householders wind up subscribing twice.
Older Americans remember when the Christmas shopping season began after Thanksgiving.


People
*
BBDO New York has named five executive vice presidents: Dennis Berger, senior creative director; Andrew Donchak, senior account director; Lee Garfinkel, senior creative director; Art Mellor, senior creative director, and Al Merrin, senior creative director. *
Hans Burgers has been named to the newly created post of executive vice president for international business development at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York.
He had previously been managing director at Saatchi International Germany.


Creditors Issue Plan to Reorganize Drexel and Pay Claims
The leading creditors of the Drexel Burnham Lambert Group issued a plan of reorganization yesterday setting out details of how claims against the bankrupt firm will be paid and how Drexel, one day, will emerge from bankruptcy.
The plan is a working draft and subject to formal approval by the creditor groups whose lawyers wrote it.
The plan will be filed in Federal courts in New York in a week; a hearing on the issues outlined in the plan is scheduled for Aug. 9.


The Clever Ukrainians
President Bush's decision to visit the Ukraine to day rather than the secessionist Baltics -- might be called opportunistic, if not cynical and cowardly.
Clearly, he did not want to offend his host.
Mikhail S. Gorbachev still claims to be president of the Lithuanians, Latvians and Estonians.
Yet it was the right decision, even if Mr.
Bush's advisers perhaps do not appreciate the reasons.
Indeed, one phrase in the President's opening remarks in Moscow suggests that he does not fully grasp the nature of the Soviet crisis: "May God bless the Soviet people -- the sovereign people of the Soviet Union."


Noted Scientist And Staff Leave Rockefeller U.
Dr.
Anthony Cerami, a leading scientist at Rockefeller University and a prominent opponent of Dr.
David Baltimore's appointment as president of the institution on the Upper East Side, is leaving the university along with his entire 30-member research team, it was announced yesterday.
Dr.
Cerami, an internationally known medical biochemist whose research specialties include age-related illnesses and infectious diseases, will take his team to a newly established biomedical institution, the Picower Institute for Medical Research, in Manhasset, L.I.
He is a former dean of graduate studies at Rockefeller and will be the Picower Institute's first president.


Berlin Braces for the Other Kind of Football


Penalty Is Set for Shearson
The New York Stock Exchange said yesterday that it had approved a settlement with Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. under which Shearson would be fined $750,000 and censured for sales violations by several brokers in its branch office in Manhattan.
Without admitting or denying guilt, Shearson, a unit of the American Express Company, consented to reviewing and modifying certain procedures under the supervision of its board's audit committee by mid-December and reporting back to the Big Board.


Hearst Didn't Send Cable to Remington
To the Editor:
American journalism is so steeped in folklore and mythology that it is often nearly impossible to separate fact from fiction.
Sylvia Orans (letter, July 9) repeats the persistent fable about William Randolph Hearst's purported cable to the artist Frederic Remington, whom he had sent to Cuba to provide illustrations of the United States war with Spain -- "You furnish the pictures and I'll furnish the war."


Laughing at Big Government, and Crying, Too
P.
J.
O'Rourke, dressed in a blue-striped shirt and chinos, was standing in the driveway of the imposing, wood-paneled 18th-century house he recently bought here.
The writer, surrounded by all that rural peace and elegance, had more the look of a country squire than of a humorist, particularly a humorist whose main effort lately has been to lampoon a zany, uselessly busy, mentally cluttered world as far from the green hills of New Hampshire as it is possible to be.
But Mr.
O'Rourke, when he is not supervising authentic antique renovations, is certainly a humorist.
Moreover, he can afford the renovations because he is reveling in best-sellerdom.
His latest book, not very subtly entitled "A Parliament of Whores," can only be described as a funnily savage attack on the political authorities of the United States, a book that talks about how Government has inured Americans to "vapor trails of zeroes," meaning huge sums of money spent counterproductively, and that has chapter titles like "The Dictatorship of Boredom" and "Would You Kill Your Mother to Pave I-95?"


A Pier on the East River Now Welcomes Visitors
THE 107th Street Pier on the East River is a public plaza once again, after four years of renovation.
And people can walk the promenade at night, since the canopy is now lighted.
Joseph Sultan designed the renovation with Giorgio Cavaglieri.
To bring light to the upper deck, the architects cut three rectangular openings in the steel and concrete roof and added electrical wiring.
Their design won a historic preservation award from the New York State American Institute of Architects.


Education Chief: at Eye of Diversity Storm
When he tries to explain what is wrong with New York State's social studies curriculum, Education Commissioner Thomas Sobol often uses the example of Christopher Columbus.
Teaching that Columbus "discovered" America, he says, ignores the Indians who were already here.
But the state syllabus has for many years been blending the story of Columbus with Indian history.
Textbooks used by the very Scarsdale schools that Mr.
Sobol headed before becoming Commissioner in 1988 spend a chapter on Indian civilizations before turning to Columbus, who gets 13 paragraphs.


DNA Frees Convicted Rapist After 9 Years
Charles Dabbs was convicted in 1984 of raping a distant cousin two years earlier in a darkened alley -- the outcome of a trial that basically pitted his word against hers for lack of any conclusive scientific evidence.
Since then, he has maintained he was innocent from the cell where he is imprisoned here in Dutchess County.


Review/Theater; 5 Musical 'Short Shots'
The nurturing of aspiring musical theater talent is a laudable goal, but it requires a lot more care than has been brought to "Short Shots," an execrable program of five one-act musicals at the Improvisation.
The authors and composers of the five shows are all members of the B.M.I.
Musical Theater division.
The offerings range from Reena Heenan's clunkingly didactic antiwar musical, "Joinin' of the Colors," about the violence in Northern Ireland, to "Norman," a witless musical comedy sketch by Frank Jump and Lynn Portas built around the punch line, "I'm a lesbian trapped in a man's body."


Books of The Times; A Hybrid of Biography and Criticism of Brando
Brando A Life in Our Times By Richard Schickel Illustrated. 218 pages.
Atheneum. $21.95.


Workers on Strike Deserve Job Protection; Rights and Actions
To the Editor:
Prof.
David Westfall (Op-Ed, July 16) claims that his defense of permanent replacements of strikers is premised on a desire to protect worker freedom of choice.
The realities suggest otherwise.


Education Chief: at Eye of Diversity Storm
When he tries to explain what is wrong with New York State's social studies curriculum, Education Commissioner Thomas Sobol often uses the example of Christopher Columbus.
Teaching that Columbus "discovered" America, he says, ignores the Indians who were already here.
But the state syllabus has for many years been blending the story of Columbus with Indian history.
Textbooks used by the very Scarsdale schools that Mr.
Sobol headed before becoming Commissioner in 1988 spend a chapter on Indian civilizations before turning to Columbus, who gets 13 paragraphs.


Fore! Nicklaus Beware of Teen-Ager
While Jack Nicklaus was adding another laurel to the greatest career in golf with his victory at the United States Senior Open last weekend, the most precocious golfer in the modern history of the game gained his greatest victory.
At the age of 15 years 7 months, Eldrick (Tiger) Woods became the youngest winner in the 44-year history of the United States Junior Amateur championship on Sunday, sweeping through six match-play victories at the Bay Hill Club in Orlando, Fla.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball AMERICAN LEAGUE
Cleveland Indians -- Placed Rudy Seanez, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.


Review/Film; A Visit With a Suicide on His Last Night
To watch "Weininger's Last Night" is to enter the title character's suicidal, self-hating mind.
This mental dream-theater is not a pleasant place to be, but for half of the film it is an artistically arresting one.
Otto Weininger was a homosexual Jewish philosopher who hated women, Jews and his own homosexuality.
In Vienna in 1903, shortly after converting to Christianity, he killed himself at the age of 23 in the room where Beethoven died.
On screen, the pressures of his life converge into a swirl of memory and imagination in a fluid performance-art manner that finally collapses under the weight of its own symbolism.
Weininger is played by Paulus Manker, who also wrote and directed the work, which opened yesterday at Film Forum.
It is his version of the play "Weininger's Last Night: The Soul of a Jew," by Joshua Sobol (the author of "Ghetto," the controversial musical about the Holocaust).
The film begins with a gunshot, and as the camera crouches to look out through a keyhole, the door is opened.
Weininger walks in, a meek-looking, bespectacled young man with a mustache.
This room becomes the landscape of Weininger's distraught mind, where figures from his past and from his imagination arrive to torment him.


Confession Tape On Bronx Blaze Is Heard by Jury
The jury in the Happy Land mass-murder trial got the crux of the prosecution's case yesterday -- the matter-of-fact confession of Julio Gonzalez.
Watching a 66-minute videotape on a television monitor in State Supreme Court in the Bronx, jurors heard Mr.
Gonzalez describe how he argued with his ex-girlfriend at the after-hours Bronx social club where she worked and how he was kicked out as a nuisance, went tobuy $1 worth of gasoline and returned with two matches to start the blaze that killed 87 people trapped inside.
"I knew that I was going to do damage," Mr.
Gonzalez said at one point, "but not, not of that intensity to cause the tragedy that occurred."  Lawyers' Plans for Defense
He said he had lost his mind, did not know what he was doing, repeatedly cried and was told by others that he was crazy.
Both comments, made before he had legal representation, conform with his lawyers' announced plans to offer an insanity defense.
On the videotape Mr.
Gonzalez admitted knowing the club was crowded but indicated he had not intended to hurt so many people.
Under questioning by Cindy Zamzok, an assistant district attorney, he acknowledged that Happy Land was full of patrons on the night of March 24, 1990, and the early-morning hours that followed.
"Yes, yes, there were many, there were many people," he said. "Yes, they were dancing."
Ms. Zamzok asked, "And you lit the fire then to the building, is that right?"
Mr.
Gonzalez answered: "I didn't think that it was going, that it was going to, to, to take inten -- inten -- a lot of intensity. I didn't think that it was going to do, uh, that."
Later Ms. Zamzok asked, "Sir, why did you set this fire?"
"I don't know," he answered.  Answers in Spanish
The sound track was not always clear because the questions were in English, the answers in Spanish, with translations both ways and frequent cross-talk.
The jury followed an English-only transcript, sometimes glancing up to the screen.
As usual, the somber-looking Mr.
Gonzalez was slumped deep into his chair, his head barely above the defense table.
He often leaned his forehead or cheek on his hands, and beneath the table one foot jiggled.
Mr.
Gonzalez, who said he still loved Lydia Feliciano, his ex-girlfriend, recalled asking her if she had a lot of suitors.
"Then she told me, yes, that she had a lot," he said.
"That was when she got angry. That was when she moved and called the doorman."
Mr.
Gonzalez's first impulse upon being kicked out of Happy Land was "to close the club" by "calling the police" because he thought it was an illegal establishment, he said.
Instead, he decided to burn it.
"There I lost my mind," he said.
After setting the fire, he walked away to wait for a bus, but turned back to see flames and smoke, fire trucks and ambulances.  'Began to Cry'
On the bus, "that's when I reflected and I began to cry," he said.
When he got home, he cried again because "I remembered again all that I had done."
Mr.
Gonzalez said he told a friend he had set a fire, and "my friend said to me, 'You are crazy.' "
Mr.
Gonzalez added that later another friend, Arturo Martinez, asked him if he had started the fire.
He denied it twice, then admitted it, he said.
On the tape, Mr.
Gonzalez recalled: "Then he said to me, he said, 'Do you know what you did? You're crazy.' Uh, 'You kill,' uh, 'Do you know how many people are dead? Eighty-seven.' Then I said to him, 'I don't know what I did.' "


Workers on Strike Deserve Job Protection; United They Stand
To the Editor:
In "Strike at Your Own Risk" (Op-Ed, July 16), David Westfall shows a profound misunderstanding of the purpose, role and tactics of labor unions.
The picture he paints is one of a benevolent employer faced with "excessive" labor demands and of a monolithic union, unconcerned with the needs of its members.
If, however, one looks at the strikes in this country of the last few years, it becomes clear that the union has represented the needs of the workers far better than the company.


Shuttle Prepares for a Morning Liftoff
Its mission postponed twice by technical problems, the space shuttle Atlantis prepared today for another attempt to carry into space a giant communications satellite designed to serve as a celestial switchboard for scientific data.
The shuttle and its crew of five astronauts were to rocket into space on Thursday on the 42nd space shuttle flight, carrying in the cargo bay a satellite that will join three others in a network used to relay information around the world.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about the new strategic arms reduction treaty misstated the Natural Resources Defense Council's estimates of the size of the superpowers' nuclear arsenals.
The Soviet Union is estimated to have 27,300 nuclear warheads (not 30,000) and the United States 19,000 (not 27,300).


Kemper Financial Picks Investments Manager
Kemper Financial Services Inc. said yesterday that James Coxon, who has 30 years of experience in the securities industry, would manage its $8 billion portfolio of stock investments in the United States.
Kemper said Mr.
Coxon would get the title of executive vice president after the next board meeting.


Dungeon Is Fate for a Chinese Who Tilted Inside the System
With his friends in high places and a record as an influential theorist of the Communist Party, one might expect Wu Jiaxiang to be at the center of power in China.
Instead, Mr.
Wu is in a cell of Qincheng Prison outside Beijing.
For two years, the 35-year-old Mr.
Wu has languished there without being charged with any crime.
The Government has apparently been afraid to release him or sentence him.
His Kafkaesque fate is an indication of how quickly a high-flying career in China can change trajectories and plunge into disgrace.


Albany Bond Issue At $191.3 Million
A $191.3 million issue of New York State general obligation bonds was offered yesterday through underwriters led by Chemical Securities, a unit of the Chemical Banking Corporation.


Joseph D. Lewis, Musical Director, 69
Joseph D. Lewis, an archivist and concert librarian for the Rodgers &amp; Hammerstein Organization since 1980 and a musical director, died on Sunday on his way to the hospital.
He was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack, said Bert Fink, the organization's director of special projects and public relations.


Judge Orders Review of Enforcing U.S. Rules on Water Use in West
A Federal district judge has ordered an environmental review of crucial rules set up to enforce limits on how many acres farmers in the West can irrigate with subsidized Federal water.
The Bureau of Reclamation must study the possible effect of rules and regulations it enacted in 1987 to put the 1982 Reclamation Reform Act into effect, the judge, Lawrence K. Karlton, ruled in a decision signed on Friday.


Dollar Posts Broad Decline On Concern Over Recovery
The dollar fell broadly in light trading yesterday after two economic reports failed to ease worries about the durability of the United States recovery.
The dollar, after falling in overseas trading, continued to slide when the Government's main economic barometer, the index of leading indicators, showed a less-than-expected rise of five-tenths of 1 percent in June.
It was the fifth straight increase for the index, but only 5 of the 11 forward-looking elements advanced.


New York City Tax Notes Are Offered at 4.85% Yield
New York City's $1 billion issue of tax anticipation notes due on Feb. 3, 1992, was offered to investors yesterday with a yield of 4.85 percent, with a small amount of notes sold at 4.90 percent, securities dealers said.
The largest winners at the auction were the First Boston Corporation, which was awarded $425 million of the issue, followed by J. P. Morgan Securities with $350 million.
The remaining $225 million was divided among Lehman Brothers; Smith Barney, Harris Upham, and Merrill Lynch.


BUSH AND GORBACHEV SIGN PACT TO CURTAIL NUCLEAR ARSENALS; JOIN IN CALL FOR MIDEAST TALKS
President Bush and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union signed a far-reaching treaty today that is designed to scale down their nations' stocks of long-range nuclear weapons, then joined in a bold bid to stage a comparably momentous Middle East peace conference in October.
The two leaders inscribed their names on the 700-page arms reduction treaty at a solemn 30-minute ceremony in St.
Vladimir's Hall in the Kremlin.
The treaty still needs approval by the legislative branches in both countries, but with the signing, after nine years of negotiation, Mr.
Bush said, "We reverse a half-century of steadily growing strategic arsenals."


New York School Attendance Rises, and So Does State Aid
Attendance in New York City's schools climbed significantly last year, reaching its highest level in 24 years, school officials said yesterday.
While the tallies do not yet include figures for June, the improvement will mean an increase of roughly $20 million in that portion of state aid based on attendance.
School officials said that the city had already factored the $20 million increase into the budget for the fiscal year that began July 1.


NBC and PBS to Pool Convention Coverage
NBC News and the Public Broadcasting Service plan joint television coverage of the 1992 political conventions.
The move, which was announced yesterday, is an effort to expand the coverage that each organization had originally scheduled and that had been limited by what one NBC News executive called the "changed realities of broadcasting economics."


Pop in Review
Lester Bowie
Sweet Basil
It's sometimes frightening to see how an environment can humble a musical performance.
At a recent show in Italy, in a gorgeously dilapidated church, Lester Bowie and his band Brass Fantasy put on a kitsch-laden show that expanded to fill the site, spilling wave after wave of riffs.
Mr.
Bowie, who can read a melody better than almost anybody in jazz, let silence burst through his phrases, and his sputtering tone, squeezed out of his trumpet, cajoled the audience, explaining to them that nothing was sacred.


Patrick, 2 Others Out of Cup Play
Three players, including James Patrick and Glenn Anderson, members of the 1987 Team Canada squad, will not be playing in the 1991 Canada Cup.
Patrick, a New York Rangers defenseman, isn't able to join the Canadian club because of an injury.
Both Anderson, an Edmonton Oilers right wing, and Doug Wilson of the Chicago Blackhawks, have decided against playing for personal reasons.
Training camp opens here on Saturday.


Surviving Vacation (It's a Family Battle)
IT'S August, and Americans are on the move.
In airplanes, rowboats, hiking boots, vans and riding saddles, we the people are pursuing that annual contradiction in terms, the family vacation.
Never mind that last year the children almost strangled one another in the back seat of the car.
Or that they found the souvenir shop much more fascinating than the views at the Grand Canyon.
Or that the best they could ever say was, "When are we going home?"


Hope for South Africa
JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH, president of the International Olympic Committee, said yesterday he was sure that a South African team would take part in the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.
He told a meeting of the executive committee of the Pan American Sports Organization in Havana that to achieve this objective South Africa needed to completely eliminate racial discrimination from individual sports federations.
"They must go sport by sport," he said.


Doctors Urged to Be Frank on Breast Implant Risk
The head of the Food and Drug Administration said today that many women had been lulled into believing that breast implant surgery was risk-free, and he urged doctors to inform them of the risks involved.
The agency head, Dr.
David Kessler, said he would not "prejudge the results" of a review the F.D.A. is conducting of data submitted by implant manufacturers.


Who Lives There, Anyway? Faces Behind the Walls: Upper West Side; Beaux-Arts Full Blown, With Balustrade
DEBORAH TURBEVILLE, the magazine photographer, occupies a choice corner of the Ansonia, the massive Beaux-Arts building on Broadway between 73d and 74th Streets.
Her one-bedroom apartment is inside the south round tower, on the 13th floor, the only high floor that is ringed by a stone neo-classical balustrade.
She moved there 10 years ago, partly because of the quirky views, which follow Broadway's diagonal slash downtown.
People who visit, she said, "always say they wondered what it was like to live up here."


B.C.C.I.'s Flashy Man in Argentina
"After I understood the country, the people and the culture," Ghaith R. Pharaon once said after arriving in Argentina in 1981, "I realized that the future was right here, and I decided to stay."
For a while, it seemed his perfect homeland.
The Saudi-born, Harvard-educated financier arrived with an impressive bankroll backed by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which, American investigors say, used him as one of its leading front men in a host of acquisitions.


Long Released From Hospital
Pittsburgh Steelers guard Terry Long, who acknowledged that he attempted suicide after failing the National Football League's steroids test, was released yesterday from Allegheny General Hospital in Pittsburgh, officials said.
Long told police on July 24 in the Pittsburgh suburb of Franklin Park he tried to commit suicide because he thought his career was over after the positive test.
His statement to police said he tried to kill himself by swallowing "two or three sleeping pills," contradicting earlier reports he had taken rat poison.
Long checked into the psychiatric ward at Allegheny General on the same day for a mental health evaluation.


Home Video
For Super Film Clarity
What's the outlook for the laser disk?
Recent industry reports indicate that while the format is growing in popularity, it continues to hold a relatively small share of the home-video market.


Bridge
Form prevailed here on Tuesday at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals: The eight top-seeded teams survived second-round play in both the Spingold Knockout Teams and the Women's Knockout Teams.
This would suggest that the seeding procedure was accurate, but there has been some controversy in that area.
The field includes a number of foreign stars who get no credit in the seeding, which is based on performance in North America.
One effect of this is to put a group that includes Tony Forrester and Andy Robson of England, perhaps the best pair in Europe, in 13th position.
Another group that includes Jaggy Shivdasani and Santana Ghose of India, perhaps the best pair in the Middle East zone, is in the 21st position, and a third that features Ron Klinger, one of the best Australian players, is in the 45th position.


Stocks Manage a Small Gain; Dow Up 8.50
The stock market posted a small gain yesterday, as worries about the pace of an economic recovery returned to the market after a strong rise in the previous session.
Analysts said that the market, which was down most of the morning, after an initial gain in the opening hour, was affected by a Commerce Department report that the index of leading indicators rose only five-tenths of a percent in June, a smaller gain than had generally been expected.


Networks Are Putting the Pressure on Pressure Groups
FOR the first time, the three leading television networks are taking a stand against pressure groups that demand that advertisers withdraw commercials from controversial programming.
In a letter scheduled to begin going out on Monday, the Network Television Association, a trade group, urges marketers and their advertising agencies "not to be intimidated" by such groups, which it calls representative of "vocal minorities with agendas inconsistent with the views of most Americans."


Karl Marx Hof
To The Home Section:
Readers of The New York Times may be interested to know that the McCarren Park Pool bathhouse in the Greenpoint section of Brooklyn was inspired by the Karl Marx Hof housing project in Vienna  [ "History and a Name in a Vienna Project," July 11 ] .


Education Chief: at Eye of Diversity Storm
When he tries to explain what is wrong with New York State's social studies curriculum, Education Commissioner Thomas Sobol often uses the example of Christopher Columbus.
Teaching that Columbus "discovered" America, he says, ignores the Indians who were already here.
But the state syllabus has for many years been blending the story of Columbus with Indian history.
Textbooks used by the very Scarsdale schools that Mr.
Sobol headed before becoming Commissioner in 1988 spend a chapter on Indian civilizations before turning to Columbus, who gets 13 paragraphs.


Trial Postponed
A judge in Covington, Ky., yesterday postponed until this fall the trial of Cincinnati Bengals wide receiver REGGIE REMBERT, who is charged with drunken driving and other traffic violations.
A bench trial had been scheduled for yesterday, but Kenton County District Judge JAMES GODSEY approved Rembert's request for a jury trial and scheduled it for Oct. 31.


Sports of The Times; Ray Felix Is Not Forgotten
BEFORE you can enter Harlem One, once a grade school and now a shelter for homeless men on 155th Street and Eighth Avenue, you must pass through a metal detector.
No guns or knives allowed inside.
And before you enter, you certainly have to notice the signs posted on the yellow walls: "Don't Even Think Of Doing Drugs Here!" "Drug Dealers Will Be Arrested."
And at the sign-in desk there is a black-and-white Xeroxed picture of Patrick Ewing, and below it the inscription: "Patrick Ewing says, Score High Points Out of Life . . . Keep your Meal Ticket Updated."


INSIDE
Medicare Fee Plan Faulted
A Federal advisory panel said the Administration's revision of Medicare fees could make it harder for the aged to get health care.
Page A17.
Smith Rape Trial Delayed


Gray Reported Stable
JEFF GRAY, the Boston Red Sox relief pitcher who has appeared in an American League-leading 50 games this season, was reported in stable condition yesterday after collapsing in the clubhouse before Tuesday afternoon's game.
"Our first concern was that he had suffered a stroke, but that now appears doubtful," Dr.
ARTHUR PAPPAS, the team physician, said.
"We're optimistic this is a spasm and not a stroke."


American General Notes Bring 8.15%
The American General Finance Company's $100 million of 8.10 percent four-year notes, due Aug. 15, 1995, have been priced by the lead underwriter Merrill Lynch &amp; Company at 99.827, to yield about 8.15 percent.
That is about 72 basis points above Treasury notes with a similar maturity date.
The issue, which is non-callable, has received a rating of A-1 by Moody's and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Alabama's new international airport, created on Tuesday by the state Legislature, said it might issue $1.6 billion in revenue bonds.
The state's debt now is rated Aa by Moody's Investor's Service Inc. for general obligations.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
A.
L.
Laboratories Inc., Fort Lee, N.J., a pharmaceuticals manufacturer, said it had established the office of the chief executive, composed of E. W. Sissener, chairman; I. Roy Cohen, vice chairman and former president and chief executive, and Jeffrey E. Smith, its new executive vice president. *
Clark-Hurth Components Co., South Bend, Ind., a manufacturer of axles and transmissions and a subsidiary of Clark Equipment Co., named John J. Reynolds president.
He succeeds Harold Bowman, who is retiring.


Twins' 8-Run Second Has Yanks Seeing Double
Anyone hear about what happened between the Twins and Yankees at Yankee Stadium last night?
Those who reside in the Bronx know because they probably heard the crush of bat hitting ball.
Again and again.
Let's see, the Twins had as many hits in one inning than the Yankees had in the game.
Scott Sanderson gave up three home runs in that second inning and was showered and shaved long before the seventh inning stretch.
Minnesota finished with four homers and 20 hits.
Getting the picture?


Judge Postpones Rape Trial of Kennedy Nephew
The judge in the rape case of William K. Smith today postponed the start of the trial.
She also said she would rule soon on defense requests that she prohibit televising the trial and limit the public disclosure of court documents.
The judge, Mary E. Lupo, did not set a new date for the trial, saying that could be determined later in consultation with both sides.
But the defense had sought a 90-day delay, arguing that the trial could not start Monday as scheduled because Mr.
Smith's legal team had not had sufficient time to prepare his defense or to investigate new allegations that surfaced against him last week.


U.S. Negotiating New Security Pacts in Gulf
As the Bush Administration consults with its allies about future military action against Iraq, American officials say they are nearing completion of new long-term security alliances with governments in the Persian Gulf.
Although Arab allies have expressed reservations about renewed bombing of Iraq's nuclear plants, the talks on future security arrangements have steadily advanced.


Ukrainians Await Bush With Skepticism
On the eve of his first venture into the heated world of Soviet politics in the provinces, President Bush was denounced today by the Ukraine's leading independence movement as having been "hypnotized by Gorbachev" at the summit meeting.
The Ukrainian popular movement known as Rukh, the umbrella group for more than a dozen of the republic's opposition parties, offered Mr.
Bush an advance sample of the sharp-edged politics that await him in this rich, sprawling republic, which the President will visit on Thursday on his way home from Moscow.


Israel Noncommittal for Now on Peace Talks
Israel adopted a noncommittal position this evening in response to President Bush's announcement in Moscow that Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d would return here on Thursday to seek Israeli assent to the American proposal for a regional peace conference in October.
Palestinian leaders took an equally cautious stance.
The reaction underlined the continuing differences over the composition of the Palestinian delegation, which is to take part with Jordan's representatives.
Israel demands that it exclude members of the Palestine Liberation Organization or residents of East Jerusalem.
The Palestinian leadership insists that both must be represented.  'Chutzpah'
In an evident attempt to downgrade a meeting that Mr.
Bush appeared to present as the prelude to an October conference, the Government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir issued no official statement on the Baker visit, his sixth since the Persian Gulf war.


Who Lives There, Anyway? Faces Behind the Walls: Flatlands; A Tidy Farmhouse Grows in Brooklyn
PAINFULLY early one morning a few years ago, a pack of tourists knocked at the door of Anthony and Maryann Cucchiara's 18th-century Dutch farmhouse in the Flatlands section of Brooklyn.
Not expecting a crowd, Mrs.
Cucchiara answered the door dressed in a flannel nightgown.
"They were a group of senior citizens who thought this was a museum," she said.
"And they were delighted to see that I'd dressed in period costume."


Europeans Try to Ease Croatia Crisis
Having helped negotiate a cease-fire in Slovenia this month, the European Community now hopes to bring an end to the fighting in Croatia without having to assume the risks of sending a peacekeeping mission into Yugoslavia.
While recognizing that a peace force might eventually become necessary, European officials said much depends on how the Yugoslav parties respond to the community's latest offer to expand its truce-monitoring role beyond Slovenia once a cease-fire has been agreed on in Croatia.


CHRONICLE
IVAN F. BOESKY, the Wall Street speculator, has been accused by his estranged wife of defaulting on promissory notes worth more than $2.3 million.
The Associated Press reported yesterday that SEEMA BOESKY filed a foreclosure action in Hawaii state court on July 19, seeking possession of Mr.
Boesky's Yacht Harbor Towers condominium in Honolulu.
It asserts that he failed to meet interest payments on two loans: a $2 million note made in April 1987, and a $320,518 note issued in August 1988.


Inquiry Finds Illegal Surveillance of Workers in Nuclear Plants
The Energy Department's inspector general has found that security personnel at the nation's nuclear weapons plants illegally acquired and used equipment for wiretapping, eavesdropping and other surveillance in violation of department regulations and Federal law.
The inspector general's findings about surveillance of employees, including some who had publicly complained of serious safety problems at the Hanford nuclear reservation in Richland, Wash., directly contradicts assertions by Hanford's security directors, in public and in legal depositions, that the plant had no such surveillance equipment.


Reporter's Notebook; NBC Creates a Series In a Standard Format But With a Deaf Star
When Marlee Matlin arrived at the hotel where NBC was holding interview sessions over the weekend for stars of its new series, she sat on a stage between Mark Harmon, her co-star on "Reasonable Doubts," and the producer of the series, Bob Singer.
The two men wore microphones.
Ms.
Matlin handed hers to her interpreter, Jack Jason.
He sat a few feet away, below the stage, facing her.
He translated the questions into sign language for her as they were asked, then translated her answers.


China's Films: More Propaganda, Less Art
Any good Communists attending the recent premiere of China's grandest propaganda film, "Decisive Battles," had to have been disappointed with the audience reaction.
The scene was from China's Civil War, and a vast army of the enemy Nationalist Chinese forces filled the screen and were marching on the heroic Communist soldiers.
At the most suspenseful moment, when it seemed the Communists were going to be annihilated, there was a burst of applause in the cinema.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day on Monday with the Market Place column about Tiffany &amp; Company misstated the percentage of his Tiffany stock sold by Thomas A. Andruskevich, a senior vice president, from April 1 to June 21.
The 19,500 shares he sold represented 13.7 percent of his stake, not 54 percent.


Columbia Gas Enters Bankruptcy
The Columbia Gas System Inc., one of the largest natural gas companies in the United States, filed for bankruptcy yesterday, citing old contracts that commit it to buy gas at prices of up to five times the current market price.
The company said five weeks ago that it would have to renegotiate the contracts by October or face bankruptcy, but after that announcement its $1.3 billion in credit lines dried up.
With summer a time of low revenues and high construction spending for the natural gas industry, the bankruptcy came faster than anticipated, said John H. Croom, the chairman and chief executive.


Sports of The Times; Ray Felix Is Not Forgotten
BEFORE you can enter Harlem One, once a grade school and now a shelter for homeless men on 155th Street and Eighth Avenue, you must pass through a metal detector.
No guns or knives allowed inside.
And before you enter, you certainly have to notice the signs posted on the yellow walls: "Don't Even Think Of Doing Drugs Here!" "Drug Dealers Will Be Arrested."
And at the sign-in desk there is a black-and-white Xeroxed picture of Patrick Ewing, and below it the inscription: "Patrick Ewing says, Score High Points Out of Life . . . Keep your Meal Ticket Updated."


Jon Tuttle, TV Producer, 49
Jon Tuttle, a television reporter, commentator and documentary producer in Portland, Ore.,, died Sunday at Emanuel Hospital there.
He was 49 years old and died of complications from leukemia, The Associated Press reported.


Who Lives There, Anyway? Faces Behind the Walls: Astoria; Tara in Queens, Built in 1832
NINE years ago, Jaime Vallejo and Larry Supon bought a nearly ruined Greek Revival house on a third of an acre in Astoria, Queens, on 12th Street near 26th Avenue.
Built in 1832, the 17-room house belonged, for most of the 19th century, to a physician named E. L. B. Baylies and his offspring.
A tunnel once connected the house to the East River, so that the owners could return home from the Manhattan ferry without being exposed to foul weather.


Try This: Raise Floor For New York Cup Bid
The Italian national team might be playing its first-round 1994 World Cup soccer matches at Giants Stadium, performing atop a 10-foot platform like some 11-man circus act.
Then again, Italy might be playing at Yankee Stadium, chipping corner kicks from the infield during baseball's All-Star Game break.


Bush Plan for Bank System Meets Attacks in Congress
The Bush Administration's plan to revamp the nation's banking system came under sharp attack in the House and Senate today, lending new weight to the view that some of the most controversial aspects of the Administration's proposals probably will not make it through Congress.
On one side of the Capitol, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady faced off for the first time in public with the chief Congressional antagonist of the plan, Representative John D. Dingell.


A Lot to Look At for Jets' Opener
Will it be Simms or Hostetler?
That was the question that broke the silence, broke the ice and ever so slightly broke up Bruce Coslet at training camp today.
With the first exhibition game against Philadelphia just three days away, the Jets' head coach has other things on his mind than answering the quarterback question of the Super Bowl champion Giants.
He even has a sizable quarterback quandary of his own.


U.S.-Soviet Agreement Paves Way for Wider Cooperation in the Cosmos
An agreement signed yesterday by Presidents Bush and Gorbachev is expected to open the way to wider American-Soviet cooperation in space exploration, including flights by Americans aboard the Soviet space station Mir and by Soviet astronauts on the American space shuttle.
Administration officials said timetables for the missions would be established in the next few months.
News accounts have said that as early as 1993, one or more American astronauts would spend 60 to 90 days in the Mir station for detailed physiological experiments.
In return, Soviet astronauts would fly on several shuttle missions.


Pop in Review
Lynyrd Skynyrd's homage to the past  Lester Bowie's kitsch  Horace Tapscott, legacy of the 60's.
Lynyrd Skynyrd
Beacon Theater
It was easy to distinguish old songs from new ones when Lynyrd Skynyrd 1991 performed Monday night at the Beacon Theater.
For songs from the 1970's, cornerstones of Southern rock that gave blues-rock a power-chorded guitar attack, the audience shouted along on lyrics or simply whooped and hollered.
During new ones, they resumed their conversations.


Market Place; Junk Bonds Put Icahn More at Risk at T.W.A.
A year ago, Carl C. Icahn was in an enviable position at Trans World Airlines.
He was firmly in control, but he had not a penny invested in it.
But now, as a result of an ill-timed investment in T.W.A.'s junk bonds, Mr.
Icahn has much more at risk.
And he will have to put in $35 million more to keep control.


Thomas J. Swales Jr., Ex-Mayor, 81
Thomas J. Swales Jr., a horse breeder who was a former mayor of Edison, N.J., and a former racing commissioner in New Jersey, died on Sunday at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick.
He was 81 years old and lived in Edison.
He died of a heart attack, his wife, Mary, said.


Slowing Is Reported In Pace of Job Loss
Although the New York City region lost 90,000 jobs in the first half of this year, the pace of that job loss is slowing, said Samuel M. Ehrenhalt, the regional Commissioner of the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics.
In the last half of 1990, job losses in the 23 counties in New York and northeastern New Jersey amounted to 116,000.
"We're beginning to see the first glimmer of light," Mr.
Ehrenhalt said yesterday.
He cautioned that it was "no more than a flickering candle in a long, dark tunnel," but he called it significant because it was the first such sign in two years and came as the pace of job losses at the national level was continuing to mount.


Holtzman Ends Pay Cut for Herself and Aides
Comptroller Elizabeth Holtzman, New York City's top fiscal watchdog, has quietly rescinded 5 percent pay cuts that she and seven staff members took last year in response to the city's fiscal crisis.
The action was described on Tuesday in The City Record, the city's official publication of public notices.
But Andrea Bernstein, a spokeswoman for Ms.
Holtzman, said the Comptroller had now taken a 2 percent pay cut in response to Mayor David N. Dinkins's televised address on Tuesday calling for municipal belt-tightening.


Energy Prices Rise Sharply On Report of Lower Supplies
Energy futures prices soared yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange following a report of sharply lower supplies and persistent rumors of refinery troubles.
Crude oil futures settled 5 cents to 26 cents higher, with the contract for delivery in September at $21.68 a barrel; heating oil finished 0.15 cent to 1.24 cents higher, with August at 60.20 cents a gallon; unleaded gasoline was 0.60 cent to 1.86 cents higher, with August at 68.24 cents a gallon; natural gas was 0.5 cent to 2.2 cents higher, with September at $1.260 for 1,000 cubic feet.


Calvin Hawley Oakes, Ex-Diplomat, 86
Calvin Hawley Oakes, a retired Foreign Service Officer and a former senior executive at the Central Intelligence Agency, died on July 18 at his daughter's home in East Hampton, L.I.
He was 86 years old and lived in Washington.
He died of congestive heart failure, his daughter, Sarah Lawrence Oakes, said.


Events: At Home With Designers
Inside Designers' Homes  American Society of Interior Designers, New York Metropolitan Chapter; (212) 685-3480 or (516) 283-8546.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-12
A far-reaching U.S.-Soviet treaty was signed by Presidents Bush and Gorbachev to scale down their nations' stocks of long-range nuclear weapons.
They then joined in a bid to stage a comparably momentous Middle East peace meeting.
Page A1
Excerpts from Bush-Gorbachev comments on cooperation A10
U.S.-Soviet pact paves way for cooperation in the cosmosA12
Reporter's notebook: Big moment, bad earpiece A12
Secretary Baker will go to Israel to obtain an official Israeli statement expressing its willingness to attend a peace conference in October, even though it has problems over which Palestinians attend such talks, President Bush said.
A1
Israel remains noncommittal on proposal A11
Six Lithuanian border guards were killed and two critically wounded in a predawn machine-gun attack on a customs post near the breakaway republic's border with Soviet Byelorussia, officials said.
A8
Ukrainians await Bush with skepticism A12
Croatia has drawn up a peace plan offering its Serb minority key conces- sions it had sought, including home rule, control over the local police and greater political power, Croatian officials said.
A3
Europeans try to ease Croatian crisis A3
A Persian Gulf security alliance between local governments and the United States is near completion, American officials say.
A6
$94 million in U.S. aid to Peru will be released, the Administration announced, after deciding that Peru had improved its human rights record.
The money is largely meant to combat the cultivation of narcotic coca plants.
A9
Imelda Marcos assails Manila's terms for returnA7
Dungeon is fate for a Chinese who tilted inside the system A8
Bangkok Journal: A wife-versus-mistress scandal A4  NATIONAL A13-18, B6-7
The nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court was opposed by the nation's largest civil rights group, the N.A.A.C.P., and the leaders of organized labor.
A1
A 1986 C.I.A. report on B.C.C.I. indicated that the rogue international bank had acquired control of Washington's largest banking company in 1982, the agency said.
A1
B.C.C.I.'s flashy man in Argentina D1
Spying at nuclear weapons plants has been taking place in violation of Federal law, according to an Energy Department report, which says that security personnel had illegally acquired and used equipment for wiretapping and other surveillance.
A18
A law banning female military pilots from flying combat planes was overturned by the Senate.
The measure permits but does not require the Air Force, the Navy, the Army and the Marine Corps to allow women to fly combat missions.
A1
A train derailed and crashed into a group of freight cars in South Carolina, killing eight people and injuring as many as 125, transportation officials said.
A14
A bus carrying a girl scout group overturned in Palm Springs, Calif., killing at least seven people and injuring dozens, some critically, officials said.
A14
A new medicare fee schedule would substantially cut payments to doctors and could make it harder for elderly people to gain access to health care, a Federal advisory panel said.
A17
The addition of a new heart drug to standard treatments for chronic heart failure sharply reduced death and illness from the condition, two studies have found.
B7
Safety data on an anesthetic drug was withheld from the F.D.A. by the drug company, F. Hoffman-La Roche, a consumer advocate said, citing internal company documents.
B7
Health director withdraws from misconduct cases B6
Doctors urged to be frank on breast implant risk B6
Judge orders review of rules on irrigation water A14
The William K. Smith rape case was postponed by the judge, who said she would rule soon on defense requests that she prohibit televising the trial and limit public disclosure of court documents.
A16
Shuttle prepares for morning liftoff B7 REGIONAL B1-5
A program for drug users, which gives them new needles in exchange for old ones, is helping to curb the spread of the AIDS virus, a new study says.
A1
AIDS victims who were infected through blood transfusions have the right to interrogate the donors of the contaminated blood, the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled.
B1
A rape conviction from 1984 was overturned by a New York State judge, basing his decision on recent DNA tests, which showed that semen on the victim's underpants was not the defendant's.
B1
Jury hears taped confession in Bronx club fire that killed 87 B3
The door to the Mayor's office will be open to the public next Monday, but not as open as Mayor Dinkins seemed to promise in a recent speech.
Mayoral aides will be screening those who show up.
B1
Dinkins's proposals get lukewarm response in Albany B3
Holtzman quietly rescinds pay cuts for her and some aides B3
The multicultural education debate has found a lightning rod: Thomas Sobol, the New York State Education Commissioner.
His conduct seems to have entered the debate as much as philosophical and educational issues.
B1
New York school attendance rises and so does state aid B4
Noted scientist and staff leave Rockefeller U.  B4
Two police officers deliver a baby on the Triborough Bridge B3 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 The Home Section
Seeing inside some special corners of New York C1
Surviving vacation: It's a family battle C1
Designs of nature, by the potato man C1
Parent &amp; Child: When children are apart C2
Currents C3
Home Improvement C4
Repairing a drop-leaf table C5
Where a mother can help another C8
A Gardener's World: Searching for fall's treasures C10 Arts/Entertainment
China's films turn to propaganda C15
Finding humor in big Government C15
Film: "Weininger's Last Night" C14
Music: Pop in Reviews C17
Dance: Lucinda Childs C15
Theater: Five one-act musicals C14
Word and Image: A hybrid book on Brando C19
Images of Bush and Gorbachev C20
Reporter's Notebook C15
NBC and PBS to pool coverage of political conventions C22 Obituaries D20
Pierre Brunet, champion skater
F. Brantley Scott, urologist Sports B8-15
Baseball: Twins rout Yankees B9
Darling traded to Oakland B9
Tumbling Pirates go south in Atlanta B10
Red Sox beat A's in 14th B11
Perez optimistic B11
Notebook B12
Basketball: Riley expects to have Ewing on team B11
Football: Giants sign top pick B9
Jets gear up for game B13
Column: Berkow on Ray FelixB9
Golf: The latest prodigy B15
Hockey: Ultimatum from LaFontaineB14
Pan Am Games: Cuba loses baseball star B12
Soccer: New ideas for World Cup in New York B15
SportsPeople B14 Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A20
Reduce the "renegade" risk
Pretoria's Gorbachev
Pain, limited. Bases, closed.
Topics: Season's cheatings


Editors' Note
The Our Towns column on Tuesday, about South Amboy, N.J., described the disappearance of a 5-year-old boy last May, and the air of mystery that continues to surround the case.
With quotations from interviews in the town, the column suggested that some residents suspect that the boy's mother, Michele Lodzinski, had something to do with his disappearance.


Croatia Offers Peace Plan to Serb Rebels
In an effort to avert all-out civil war, the Yugoslav republic of Croatia has drawn up a peace plan offering its Serb minority key concessions it had sought, including home rule, control over the local police and greater political power, Croatian officials said today.
But it remained unclear whether the Serb rebels, who have steadily wrested territory from the Croatian forces in recent weeks, would accept the deal.


More Names Emerge in Japanese Stock Market Scandal
In a new round of disclosures today of the extent of the discriminatory practices in the Japanese stock market, 13 brokerage houses said they had improperly covered more than $300 million in losses for some of the country's largest industrial groups and a politically powerful religious organization.
On Monday, Japan's four largest securities houses released a list of clients to whom they had paid nearly $1 billion in improper compensation for market losses.
Those payments have created a scandal that has appeared to substantiate longstanding criticisms that the market here favors powerful interests and discriminates against individuals and foreigners.
Intended to Quell Outrage
The disclosure of the two lists resulted from heavy pressure by the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, whose image has suffered because of the scandal.
The releases have been intended to quell public outrage, but they have left numerous questions unanswered.


STATE DEPT. BACKS PERU AID PACKAGE
After months of internal debate, the Administration has determined that Peru has improved its lackluster performance on human rights enough to release $94 million in aid, largely intended to combat the cultivation of narcotic coca plants, State Department officials said today.
The move immediately drew strong condemnation in Congress and among human rights groups who asserted that the Peruvian Army had the worst record of summary executions, disappearances and torture of any military in Latin America.


Studies Find Drug Cuts Heart Failure Deaths
Adding a drug to standard treatments for chronic heart failure has sharply reduced death and illness from the condition, two Federally sponsored studies have found.
The drug, enalapril, is widely used to help alleviate the symptoms of heart failure, like shortness of breath, and to treat high blood pressure.
The new studies are the first to show that it actually reduces the rates of death and hospitalization for people with moderate or mild heart failure.


Warnings in Beer Ads Won't Cut Alcoholism
To the Editor:
Underage drinking is a serious problem, despite a 40 percent drop in teen-age driving-while-intoxicated fatalities between 1982 and 1989.
But it's absurd to think a 10-second visual and audible warning at the end of a beer commercial would fight the problem.
Such warnings are not even discussed, for example, in the seventh special report to Congress on alcohol and health published last year.


Fore! Nicklaus Beware of Teen-Ager
While Jack Nicklaus was adding another laurel to the greatest career in golf with his victory at the United States Senior Open last weekend, the most precocious golfer in the modern history of the game gained his greatest victory.
At the age of 15 years 7 months, Eldrick (Tiger) Woods became the youngest winner in the 44-year history of the United States Junior Amateur championship on Sunday, sweeping through six match-play victories at the Bay Hill Club in Orlando, Fla.


Jersey City Rookie Joins Twins
Willie Banks got the word Monday night.
He was in the clubhouse of the Portland Beavers when the manager, Russ Nixon, pulled him aside and told him he had been summoned by the first-place Minnesota Twins.
The manager patted his pitcher on the back and told him that he hoped he never saw his face again inside a Class AAA ball park.
Banks told Nixon that he would try to accommodate him.


Senate Votes to Remove Ban On Women as Combat Pilots
The Senate voted overwhelmingly today to overturn a 43-year-old law that bars women from flying warplanes in combat.
The new measure, an amendment to the military budget bill for the 1992 fiscal year, would permit, but would not require, the Air Force, the Navy, the Army and the Marine Corps to allow women to fly combat missions.


Pretoria's Gorbachev
Faced with a major scandal within South Africa's ruling party, President F. W. de Klerk has moved sideways to protect his right flank while moving forward to placate his critics.
He told his country Tuesday that he did not know about secret subsidies to Inkatha, a black movement favored by white conservatives, and that it wouldn't happen again.
And he has demoted Cabinet hard-liners, putting moderate colleagues in charge of defense and internal security.
It's a performance, in short, reminiscent of Mikhail Gorbachev.
Both leaders have given powerful impetus to liberating reforms.
But both contend with entrenched enemies inside the parties they seek to transform.
They survive by tacking with the wind.
Whatever their faults, the world has a considerable stake in their efforts to open closed societies and closed minds.


AIDS-Infected Can Question Blood Donors
The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled today that people who were infected with the virus that causes AIDS through blood transfusions have the right to question the donors of the contaminated blood, provided that the donors' rights to privacy are upheld.
The purpose would be to help the infected person discover whether the blood bank was negligent in accepting the blood, whether it failed its duty "to stand protectively" between the donor and the recipient.


New Questions in Misconduct Cases Prompt Withdrawal of Health Official
The new director of the National Institutes of Health, after forcing the agency's chief fraud investigator to resign, has now excused herself from making any further decisions about any misconduct cases to come before her agency.
The disputes raise again the question of whether scientists can effectively police themselves, said Represenative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan and chairman of the subcommittee that will hold a hearing Thursday into the actions by Dr.
Bernadine Healy, the health institutes' director.
"We are concerned that there is an attempt at N.I.H. to dismantle the Office of Scientific Integrity and to interfere with its inquiries."


At Big Moment, Little Earpiece Fails
It used to be that American and Soviet leaders seemed not to listen to each other.
Today, they couldn't hear each other -- or more precisely, understand each other -- even though they were sitting side by side.
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev began his official joint news conference with President Bush at the end of their meeting by offering a standard diplomatic flourish of mutual congratulations: "The official visit of the President of the United States of America to the Soviet Union . . . many things that are important . . . days were full of very substantial dialogue . . . spectrum of issues. . . ."


Who Lives There, Anyway? Faces Behind the Walls: Tudor City; Triplex Aeries, Drop-Dead Views
FROM the street, the three-story windows that crown three of Tudor City's towers seem unimaginably luxurious.
Cynics often presume that they conceal water tanks.
In truth, they light the three-story living rooms of 14 apartments, some with terraces trimmed with gargoyles.
Two of the most elaborately decorated, at 5 Tudor City Place, the short street that runs through the complex, belong to Brian Lingenfelter and to Adrienne and Peter Berczeller.


Corrections
An article in Weekend on Friday about the jazz pianist Don Pullen misidentified the university he attended.
It was Johnson C. Smith University in Charlotte, N.C.


Pop in Review
Horace Tapscott
Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South,  at Perry Street Manhattan Through Sunday
New York may be the jazz center of the universe, but audiences in New York are treated to roughly the same group of musicians, year after year.
To hear Horace Tapscott, a legendary Los Angeles-based pianist, becomes a revelation not only because of his exceptional talents, but because his conception is so far removed from what passes as standard here.
He is one of the best arguments around for regionalism.


Sports of The Times; Ray Felix Is Not Forgotten
BEFORE you can enter Harlem One, once a grade school and now a shelter for homeless men on 155th Street and Eighth Avenue, you must pass through a metal detector.
No guns or knives allowed inside.
And before you enter, you certainly have to notice the signs posted on the yellow walls: "Don't Even Think Of Doing Drugs Here!" "Drug Dealers Will Be Arrested."
And at the sign-in desk there is a black-and-white Xeroxed picture of Patrick Ewing, and below it the inscription: "Patrick Ewing says, Score High Points Out of Life . . . Keep your Meal Ticket Updated."


CHRONICLE
ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER has donated $175,000 to the nonprofit Almeida Theater in London, which had its local arts grant cut earlier this year.
Since 1989, the theater has received kudos for adventurous productions, and such actors as GLENDA JACKSON, CLAIRE BLOOM and DIANA RIGG have performed there.
The premiere of "Party Time" by HAROLD PINTER will be staged there this year.


7 Are Killed as Girl Scout Bus Overturns on Mountain Road
A bus carrying about 60 Girl Scouts overturned today on a winding road, killing at least seven people and injuring dozens, some critically.
The chartered bus was traveling down the narrow road when it apparently lost its brakes at a turn and then tumbled down the boulder-strewn mountain, the authorities and witnesses said.


Who Lives There, Anyway? Faces Behind the Walls: Greenwich Village; The Teak House on East 10th Street Was Built in 1887
THE teak house at 7 East 10th Street has attracted attention since Lockwood De Forest built it in 1887.
An artist who traveled and worked in the Middle East and India, he commissioned exuberant teak bay windows, brackets and other woodwork for his five-story brick house.
It has since been divided into apartments, but the facade has lost none of its impact.
"I feel like a Grayline tour guide when I walk out of the building," said Robert Beck, a businessman who has rented a one-bedroom apartment in the building since 1978.


Construction Begins in People's Park in Berkeley


Critic's Notebook; Summit Image: Hardly a Mikhail and George Show
It shattered the first rule of television, the one that says image defeats reality.
In the image wars, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, even in translation, effortlessly demolishes George Bush.
The opening of the summit found the articulate, open-faced, straight-talking Soviet President chatting with Peter Jennings of ABC in the pleasant precincts of the Kremlin, as engaging as ever.
But much had happened since Mr.
Gorbachev won over the world's television audience on his first visit to the United States in 1987.
When he said winsomely on a Monday stroll among apparently friendly Soviet tourists, "See, some people like me," it seemed as much a plea as a boast.
Mr.
Jennings, in Moscow along with all the network anchors, reminded viewers that polls indicate that only 20 percent of the Soviet people think their leader is doing a good job.
As Mr.
Jennings pressed Mr.
Gorbachev on whether he was still in control, he turned defensive.
"I'm the man who began all this," he declared, and he took to speaking of himself in the third person, like a shaky autocrat: "If anyone's writing off Gorbachev, that's a superficial judgment."


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.65
5.75
8.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.51
5.55
7.43
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.65
5.69
7.26
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.99
8.03
8.19
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.33
8.37
8.34
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.30
9.34
9.45
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.11
7.12
7.29
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
A report in the Food Notes column of The Living Section on July 17 about foods introduced at the International Fancy Food and Confection Show misstated the source of Mont Blanc hot chocolate.
It is made in Colorado, not in France.


Baker Heading to Israel to Press It on Peace Talks
President Bush announced today that he was sending Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d to Israel on Thursday to obtain an official Israeli statement expressing its willingness to attend a Middle East peace conference in October, even though it has problems over which Palestinians attend such talks.
Mr.
Baker reportedly has spoken three times by phone with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir of Israel in the last 24 hours, and American officials said that they expected Israel to officially say it would attend the conference, provided they are not faced with either Palestine Liberation Organization members or Palestinians from East Jerusalem at the table.


Massachusetts Jail Financing
Massachusetts, which like so many states has overcrowded jails, plans to issue $70 million in taxable municipal bonds to construct a prison in Plymouth County, near Boston.
Dillon, Read &amp; Company, the underwriter for the negotiated deal, expects the issue to be marketed sometime in September or October.
Richard A. Skerry, general counsel for the Massachusetts Industrial Finance Authority, said yesterday that the plans at first called for a 440-bed unit to be privately operated.
There has been a trend around the nation for states to ask private organizations to build and operate jails, with the state paying a daily rate for each prisoner.


Market Place; Junk Bonds Put Icahn More at Risk at T.W.A.
A year ago, Carl C. Icahn was in an enviable position at Trans World Airlines.
He was firmly in control, but he had not a penny invested in it.
But now, as a result of an ill-timed investment in T.W.A.'s junk bonds, Mr.
Icahn has much more at risk.
And he will have to put in $35 million more to keep control.


With Light From Above
IN 1844, the first Seamen's Church Institute was a chapel floating on a barge in New York Harbor.
The newest, which opened on May 1, is in a 33,000-square-foot space created from two red brick buildings, one dating from 1799, the other new.
In the new site, at 241 Water Street (near Beekman Street), sailors can receive counseling, worship in the chapel and learn to pilot supertankers through computer simulation.


Maggie Feinstein, 57; Started Teamsters Unit
Marguerite Feinstein, founder and director of the retiree division of Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, which represents 23,000 municipal workers in New York City, died on Monday at St.
Francis Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
She was 57 years old and lived in Clinton Corners, N.Y.
Mrs.
Feinstein, who was known as Maggie, was the wife of Barry Feinstein, president of Local 237.
She died of a cerebral hemorrhage, said Frank Mazza, a spokesman for the union.


Imelda Marcos Assails Manila's Terms for Return
Calling it "unbelievable and cruel," Imelda Marcos, the widow of former President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines, said yesterday that she would decline an offer by the Manila Government to return from exile unless she can bring her husband's remains back with her.
The Government of President Corazon C. Aquino lifted its five-year-ban on her return Tuesday.
But in doing so, it also announced that it would not permit the return of the remains of Mr.
Marcos and that it would charge Mrs.
Marcos in 25 criminal cases.


Proposals by Dinkins Are Getting A Lukewarm Response in Albany
Despite Mayor David N. Dinkins's plea Tuesday for "sweeping changes in the way the state treats New York City," many of his proposals -- including a redirecting of state education aid and a state takeover of Medicaid costs -- appear bound to run into sharp resistance in Albany, where lawmakers have rejected such ideas in recent years.
The Mayor described New York as standing at "the most critical time in the history of our city," and he clearly hoped that his televised address would galvanize the Legislature into action to help the city.


Lynn Leaves W.L.A.F.
MIKE LYNN, the former general manager of the Minnesota Vikings, has resigned as president of the World League of American Football.
Lynn, who took over as president of the league last Oct. 10, said that his continuing association with the Vikings played a part in his decision to step down.
Lynn is a participant in a group seeking National Football League approval of a new ownership control arrangement for the Vikings and is a member of the team's board of directors.(AP)


Rights Panel Fights Canarsie Realty Bias
The New York City Commission on Human Rights plans to send field workers into the Canarsie section of Brooklyn tonight to calm residents' fears after a series of racially motivated attacks and threats against real-estate agents and homeowners.
The action comes during a week when one Canarsie realty office was firebombed for the second time in 12 days, a real-estate agent was threatened and homeowners received telephoned threats not to sell homes to blacks or other minorities.


Advertisers Get Ready For the Football Season
With the football season near, advertisers are introducing campaigns heavy on the pigskin and on tie-ins with the National Football League.
Sealy Inc., the mattress maker, began television commercials yesterday for its campaign, "N.F.L. hit the sack bonus blitz," with a new spokesman, a sleepy Sealy salesman who snoozes on a mattress while football players block, pass and tackle around him.
Leo Burnett U.S.A., Chicago, created the spot.


Beyond Plain Cowhide
Dualoy Inc.
45 West 34th Street
, New York, N.Y. 10001; (212) 736-3360.
It takes a special kind of leather to upholster a sofa, says William Feigin, owner of Dualoy, which sells upholstery and specialty leathers.
Sheepskin can be too weak.
Goatskins and pigskins, though stronger, are often too small.
But cowhides are durable and can cover large parts of a sofa without requiring unsightly seams.


U.S. Reports Spying On A-Plant Workers
The Energy Department's inspector general has found that security personnel at the nation's nuclear weapons plants acquired and used equipment for wiretapping, eavesdropping and other surveillance in violation of department regulations and Federal law.
According to the findings, some of the employees who were spied on had publicly complained of serious safety problems at the Hanford nuclear reservation in Washington State.
The inspector general's report directly contradicts assertions by Hanford's security directors that the plant had no such surveillance equipment.
Article, page A18.


Board of Ed, Chancellor and Public Must All Work Together; Lives Are at Stake
To the Editor:
Reintroducing the parental opt-out provision to the high-school condom availability program ("The Condom Battle Stakes," editorial, July 19) will have one sure result: more young people will die.


C.I.A. Reported Bank's Holding Five Years Ago
The Central Intelligence Agency said today that it prepared a report in 1986 stating that the Bank of Credit and Commerce International acquired control of Washington's largest banking company in 1982.
Government officials outside the intelligence agency said the information on First American Bankshares Inc.'s ownership was distributed at the time to the State and Treasury Departments and possibly to other agencies.


A Delivery That Rush Hour Couldn't Delay
Among the sordid transgressions chronicled each day under the category "Type of Occurrence" on the press information sheets at New York City Police headquarters, this cheerful entry appeared yesterday: "A Blessed Event."
"Blessed Event" was what Detective Joseph K. McConville, a police spokesman, described it when two highway patrol officers helped deliver a baby yesterday morning in a car stopped mid-span on the Triborough Bridge between Queens and Manhattan.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
WHEN he was 10 David Fassler went off to summer camp, leaving his 8-year-old sister behind.
It was their first long separation.
One evening the girl and her parents went to a restaurant.
"When the hostess asked how many people were in the party my parents said three, but my sister insisted on adding, 'We're really four, but my brother's at camp,' " said Dr.
Fassler, a child and adolescent psychiatrist in Burlington, Vt.


Federal Suit Charges Landlord With Bias
A landlord with more than 1,500 apartments in Manhattan, Queens and the Bronx was accused yesterday of discriminating against black and Hispanic people who sought apartments in his buildings.
According to a suit filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan by the Open Housing Center against the landlord, Arnold Goldstein, workers at his office told minority applicants there were no vacancies even when there were or showed them apartments they could not afford when less expensive ones were available.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 1


N.A.A.C.P. and Top Labor Unite to Oppose Thomas
The nation's largest civil rights group and the leaders of organized labor said in coordinated announcements today that they opposed the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
"Judge Thomas's inconsistent views on civil rights policy make him an unpredictable element on an increasingly radical conservative court," said Dr.
William F. Gibson, chairman of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, in making the announcement for his organization.


Now, Reduce the 'Renegade' Risk
The summit meeting in Moscow made notable advances with the signing of a strategic arms accord and a dramatic commitment to convene a Mideast peace conference in October.
But Presidents Bush and Gorbachev both shied away from the hard, imperative task of seeking deeper reductions in the nuclear arms that still imperil the world.
Both said it would be impractical to eliminate their arsenals at a time when other nations still possess nuclear arms.
Mr.
Bush expressed particular concern about nuclear weapons in the hands of "renegades." But he seemed to rule out the risk of renegade nationalists or military officers in the Soviet Union gaining access to some of its huge stockpile of weapons.
The best way to reduce that risk, however remote, is to negotiate further cuts.


Sperm Mix-Up Lawsuit Is Settled
A 34-year-old Long Island woman who sued a Manhattan doctor and a midtown sperm bank, charging they mistakenly substituted another man's sperm for her late husband's, has reached an out-of-court settlement estimated at $400,000, a lawyer involved in the case said yesterday.
The woman's suit, filed last year in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, helped lead to stronger state health licensing regulations over sperm banks.


Calendar: Native American Crafts
Teachers' Works New York School of Interior Design, 155 East 56th Street; (212) 753-5365.


On That Chat With Dinkins: Make It Almost Everybody
Ken Wyche, a fry cook, would like nothing better than to tell the Mayor about the run-down city-owned building he lives in.
So he was thrilled to hear Mayor David N. Dinkins, right there on television, declaring that his office door was open to New Yorkers with gripes.
But Mr. Wyche is in for a surprise. The door, it turns out, is only ajar.


Five Killed in Apartment Fire in Detroit


Board of Ed, Chancellor and Public Must All Work Together
To the Editor:
We agree with Joseph A. Fernandez, New York City Schools Chancellor, that it is important to draw a line between the Chancellor's managerial responsibilities and the Board of Education's policy making.
The board must accord the Chancellor discretion to manage the school system consistent with broad board-developed guidelines.
However, we believe the questions you report the board to be asking the Chancellor (news article, July 19) are appropriate.


Midway Airlines
Midway Airlines Inc., which last month introduced a policy of fully refundable excursion fares, said it was doubling, to 48 hours, the period in which passengers must buy their excursion tickets after making reservations.
The extension takes effect immediately.
A spokesman for the Chicago-based carrier said the longer deadline was for the convenience of customers and travel agents.


Noted Scientist And Staff Leave Rockefeller U.
Dr.
Anthony Cerami, a leading scientist at Rockefeller University and a prominent opponent of Dr.
David Baltimore's appointment as president of the institution on the Upper East Side, is leaving the university along with his entire 30-member research team, it was announced yesterday.
Dr.
Cerami, an internationally known medical biochemist whose research specialties include age-related illnesses and infectious diseases, will take his team to a newly established biomedical institution, the Picower Institute for Medical Research, in Manhasset, L.I.
He is a former dean of graduate studies at Rockefeller and will be the Picower Institute's first president.


Now Grownup Scribblers Have a Table, Too
A YEAR and a half ago, Gary Komarin built a table with a blackboard surface for children.
In April, he built one for adults.
"Young children scribble all over a table, and 11-year-olds write their names in script and grownups mindlessly scribble, or make pictures of faces, or do word games," said Mr.
Komarin, an artist in Flanders, N.J.
His wife, Sharon, collaborated on the design of the tables for their company, P. H. Lowell.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
TO install a window or door in an existing wall, first remove any framing that would obstruct the opening and then build new framing for the window or door.
This should be done from the inside, before any opening is cut in the outside wall.
Such openings in a building's framing are called rough openings, even though they are usually made to precise dimensions.
The combination of boards used to trim the opening is called rough framing.
Rough framing varies according to what's being installed.
Local building codes also have specific requirements that may differ from the examples described here.


Treasury Sets Refunding Details
The Treasury announced plans yesterday to sell $38 billion of notes and bonds next week as part of its regular quarterly refunding, but the record size of that package did not prevent modest price increases in trading of existing government securities.
Dealers and investors were well prepared for the size of next week's offerings, which are needed to finance a budget deficit forecast at about $282.2 billion for the year ending Sept. 30.


Bangkok Journal; Irate Wife, Talky Mistress, Shellshocked General
The general who led the military coup in Thailand in February is finding his position undermined in a wife-versus-mistress scandal that has offered a rare, very public glimpse of Thailand's system of near-legalized polygamy.
The 60-year-old general, Supreme National Commander Sunthorn Kongsompong, has described the dispute between his wife and his mistress as a private matter.
The feud centers on the mistress's attempt to use the general's family name as her own.


Clark and Red Sox Beat A's in 14
Jack Clark hit his third home run of the game, a two-out drive in the 14th inning tonight night that led the Boston Red Sox over Oakland, 11-10, and stopped the Athletics' five-game winning streak.
Clark hit a grand slam and two bases-empty shots for the first three-homer game of his career.
Wade Boggs went 5 for 7 with three doubles and a walk as Boston won in 5 hours 1 minute.


Topics of The Times; Perilous Prescription
Selegiline is the generic name of a relatively new medication -- brand name Eldepryl -- for Parkinson's disease.
Stelazine is the brand name of an older drug for other problems, and it can worsen parkinsonism.
The two words aren't hard to confuse, especially in the prescription scrawl they teach at med school.
According to a letter in The New England Journal of Medicine, that's what happened to two Parkinson's patients for whom selegiline was prescribed.
Different pharmacists mistakenly gave both of them Stelazine, with bad effect in both cases.


BRIEFS
*
C3 Inc., Herndon, Va., a computer company, aid it would aquire Telos Corp., Santa Monica, Calif., a computer software company, for $42 million. *
Data General Corp., Westborough, Mass., said it would buy the computer-maintenance unit of HBO &amp; Company, an Atlanta-based provider of clinical and financial products to health-care organizations.
The terms of the agreement were not disclosed.


B.C.C.I.'s Flashy Man in Argentina
After I understood the country, the people and the culture," Ghaith R. Pharaon once said after arriving in Argentina in 1981, "I realized that the future was right here, and I decided to stay."
For a while, it seemed his perfect homeland.
The Saudi-born, Harvard-educated financier arrived with an impressive bankroll backed by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, which, American investigors say, used him as one of its leading front men in a host of acquisitions.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Banking Scandal
The C.I.A. prepared a report in 1986 saying B.C.C.I. had acquired control of Washington's largest banking company in 1982, the agency said.
Fed officials have said they would never have permitted it to own a U.S. bank.  [ Page A1. ]


Cuba's Premier Pitcher Is Out With a Blood Clot
The Cuban national baseball team, which has won five consecutive Pan American championships and fully expected to waltz to a sixth, has suddenly seen the streak jeopardized in the worst of all possible places: home.
The team learned this week that Lazaro Valle, considered a major league-quality pitcher and generally regarded as one of the best Cuban hurlers in the last decade, will miss the XI Pan American Games because of a blood clot in his pitching arm.


Help With Keys and Zippers
FOR the elderly or the disabled, there is Independence House, a catalogue of products that make eating, exercising or getting dressed easier.
Among the 140 products in the catalogue is a key turner, shown above, which gives a firmer grip.
It comes in two sizes: the $4.50 style holds one key, the $7.95 two.
Another tool has a hook at one end to button clothing, and a hook at the other end to pull zippers ($6.95).


Ephraim Frankel, 86, Philadelphia Builder
Ephraim J. Frankel, a major builder and developer of office and residential properties around the country, died last Thursday at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
He was 86 years old and lived in Philadelphia.
He died of a stroke, a family spokeswoman said.


Both Sides Softening Stance on Document On Foreign Arrests
A House subcommittee sidestepped a constitutional clash with the Bush Administration today, agreeing to suspend its demand for a Justice Department document on the subject of the arrest of fugitives on foreign soil.
In return, the Justice Department agreed that it would consider granting lawmakers limited access to the document, a 1989 legal opinion that concluded that Federal agents could legally arrest fugitives overseas without the consent of the country involved.


Perez Says Shoulder Is Well
It is possible that the ongoing saga of Pascual Perez took a temporary turn for the better yesterday when the pitcher said he expected to start for the Yankees against the Detroit Tigers on Aug. 9 or 10.
After throwing without pain for 18 minutes before the Yankees lost to Minnesota, 12-3, last night, Perez said pitching coach Mark Connor had told him he would start at Yankee Stadium either next Friday or Saturday.


Backfield Movement as Giants Sign Top Pick
After 2 hours 15 minutes of late-evening negotiations on Tuesday and his fast trip to the airport today, the Giants signed their first-round draft pick, fullback Jarrod Bunch, in time for him to join the team for the last 40 minutes of practice.
Bunch agreed to a three-year deal worth $2.2 million, including a $1 million signing bonus.


2 Coca-Cola Executives to Retire
The Coca-Cola Company yesterday announced the retirement of two longtime senior officers and said their responsibilities would be taken over by other longtime Coke executives.
Ira C. Herbert, who is 63 years old and executive vice president of Coca-Cola, as well as president of its North America business sector, plans to retire on Dec. 31.
He has been with Coke since 1965.
John W. Georgas, 63 years old and executive vice president of Coca-Cola, as well as president of its international business sector, will retire that same date.
Mr.
Georgas joined the company in 1974.


Two Big Steel Companies Post Losses in 2d Quarter
The Bethlehem Steel Corporation and the National Steel Corporation lost about $30 million each in the second quarter.
Both companies blamed the recession for fewer orders and higher operating costs.
Bethlehem Steel
Bethlehem lost $29.1 million on sales of $1.12 billion in the second quarter.
In the comparable period last year, the steel maker earned $21.9 million, or 21 cents a share, on sales of $1.28 billion.


Corrections
A subheading yesterday about a Middle East peace conference referred incorrectly to a major point of contention.
It should have said, "Who represents the Palestinians is the biggest issue, officials say"; it should not have said "Palestine."


Gunmen Kill 6 Lithuania Border Guards
Six Lithuanian border guards were killed today and two were critically wounded in a machine-gun attack on a customs post near the breakaway republic's border with Soviet Byelorussia, officials here said.
The Lithuanian authorities said the identity of the attackers was not known.
The customs stations, symbols of Lithuania's claim to independence from the Soviet Union, have been frequent targets of violent raids by Soviet troops and "black beret" police units loyal to Moscow.


Benjamin Siegel, Author, 76
Benjamin Siegel, a novelist and short story writer, died Wednesday at his home.
He was 76 years old and lived in Tuxedo, N.Y.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Brook Lark Ing.


A Few Giants Work on $'s, Not X's and O's
Dave Meggett may be the National Football League's best combination punt returner-kickoff returner-running back-pass receiver, and he wants to be paid accordingly.
Erik Howard is one of the best nose tackles and wants to make perhaps $3.5 million over three years, which is what the Detroit Lions have just given their nose tackle, Jerry Ball.
Steve DeOssie shared an inside linebacker job with Gary Reasons and wants to be paid $600,000 a year, which is what Reasons is making.
So Meggett, whose original two-year contract has expired, is not in the Giants' training camp.
Neither are Howard and DeOssie, who have contracts but want more money.


F.C.C. Delays TV Ad Limits
The Federal Communications Commission today delayed by three months new limits on commercials in some television shows intended for children.
The unanimous vote came in response to a request by the Association for Independent Television Stations, but was criticized by children's TV advocates.


Gotti Discusses Representation In Secret Tapes
In a rare glimpse of the relationship between a man reputed to be a Mafia boss and his highly paid lawyers, secret tapes reveal a snide-sounding John Gotti saying of his favorite attorney, Bruce Cutler, "Without us, he wouldn't be on the map."
"And I got to say, they all want their money up front," Mr.
Gotti is quoted as saying about his defense lawyers, adding that he paid the legal bills for some associates amounting to "$300,000 in one month."


After the Summit; Bush, in Ukraine, Walks Fine Line on Sovereignty
Walking a fine line in the struggle for self-rule that is bedeviling Mikhail S. Gorbachev, President Bush warned today of the excesses of "suicidal nationalism," but said the United States would not choose sides between the Government in Moscow and restless Soviet republics.
Still Mr.
Bush spent much of his day here praising Mr.
Gorbachev and his vision of the Soviet Union.


For Some Mets, a 2-7 Road Trip Is a Grand Delusion
It was as if the bad trip had produced one final, wild delusion.
The Mets, in a strangely upbeat locker room late Wednesday night after a 6-3 loss to the Dodgers, finished their swing through California 2-7, five and a half games behind the Pirates and smiling.


At the Bar; Sinatra's Ex-Lawyer, Thanked by Kitty Kelley, Declines the Honor With a Lawsuit.
There is no greater honor an author can bestow than to list someone in the acknowledgments.
It is a chance for people to see their names in print, and on high-quality, acid-free paper rather than the more ephemeral stuff that newspapers use.
But it would be an understatement to say that Milton A. (Mickey) Rudin of Beverly Hills, Frank Sinatra's long-time lawyer, was not flattered to find himself being thanked in "Nancy Reagan: The Unauthorized Biography," by Kitty Kelley.
In fact, he has sued Ms.
Kelley and her publisher, Simon &amp; Schuster, for libel.


California S.&amp;L. Expects Loss
The Great American Bank, a troubled California savings and loan association, said today that it expected to have a $70 million loss in the second quarter after setting aside $66 million in loan-loss reserves.
The reserve reflects what the company said were deteriorating real estate markets and other declining asset values.
Great American said its financial condition remained bleak, suggesting that the San Diego savings institution is a strong candidate for being seized by the Government.
The company said that as of June 30, 1991, it failed to meet by wide margins any of the Government's minimum capital requirements.


Executives Are Shifted By I.B.M.
I.B.M. streamlined its top management yesterday to free its fast-growing personal computer, work station and minicomputer businesses to compete more aggressively.
The shift realigns the company's top executives.
I.B.M.'s president, Jack D. Kuehler, will take direct control of the company's Personal Systems and Application Business Systems divisions.


Hope Stirs in the N.L. East As Pirates Lose 6th in a Row
Jose Oquendo went 3 for 3 with three runs batted tonight in as the St.
Louis Cardinals beat Pittsburgh, 6-3, and sent the Pirates to their sixth straight loss.
All six losses have come on the road for the Pirates, who remain the major leagues' best road team with a 31-20 record.
The Pirates last lost six straight from Sept. 12-18, 1990.


Dahmer's Lawyer Is Comfortable in the Heat
In legal circles here, it was no surprise when Gerald P. Boyle emerged as the lawyer representing Jeffrey L. Dahmer, the man the police say killed as many as 17 men over 10 years.
Mr.
Boyle, 55 years old, who represented Mr.
Dahmer in a 1989 conviction for molesting a minor, has long thrived on high-profile cases.
A former Milwaukee County deputy prosecutor, he successfully prosecuted a man in 1967 who murdered a girl, a young woman and tried to kill another young woman in what has been called this city's first serial murder case.He also represented Reggie Jackson, who had assaulted a man who asked the baseball player for an autograph.


Middle East Talks: Juggling the Onus
By saying yes today to a regional peace conference in October -- even if it is a yes embroidered with a serious condition -- Israeli officials believe that they have liberated themselves from the stigma of being chief naysayer of the Middle East, and have placed that label on the Palestinians.
For the last few weeks, they had been regarded in many circles overseas as the bad guys, reluctant to come to the negotiating table even though neighboring Arab states, notably Syria, accepted the United States peace initiative.


One Year After the Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait: What Did Winning Mean? And What's Next?; Oil Business, Not Oil Politics
Iraq's bid to dominate world petroleum supplies lies smoldering in the still burning oil fields of Kuwait.
The aftermath of Baghdad's defeat could turn into a period of calm for oil producers and consumers.
For, while the Persian Gulf crisis turned out to be about oil and geopolitics, its outcome suggests that the "business of oil" could take precedence over the "politics of oil" in the years immediately ahead.
The U.S., along with some coalition partners, has assumed an explicit role in assuring the secure flow of oil, and that certainly affects the orientation of the oil exporters.


A.T.&amp; T. Appointment
A.T.&amp; T. yesterday named Richard A. McGinn to the new position of senior vice president of strategy, sales and customer operations of its Network Systems unit.
Since the NCR Corporation agreed to be acquired by A.T.&amp; T. in May, Mr.
McGinn, president of A.T.&amp; T.'s computer systems unit, has been co-chairman of the team that oversaw the merging of the companies' computer businesses.
The other co-chairman was Charles E. Exley Jr., NCR's chairman and chief executive.
Mr.
McGinn joined A.T.&amp; T. in 1978 and has served in many posts, including vice president of A.T.&amp; T. international operations.


Art in Review
Nic Nicosia Pace-MacGill Gallery 32 East 57th Street Through Aug. 31
Nic Nicosia's photographs have long featured elaborate, jokey tableaux; in one example from several years ago, tourists clad in Hawaiian shirts and bermuda shorts were forced to cling to signposts to keep from being blown away by a staged hurricane.
In his "Love + Lust" series, shown here, Mr.
Nicosia presents studio setups that suggest sexual encounters of various sorts, all staged in a tone of delicious, titillating naughtiness.


CHRONICLE
Over the protests of environmentalists, RONALD and NANCY REAGAN won approval to be buried on the grounds of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation in Simi Valley, Calif.
The Ventura County Board of Supervisors approved the request, said John Meroney, a spokesman for the foundation.
Protesters said the site would attract too many tourists.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about efforts to add information to public school curriculums about Hispanic contributions to history and culture misstated the national origin of Franklin Chang-Diaz, the first Hispanic American astronaut in space.
He was born in Costa Rica.


The Real New York? It's There, All Right, but It's Hiding
THE Automat has sealed its last slot, and that wonderful institution, the New York cafeteria with free-flowing seltzer and soup that held a spoon perpendicular, has gone down the urban digestive tract.
New Yorkers have always wolfed down lunch, but it used to be unthinkable that something called fast food would become the staple of midday dining.
More than 50 years ago, Grant's Tomb, overlooking the lordly Hudson from Riverside Park at 122d Street, was among the city's finest tourist attractions.
Visitors and natives boarded double-decker buses for the journey, which cost a dime in contrast to other fares of a nickel.
But the Grants rest in relative peace today as tourists flock to newer sites.


George Jablow, Accountant, 89
George Jablow, an accountant and former executive vice president of Charles of the Ritz, a cosmetics firm, died on Tuesday at his home in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 89 years old.
He died of kidney failure, said his daughter, Joan Fine of Boca Raton, Fla.


2 Store Chains Say Sales Drop
Sales for stores under the umbrella of Federated Department Stores Inc. and the Allied Stores Corporation declined 4.7 percent in June, to $580.7 million, from $608.1 million in the comparable period last year.
The companies, operators of such department store chains as Bloomingdale's, Abraham &amp; Straus and Jordan Marsh, reported yesterday that sales in stores open at least a year declined 1.4 percent after rising 4 percent in May.


4 Weeks to Gorge On the Arts Outdoors
BECAUSE it is sprawled out over nearly four weeks and embraces more than 700 performers, Lincoln Center's 21st annual Out of Doors festival is almost dizzying to contemplate.
But if the festival's scope makes the mind reel, its programming is anything but scattershot.
Meticulous planning has gone into the more than 70 free events that will unfold over the next 25 days in Lincoln Center's parks and plazas.
The festival, which typically draws 250,000 people, is a family affair that seeks to offer as many different kinds of performing art as possible on any given day.
As New York has become more and more of a world city, the festival's view of the performing arts has expanded accordingly.


Baby Deaths Found High in Rural Areas
Infant mortality rates are as high in nonurban areas of America as in the nation as a whole, but the problems there are often ignored, the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation says in a new report.
The report, "Infant Survival in Rural America," is the first to document the distinct problems contributing to high rates of infant mortality in nonmetropolitan areas, where one in five of all infant deaths in the United States occurs, the foundation said.


One Year After the Iraqi Invasion of Kuwait: What Did Winning Mean? And What's Next?; Blood, Sweat And Paradox
At the moment of the German surrender in May 1945, the Supreme Allied Commander, Dwight D. Eisenhower, called for a toast.
The Champagne turned out to be flat.
It was an omen, some thought later, of the spoiled, cold-war peace that lay ahead.
A year after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and five months after the apparent triumph of Operation Desert Storm, the taste of victory in the Persian Gulf remains similarly stale, if not yet bitter, for the Commander in Chief, George Bush.


BRIEFS
*
AM International Inc., Chicago, a business equipment company, said it had signed an agreement to sell assets of its Bruning division, which makes engineering and graphics products, in the United States, Canada and New Zealand to Oce-van der Griten N.V., the Netherlands.
The price was $52.5 million. *
Cray Research Inc., Minneapolis, a scientific computer company, said Bayerische Motoren Werke A.G., the German car manufacturer, had installed a Cray MP supercomputer system at its research and development center in Munich, Germany.


O'Brien Drops His Agent
When the agent Leigh Steinberg was asked after the National Football League draft whether representing three quarterbacks on the same team created any conflicts, he said he didn't think so.
The question is now moot, however, because Ken O'Brien, the Jets' incumbent starter, has dropped Steinberg as his agent.


Health Official Concedes Mishandling of Inquiry
Dr.
Bernadine Healy, the new director of the National Institutes of Health, admitted today that she had done a poor job of investigating a misconduct case at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, where she formerly worked.
In an angry confrontation with Representatives John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, and Norman F. Lent, a New York Republican from Nassau County, who are looking into the way the institutes investigates misconduct, she conceded that the inquiry she conducted at the clinic in 1990 was "sloppy and inadequate."  Series of Unexpected Actions
Questions about Dr.
Healy's handling of the Cleveland case were among the issues that have been raised by members of the House Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations after a series of unexpected actions by Dr.
Healy involving the agency's Office of Scientific Integrity since she took office about three months ago.


Hairline Cracks Are Found in Seawolf Submarine
Inspectors have found cracks in the hull of the first boat of a new class of nuclear attack submarines, the Pentagon and the builder, the Electric Boat division of the General Dynamics Corporation, said yesterday.
The first Seawolf submarine, a $2 billion boat under construction in Groton, Conn., has hairline cracks in the welds, the Government and the company said.
The submarine uses a steel called HY-100, for high yield 100, which is supposed to withstand 100,000 pounds of pressure per square inch; earlier boats were built of HY-80.
The weld material is also new.  'A Serious Problem'
In a statement issued last night, Electric Boat said the cracks "resulted form a welding procedure that produces welds that are too brittle for the harsh environment in which this submarine must operate."


PGA Tour Union
PGA Tour officials announced yesterday the formation of a union and retained RICHIE PHILLIPS, executive director of the Major League Umpires Association, as their general counsel.


Purchasers Cite June Gains Despite Signs of Weakness
The economy got a modest lift from the manufacturing sector in July, but there were continuing signs that recovery would be slow, according to a widely followed survey released yesterday.
The National Association of Purchasing Management said its monthly index of business activity edged up to 51.8 percent, from 50.9 percent in June for its sixth straight increase.


U.S. Judge Blocks Bridgeport From Bankruptcy Court
Connecticut succeeded today in blocking the City of Bridgeport from bankruptcy court when a Federal judge ruled that the city, despite its financial troubles, was able to pay its bills.
Declaring that Bridgeport was not insolvent, the judge, Alan H. W. Shiff of Federal Bankruptcy Court in Bridgeport, said the state's largest city "has no choice but to continue with the budget and collective-bargaining processes."


WEATHER DELAYS SHUTTLE LIFTOFF
Threatening weather today forced another postponement of the planned 42nd space shuttle flight.
The launching of the Atlantis shuttle, postponed twice before by technical problems, was put off today because of worsening weather around the Kennedy Space Center.
The weather at the beginning of the launching period was extremely good, but there was a delay while flight controllers checked out a suspected problem in the shuttle's cabin pressurization system.


Critic's Choice/Film; Old Story With New Textures
A teen-age boy is irresistibly attracted to a beautiful, mysterious older woman; the world doesn't need to hear
that
story again.
But "The Miracle," the latest film by the Irish writer and director Neil Jordan, works in ways that its ancient plot doesn't begin to convey.
Like Mr.
Jordan's best-known film, "Mona Lisa," this one relies on the texture of complicated lives.
Its fresh, enigmatic charm comes from its characters' quirky wit, the sumptuous photography of the Irish seaside town of Bray and the matter-of-fact way in which secret, tangled relationships are revealed.


Black Man Tells Police Of Attack by 4 Whites
A black man has told the police that he was taunted and slashed by four white teen-agers early yesterday morning while playing with his 2-year-old daughter in a Canarsie playground.
The police have classified the case as bias-related.
It comes after a series of racially motivated attacks and threats last month in the southeastern Brooklyn neighborhood whose black and Hispanic population has grown sharply in the last decade.


When Politics Topples Precedent, That's Chaos
To the Editor:
"Court Reversals" by John W. Farrell (letter, July 23) deals with an important subject in constitutional law and sorely needs correction.
Overruling precedents recently made is quite different from overruling decisions that were themselves in conflict with earlier decisions, and from overruling old decisions after substantial changes in social and economic conditions have occurred.


Mandela's Group Calls for Interim Rule
The African National Congress said today that it wanted to move as quickly as possible to a conference of all South African political paties as a way of forcing the white Government to give way to a multi-racial interim administration.
In a statement issued today the congress's national executive committee said, "The only way forward is to create a transitional authority, with a limited life span, charged with the task of preparing the country for a democratic constitution and governing the country during this period."


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 2


Soybeans at 9-Month High With No Rain in Forecast
Soybean futures prices soared to a nine-month high yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade with no drought-breaking rain predicted for the Midwest.
Soybeans for August delivery, which are exempt from the exchange's 30-cent daily price limit, rose 31 cents to settle at $6.14 a bushel, the highest settlement of a near-month soybean contract since Oct. 23.
Other soybean contracts finished 11 cents to 28 1/4 cents above Wednesday's final prices.


The Who, What, Where and When of the Festival at Lincoln Center
The Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival features a variety of free performances through Aug. 26 at locations throughout Lincoln Center.
Rain dates or other information: (212) 875-5397.
A schedule of events follows.
TODAY  BIG NAZO PUPPETS, children's theater, Fountain Plaza, 10:30 A.M.; also tomorrow, 5:30 P.M.
WEATHERPROOF DANCES, "In Deep" by Tamar Rogoff, with Tony Tsirantonakis and Marshall Coid, Fountain Plaza, 5:30 P.M.


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions yesterday about the reclamation of People's Park in Berkeley by the University of California referred incorrectly to the demonstrators.
They were linking arms to avoid being evicted by the police; they were not watching as a bulldozer began removing topsoil.


Accounts
*
Ziebart International Corp., Troy, Mich., to Kolon, Bittker &amp; Desmond Inc., also of Troy.
The billings have been estimated at $7 million.
Also included in the review were the incumbent agency, Simons Michelson Zieve Inc., Troy, as well as J. Walter Thompson, Detroit, and Ross Roy Franchise Inc., Bloomfield Hills, Mich.


At the Movies
A Dylan Thomas Original
In an era when the price of original screenplays has ranged up to $3 million, the producer Chris Sievernich has fashioned his latest movie from the work of a famous author that he picked up for one English pound, or at current rates, less than $2.


Honor Impugned, Squirrels Find Defenders
In the great catalogue of iniquity attributed to New York City, one might have thought there could be no fresh surprises in the accounts of wickedness and roguery, of moral turpitude and shameless knavery that somehow make news abroad.
But no.


'Belshazzar's Feast'
The baritone Jake Gardner is to be the soloist in Sir William Walton's oratorio "Belshazzar's Feast" in a concert by the Waterloo Festival Orchestra under Gerard Schwarz's direction.
Also on the program are Schumann's Symphony No. 4 and Walter Piston's score for the ballet "The Incredible Flutist." The concert is to take place tomorrow evening at 8 at Waterloo Village, Stanhope, N.J.
Tickets are $20 for tent seats or $15 for seats on the lawn.
Information: (201) 347-4700.


Lee V. Eastman, 81, Entertainment Lawyer
Lee V. Eastman, a lawyer and art collector, died on Tuesday in New York Hospital.
He was 81 years old and had homes in Manhattan and East Hampton, L.I.
He died of a stroke, his wife, Monique, said.


TV Weekend; 'Dream On' and Some Other Games People Play
Steadily gaining a sitcom audience for Home Box Office, "Dream On" may well be television's flakiest series, as becomes evident with further samplings.
Martin Tupper, whose psyche was molded by television when he was growing up in the 1950's and 60's, is offered as a contemporary Everyman: divorced, trying to maintain a connection with a son in his early teens, struggling to salvage a smidgen of dignity as an editor of questionable romance novels, all the while being bombarded with flashes of black-and-white scenes from the television shows and old movies of his childhood.
Martin's best friend is his ex-wife, Judith, who has married a candidate for a Nobel and countless other prizes.
Coping with a sneering secretary and a string of beautiful but out-of-kilter girlfriends, Martin does a lot of nervous smiling.
Brian Benben has an amiable stranglehold on the role.


Review/Theater; Shakespeare as Carnival in Amazonian 'Dream'
With its spells and incantations, "A Midsummer Night's Dream" freely lends itself to directorial invention, as is amply demonstrated in the Brazilian production of the play that opened last night at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park.
As adapted and staged by Caca Rosset, this is a lithe and fanciful "Dream." Through graceful use of nudity, the production underlines the natural primitivism of the story.
The members of Mr.
Rosset's Teatro do Ornitorrinco perform in Portuguese and there is no simultaneous translation.
For an English-speaking audience, the Shakespearean language certainly is missed, but the action is easy to follow and there is something to be said for hearing familiar words spoken in a lilting, unfamiliar language.
Fortunately, the dialogue is communicated through actors who are vocally and physically expressive.


Property Valued At $40 Million Seized in Raids
The authorities yesterday seized what they claimed was $40 million worth of real estate, merchandising and used-car businesses that an important New York City drug ring used to transform its illegal proceeds into legitimate financial enterprises, Federal, state and city law-enforcement officials said.
The ring was described as a classic example of how drug traffickers use their profits to infiltrate the legitimate business sector.


As the Games Begin, Havana Is Glowing With Self-Satisfaction
After five years of wondering whether their hometown could meet the challenge, the people of this tough-minded city full of contradictions and rustic charm are prepared to welcome athletes from 39 hemispheric neighbors Friday evening for the beginning of the Pan American Games.
As recently as this spring there were serious questions about the ability of Cuba -- in the face of a severe economic crunch and growing diplomatic isolation -- to complete all the construction needed to accommodate 17,000 athletes, journalists and tourists for 16 days.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON DECOLONIZATION, SUBCOMMITTEE ON SMALL TERRITORIES -- 10 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Lead Levels in Many Wines Exceed U.S. Standards for Water
The Federal Government today released results showing that many wines sold in the United States contain lead in quantities far above the amount allowed for drinking water.
The high levels were attributed in part to the lead foil capsules often used to cover the cork.


Abroad at Home; Against Any Winds?
Americans are brought up believing that Federal courts are our ultimate protectors against the abuse of state power.
The innocent man, convicted in violation of the Constitution, can look to those judges to vindicate his rights.
That belief -- that premise of our system -- is now in the balance.
It will no longer be valid if a provision in the Senate crime bill, put there at President Bush's urging, becomes law.


Gray Outlook Unclear
The condition of Boston reliever JEFF GRAY, who collapsed in the team's clubhouse in Fenway Park before Tuesday's game, was reported "about the same" yesterday by Dr.
ARTHUR PAPPAS, the team physician.
In a third report since the 28-year-old right-hander was stricken, the Red Sox said that it would be approximately 10 to 14 days before any prognosis was be made.


When Politics Topples Precedent, That's Chaos; Natural Law
To the Editor:
The judicial philosophy of a Supreme Court nominee is fair ground for dispute.
However, Laurence H. Tribe's attack on Clarence Thomas in "Natural Law and the Nominee" (Op-Ed, July 15) unfairly paints Judge Thomas as an extremist by distorting the natural-law tradition.


Morton Brautman, Shipping Executive, 64
Morton Brautman, the founding president of Hemisphere Forwarding Inc., international shipping agents, died on Tuesday.
He was 64 years old and lived in West Nyack, N.Y.
He suffered a heart attack after taking ill in the company's offices near Kennedy International Airport, a company spokesman said.


Auctions
A ledger book of 60 illustrations depicting battles between the Teton Dakota, the largest of the seven tribes of the Sioux confederation, and the United States Army in the 1870's is to be auctioned in a sale of American Indian art on Aug. 10 and 11 at the Eldorado Hotel in Santa Fe, N.M.
The book of drawings, which is incorrectly attributed in the catalogue to Little Assiniboine, an adopted brother of Sitting Bull, is the most important of the 540 items in the sale organized by W. E. Channing.
The auction concern estimates the sale will total from $785,000 to more than $1 million.
Will Channing, the auctioneer, said in a telephone interview from Santa Fe on Wednesday that he had based the attribution of the naive multi-colored pencil drawings on the contents of a 1911 letter accompanying this lot, written to Dr.
R.
G.
Ferguson of Great Falls, Mont., by W. H. Goodwyn, a Canadian Northwest Mounted Police officer.
Goodwyn said the book was found in 1878 or 1879 in the Milk River Valley near the Canadian border of what is now Montana.


U.S. CONFISCATING A-PLANT WIRETAPS
After learning that security personnel at the nation's nuclear weapons plants and laboratories acquired wiretapping and eavesdropping equipment in violation of Federal regulations, the Energy Department today said it had directed its offices around the country to confiscate the equipment and send it to an agency training center in Albuquerque, N.M.
The actions, ordered by Energy Secretary James D. Watkins, came in response to a finding by the agency's inspector general that Federal employees and the companies that operate weapons plants and laboratories for the Government had purchased an array of sophisticated listening devices.
The purchase of the surveillance equipment, along with separate assertions that the University of California had wasted millions of dollars while managing the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California, were the subject of a hearing today by the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs.
Rules Bar the Purchase
During the hearing, the Inspector General, John C. Layton, said that although the Energy Department's regulations specifically prohibited the purchase and use of electronic listening devices, he had found no evidence that employees or members of the public had been spyed on or that any Federal law had been broken.
"Violating a regulation is not the same as an act that is illegal" he said.
Much of Mr.
Layton's report, which is to be made public shortly, is concerned with the purchase and use of eavesdropping at the Hanford nuclear reservation near Richland, Wash.
Several employees at the plant who publicly raised serious safety problems at the plant have said they were targets of the equipment.
Mr.
Layton said today his investigators found no evidence that the allegations were true.
"We have not evidence anyone's privacy was invaded by use of these devices," said Mr.
Layton.
Violations Are Reported
Thomas E. Carpenter, a lawyer for the Government Accountability Project, a public interest law firm in Washington that represents seven of the employees, said today that the Inspector General's investigators never talked to his clients or sought to look at evidence of wiretapping he had developed.
"Obviously if you don't look for the information you aren't going to find an awful lot," said Mr.
Carpenter.
"Our clients have been followed, their phones have been monitored, their houses have been broken into, and they have been harassed and intimidated even in their homes. Now we've learned that Hanford has the eavesdropping capability that top security executives denied in depostions."
The Energy Department declined to identify the kinds of eavesdropping equipment it owns or the precise nature of its uses, saying such information is classified.
William L. Barker, the Acting Director of Security Affairs, said today that Mr.
Watkins has taken other actions to eliminate any more questions about how such equipment is deployed.
Mr.
Barker said the Energy Department is developing a formal agreement with the Federal Bureau of Investigation to outline how each agency will respond in the event such equipment might be needed by a nuclear weapons plant or laboratory.
Such uses might involve a terrorist or hostrage incident, Mr.
Barker said.
Mr.
Barker said Mr.
Watkins issued an order this week to Energy Department field offices and contractors, directing them to halt any purchases and stop any manufacturing or modification of eavesdropping equipment.
Mr.
Barker said all of the department's nuclear sites possessed such equipment.
And the Energy Department is evaluating the need for the Technical Surveillance Countermeasure Training Center at the Hanford reservation, where instructors used the equipment to train security personnel from other plants.
Lab Is Focus of Hearing
The hearing today also focused on operations at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, Calif., which is managed by the University of California.
The Energy Department and the university opened negotiations last week for new contracts to operate Livermore, and two other national laboratories, Los Alamos in New Mexico and the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in Berkeley, Calif.
The current contracts expire on Sept. 30, 1992.
In a report prepared for the committee, the General Accounting Office said today that it found that the university kept a fleet of 1,156 vehicles and 800 custom-made bicycles at the 1.2 mile square laboratory.
In contrast, the 300-square-mile Savannah River plant in South Carolina operates a fleet of 1,600 vehicles.
Senator John Glenn, the committee chairman, said today that one reason the university bought so many cars with Government funds is that its contract calls for the title of the vehicles to be transferred to the university after four years of use.
"Since they get the cars anyway, they want them with low mileage," Senator Glenn remarked.
Ron Weinberg, a spokesman for the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, said: "We have a large number of vehicles because of the work we do here. To do the big science type of things we do, we move a great deal of equipment. This is a billion dollar a year operation, and we need the vehicles"
The accounting office, the investigative arm of Congress, also said that the University of California leased 58 cars in 1986 for use at the laboratory at a cost of $1 million.
Leasing the vehicles through the General Services Administration would have cost $400,000.
The Congressional investigators also noted that the university levied a $150,000 administrative fee.
All the university did for the money was to submit the bills, said the accounting office.
"We lease from the G.S.A. whenever we can," said Mr.
Weinberg.
"When that wasn't possible we leased from the most competitive bidder."


Art in Review
'Who's on First?' Lieberman-Saul Gallery 155 Spring Street Manhattan Through today
The works in this patchy summer group show focus on a variety of aspects of the national pastime, from the stadiums themselves (in large-format photographs by Jim Dow) to the spectacle behind the game (in David Godlis's shot of the gigantic Diamondvision screen atop Shea Stadium).
A number of images present baseball as a peculiar blend of nostalgia, kitsch and heroism.
Jeffrey Rubin, for example, exhibits an oil-colored photograph of the great pitcher and philosopher Satchel Paige, while Miriam Fishman's untitled Art Deco-style montage features orange baseballs, Crackerjack pieces and musical notes against a blue backdrop of a pitcher in mid-delivery.
Others, including Mauro Altamura and Howardena Pindell, consider baseball as a form of television, with its distinctive camera angles and spatial compressions.


CHRONICLE
A rock concert promoter in Buffalo is suing JERRY LEE LEWIS, charging that the singer arrived late, left early and sang poorly at a concert, The Associated Press reported.
The promoter, ED SMITH, said the problems occurred on July 10 at Melody Fair in North Tonawanda, N.Y.
Efforts to reach Mr.
Lewis and his agent were unsuccessful.


A.T.&amp;T. Helped by Ruling Easing Curbs on Discounts
The Federal Communications Commission gave A.T.&amp; T. a big lift today, loosening restrictions that have made it difficult for the company to offer volume discounts and other special pricing deals on long-distance services for large corporate customers.
The move should help the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company compete more aggressively for large customers in offering complex packages of services that, for example, combine network management with call-routing programs.


Second-Class Day Care
Somehow or other, the poor manage to get it in the neck.
Last year Congress passed legislation enabling states to give money to families that were either on welfare or about to be because they couldn't buy child care.
Wonderful!
But those same families are now about to discover that the kind of child care they can buy, whether in a private home or a large day care center, has a green light to be lousy.
The green light comes from the Bush Administration, which in the name of "parental choice" has proposed new rules that say states must set identical standards for both publicly subsidized and nonsubsidized day care providers.


CHRONICLE
After AXL ROSE, the lead singer of the heavy metal group Guns 'n' Roses, threatened to cancel a concert when the police in California ticketed his limousine on Tuesday, the police took the ticket back.
They said Mr.
Rose was enraged when an officer wrote a citation against his chauffeur for an illegal left turn outside the Forum in Inglewood, Calif.
"Rather than stick our feet in the mud and say, 'No, we're going to treat you like everybody else,' we chose to avoid a riot," said Capt.
JAMES SEYMOUR.


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 552 money market mutual funds decreased by $5.15 billion, to $453.57 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 203 institutional funds decreased by $2.72 billion, to $129.55 billion.
The assets of the 259 general-purpose funds were down by $1.36 billion, to $176.06 billion.
The 90 broker-dealer funds decreased by $1.08 billion, to $147.95 billion, the institute said.


Rater to Add Policyholder Panic Factor
The A. M. Best Company, which rates the financial strength of insurance companies, said yesterday that it would add a factor to its method of analysis -- the likelihood that an insurer could face a policyholder panic with large-scale cash withdrawals.
Guides to insurers' performance and strength published by A. M. Best, an Oldwick, N.J., concern, are used by almost all insurance agents and insurance executives, as well as millions of policyholders.


Bernice Falk, Executive, 73
Bernice Falk, director of training and staff development for the Jewish Child Care Association of New York, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 73 years old.
She died of a brain tumor, her family said.


State Eases Threat Of Fiscal Takeover Of New York City
Mayor David N. Dinkins won a vote of confidence yesterday when the State Financial Control Board decided that it had no need to impose stringent controls on New York City spending.
Putting that possibility to rest for now, the board found that the city, after months of scrambling, had made progress on three fronts: It had successfully balanced its budget for the fiscal year that ended in June, it had been able to sell its bonds, and it had prepared a reasonable plan for the current fiscal year.


Dow Posts Loss of 7.15, To 3,017.67
After climbing for three days, stock prices fell slightly yesterday in heavy trading.
Analysts said the drop reflected uncertainty over economic data that will be released today as well as concern over a drop in bond prices yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 7.15 points, to 3,017.67.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totalled 170.6 million shares, with declining shares outpacing advancing shares 9 to 7.
Prices also fell on the American Stock Exchange, where the value index fell 0.04, to 368.24.
In the over-the-counter market, the Nasdaq composite index rose 2.11, to 504.15.


Bud Bowl's Preseason Has Begun
AUGUST has barely begun.
The baseball pennant races are still under way.
The football season has not even started.
But marketing executives at Anheuser-Busch Inc. are already thinking about the next Super Bowl -- and the next Bud Bowl.
For those who have missed it, the idea behind the Bud Bowl is to offer the Super Bowl's enormous television audience of more than 110 million a light-hearted mock football game, played by tiny bottles of the Budweiser brands, while the large human beings playing the actual game are taking a break.


INSIDE
Accusations in Bank Inquiry
William von Raab, former Commissioner of Customs, accused the Administration of foot-dragging in the investigation of B.C.C.I.
Page D1.
B-2 and 'Star Wars' Gain
Disagreeing with the House, the Senate voted to back the Bush Administration's top two strategic military priorities.
Page A11.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Hoch's 63 Ties Mark Scott Hoch shot a nine-under-par 63 in the first round to tie the Buick Open record and take a three-stroke lead over Brad Faxon and Marco Dawson yesterday.
The course record at the 7,014-yard Warwick Hills Golf and Country Club in Grand Blanc, Mich., is 62 by Jim Colbert in a 1979 pro-am event. (AP)


The Spoken Word
LECTURE AND WALKING TOUR, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the neighborhood, followed by "Are You Game?," a look at the lives of children at the turn of the century.
The tour begins at noon on Sunday, and the lecture at 2 P.M.
Walking tour fee, $12 ($11 for the elderly, $6 for students); lecture: $2.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"American Life in American Art," by Amy Winter, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "John Baldessari," by Ms.
Winter, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art.
"Mythic Imagery: Rothko and Pollock," by Jill Snyder, today at noon and Sunday at 1 P.M.; "Looking at Modern Art: Photography," by Vivien Knussi, today at 1 P.M.; "Ad Reinhardt," by Ms.
Snyder, today, tomorrow and Sunday at 3 P.M.; "Modern Sculpture," by Ms.
Knussi, tomorrow at 1 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; under age 16 free).
Information: (212) 708-9480.
LECTURES AND GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
All free with museum admission of $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3764.
GALLERY TALK, Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue and 103d Street, Manhattan.
Discussion of the museum's collection of doll houses.
Tomorrow at 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission, which is by contribution: $4 ($2 for children, students and the elderly.) Information: (212) 534-1672.
LECTURE AND WALKING TOUR, on Ellis Island, sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Seth Kamil, a historian, will speak about the island and lead a walking tour on Sunday at 9:30 A.M.
Tickets are $20.
Meeting place and other information: (212) 996-1100.


BankAmerica Agrees To Buy Nevada Bank
The BankAmerica Corporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the Valley Capital Corporation, a company based in Las Vegas that owns the Valley Bank, the second largest bank in Nevada.
The purchase will be made with BankAmerica stock valued at about $380.5 million, with each share of Valley stock being exchanged for a share of BankAmerica.
Valley Bank's name will be changed to BankAmerica, but Valley's top officers will manage the new bank.
Valley Capital's $233 million subsidiary bank in Arizona will be combined with BankAmerica's existing bank in that state.


Review/Theater; A Solo Study of the Politics of Revenge
Daniel Keene's "Estrella!" -- being presented at the Interart Theater through Aug. 11 -- leaves one with the impression of having listened to a two-hour unaccompanied aria.
And the urge to cheer the actress Rhonda Wilson for having got through this one-character performance without collapsing is irresistible.
The suggestion of opera is hardly accidental.
Mr.
Keene, an Australian, has not only written for opera, but also has packed houses in his homeland with his dramatic adaptation of "Madama Butterfly." And the plot of "Estrella!" has more than a hint of "Tosca" in it.


Place in Giant Plans Saved for Hampton
Were he not so heavily involved in Coach Ray Handley's offensive scheme, running back Rodney Hampton could easily get the impression that opportunity was passing him by.
Hampton, the Giants' first-round pick last year, has spent the last two weeks of training camp sidelined with a hamstring injury suffered in the team's first scrimmage.
At a time when most young players are trying to catch the coach's eye, Hampton has to keep from catching 40 winks.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
California Microwave Inc., Sunnyvale, Calif., a supplier of microwave communications systems, named Steven W. Eymann president of its Efdata Corp., which produces satellite equipment. *
Eastman Kodak Co., Rochester, named Rafael Lopez-Aparicio general manager of its newly created Kodak Kft. subsidiary, Budapest, its first subsidiary in Eastern Europe.


After the Summit; Excerpts From Bush's Ukraine Speech: Working 'for the Good of Both of Us'
Following are excerpts from President Bush's speech today to the Ukrainian Parliament:
This beautiful city brings to mind the words of the poet Aleksandr Dovzhenko : "The city of Kiev is an orchard. Kiev is a poet. Kiev is an epic. Kiev is history. Kiev is art."


Books of The Times; How Unionism Developed and How It Is Today
Which Side Are You On?
Trying to Be for Labor When It's Flat on Its Back By Thomas Geoghegan 287 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.95.
Labor Will Rule Sidney Hillman and the Rise of American Labor By Steven Fraser Illustrated. 688 pages.
The Free Press. $29.95.
Although it sounds nearly impossible to write a charming book about such a complex subject as the diminished role of unions today compared with what they did in the New Deal years, Thomas Geoghegan succeeds in doing so by telling the story through his own life as a labor lawyer.
His account of how he remains in the boondocks of trade unionism while most of his Harvard Law School classmates practice in more lucrative but duller fields makes for lively reading.
Mr.
Geoghegan, a product of the 1960's, heeded a different drummer: his own altruistic instincts.


Edward N. Waters, 85; Musicologist at Library
Edward Neighbor Waters, a musicologist and former music division chief at the Library of Congress, died on Saturday at his home in Mitchellville, Md.
He was 85 years old.
He died of cardiopulmonary failure, a spokesman for the library said.


Todd Board Vote Is Set for Borman
The Todd Shipyards Corporation of Jersey City has agreed to allow a Los Angeles investor to run for election to its board, and he is expected to become chairman of the company.


'Megadance' at Tully
Four choreographers will be featured in the "Megadance" program of the Serious Fun festival, tonight and tomorrow night at 8 at Alice Tully Hall.
The choreographers -- Ann Carlson, Doug Elkins, Charles Moulton and Elizabeth Streb -- will present works commissioned by the festival.
Tickets are $20 to $30.
Information: (212) 875-5050.


On Stage, and Off
Dennis as Both Film and Musical
Now, just when you thought America was safe from mischievous children and large dogs, a "Dennis the Menace" epidemic is looming.
Last week, Warner Brothers announced that a live-action version of Hank Ketcham's comic invention will make its way to the screen, produced by John Hughes of "Home Alone" fame.
And now the producer Elliot Martin hopes to bring "Dennis the Musical" to Broadway.
Gavin MacLeod of "The Love Boat" will star, James M. Nederlander will co-produce, and the show is scheduled for a fall 1992 arrival.


Ex-Bonwit Chairman Joining Bloomingdale's
Less than two months after joining the swelling ranks of merchants without stores, Frank Doroff, former chairman of Bonwit Teller, is expected to join Bloomingdale's as its executive vice president and general merchandise manager.
He will become the chain's top merchant, with responsibility for women's ready-to-wear apparel and accessories, a large chunk of the Bloomingdale's business.


No Ruling the Seas
The expense of high-tech yachting will force Britain to miss the America's Cup for the first time since the English launched the competition in 1851.
Commodore DENNIS DE SAVARY has formally withdrawn the Port Pendennis Yacht Club's challenge, the America's Cup Organizing Committee announced yesterday in San Diego, where the San Diego Yacht Club is trustee of the America's Cup.


Washington at Work; Education Pundit Heard As Voice of Revolution
Chester E. Finn Jr. is a self-described "education policy wonk," whose changeable political nature has led him from the Democratic Party to the Republican fold in his attempt to influence the American educational system.
Looking for an articulate, credible spokesman to trounce public schools on the airwaves?
Mr.
Finn was available.
An article or editorial on the state of high schoolers' acumen?
Mr.
Finn to the rescue.


MONY, Sorely Tested, Reassures Customers
The Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York boasts about its 148 years in the business, its 145 years of uninterrupted dividends and its financial strength as the nation's 13th-largest insurance company.
Even the company's more familiar name -- MONY -- seems to instill confidence.
But now MONY's reputation is being sorely tested.
Two weeks ago, Moody's Investors Service lowered its rating of the company's financial strength to Baa-1, which effectively means "adequate," from A-2.
The change makes MONY the only one of the nation's 20 biggest insurers not to receive an A-or-higher rating, which implies "exceptional," "excellent" or "good."


Harvard Tie To Banking
The investment company that oversees the $5 billion Harvard University endowment has confirmed its interest in five failing New Hampshire banks and savings institutions, a trade newspaper reported yesterday.
The Harvard Management Corporation previously participated in the rescue of a Texas bank in 1989.


Excerpts From Calls to Milwaukee Emergency Numbers
The following is a transcript of conversations that occurred between unidentified female callers and members of the Milwaukee Police Department, the Fire Department and the 911 emergency service.
Names of police officers have been deleted from the tape by the police department.
911 OPERATOR: Operator 71.


Our Towns
Rick Davey brought Little Miss 1565 home to her family this summer.
It was 47 years after she died.
She was, though unnamed for nearly half a century, the most famous victim of one of the worst fires in American history: the burst of flame in the big top of the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus on Barbour Street here on July 6, 1944.
It left 168 people dead and memories of terror and innocence tangled together in a circus tent.


Wildcats Drop Player
LLOYD MUMFORD has been dropped from the Villanova basketball team in the wake of charges that he broke into two suburban Philadelphia homes.
Mumford, 20 years old, of Mattapan, Mass., faces a preliminary hearing on Tuesday on charges of criminal trespass, criminal mischief and disorderly conduct.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher; Gold Prices Decline in U.S.
The dollar settled mostly higher on world currency markets yesterday in active but uneventful dealings.
Gold prices declined slightly in the United States after rising overseas.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold bullion for current deliver settled at $363.20 an ounce, down 40 cents from Wednesday's level.
The Republic National Bank said gold lost 30 cents an ounce for a late bid price of $363.40.


U.S. Planning to Allow Visits by People with AIDS
Bush Administration officials have decided to permit some immigrants with AIDS into the country while barring others, health officials said today.
After two years of raucous debate, Federal health officials have reached a consensus about the policy they will establish on the immigration of people with AIDS.


Sounds Around Town
Re-Africanizing Rumba
Diblo Dibala, Summerstage, Rumsey Playfield, mid-Central Park at 70th Street, (212) 360-2777.
The re-Africanized rumbas of Zairean soukous float and lilt on their twining guitar riffs; Diblo Dibala has dispensed some of the best of them as a member of Kanda Bongo Man's band, as a co-leader of the group Loketo and now with his own band.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Admission is free, but donations are requested.
Jazz Meets Gospel


Look Out Above! The Giants Win Again
The San Francxisco Giants' winning streak reached 11 games,the team's longest in 25 years, as Kevin Mitchell and Will Clark homered tonight to lead a 17-hit attack that overwhelmed the Cincinnati Reds, 8-1.
Mitchell had four hits, including a three-run homer, and Clark and Willie McGee each had three hits as the Giants' offense remained in high gear.
The Giants are averaging more than five runs a game during the streak, their longest since they won 12 straight in 1966.


Erickson Can't Play
The National Football League career of the former University of Miami quarterback CRAIG ERICKSON might be over before it had a chance to begin.
A fifth-round choice of the Philadelphia Eagles, Erickson announced that he would become a graduate assistant coach at Georgia this season instead of signing with the Eagles because of damage to a nerve in his lower right leg.


I.B.M. and NEC Near Supercomputer Pact
The race to build and sell supercomputers has been a nationalistic one, pitting American makers against the Japanese.
Now, in the latest of I.B.M.'s sometimes mystifying set of new alliances, that distinction is about to be muddied.
Officials at I.B.M.
Japan said today that they were near an agreement with the NEC Corporation to sell and install systems that combine the SX-3, NEC's largest supercomputer, with I.B.M.'s own mainframes.


After the Summit; Excerpts From Bush's Ukraine Speech: Working 'for the Good of Both of Us'
Following are excerpts from President Bush's speech today to the Ukrainian Parliament:
This beautiful city brings to mind the words of the poet Aleksandr Dovzhenko : "The city of Kiev is an orchard. Kiev is a poet. Kiev is an epic. Kiev is history. Kiev is art."


Sounds Around Town
Debriano's Latin Jazz
Santi Debriano Trio, Village Gate Terrace, 160 Bleecker Street, at Thompson Street, Manhattan, (212) 475-5120.
Santi Debriano, the Panamanian-born musician who has become one of the most active young bassists in New York City, is unveiling his newly formed trio this weekend with Paul Meyer on guitar and Vanderlei Beirera on drums.
Mr.
Debriano -- whose father was a pianist and band leader in Panama and later in Brooklyn -- grew up listening to the bands his father played with, which gave him a basis for his Latin-tinged jazz.
His trio, which has been rehearsing for five months, has a book of compositions by Mr.
Debriano and Mr.
Meyer, all in arrangements by Mr.
Pereira.
The trio plays three sets tonight and tomorrow between 10 P.M. and 3 A.M. and Sunday between 10 P.M. and 2 A.M.
There is no cover charge, but there is a $6.50 beverage minimum.


Review/Film; The Next Generation At 'Blue Lagoon'
The 1980 hit "The Blue Lagoon" was nothing more than a teen-age titillation movie, but it had a sweet, dopey simplicity.
Brooke Shields and Christopher Atkins, as 19th-century orphans stranded on a tropical island, learned about sex the way Adam and Eve must have (if they had been very discreetly photographed) and still had trouble figuring out where the baby came from.
Well, that baby is back, and he is the unluckiest child on earth.
Trapped in "Return to the Blue Lagoon," he is destined to replay a more complicated and even lamer version of his parents' coming of age.


William Ball, Director, 60, Dies; Founded a Conservatory Theater
William Ball, the founder of the American Conservatory Theater in San Francisco, was found dead at his apartment in Hollywood on Tuesday.
He was 60 years old.
The coroner's office said the cause of death had not been determined.


Restaurants
While many midtown restaurants are merely treading water, the Manhattan Ocean Club is coursing through the surf with the insouciance of a playful dolphin.
And the reasons are evident.
This elegant fish house delivers irreproachably fresh fare that is generally prepared in an engaging and uncontrived manner.
Despite its big-city prices -- count on $60 to $70 a person with wine, tax and tip -- the sprawling dining rooms buzz at both lunch and dinner.
The restaurant is under the same ownership as the Post House and Smith &amp; Wollensky, two popular Manhattan steakhouses.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE
Buffalo Bills -- Waived Lionel Manuel, wide receiver, and Tim Kalal, punter.
Philadelphia Eagles -- Signed Mike Schad, guard, to a two-year contract.
Agreed to terms with Kenny Jackson, wide receiver, on a one-year contract.
ARENA FOOTBALL LEAGUE
Albany Firebirds -- Signed John Levelis, lineman.
Placed Chuck Harris, lineman, on injured reserve.
Detroit Drive -- Placed Troy Knight, lineman, and David Evans, wide receiver-defensive back, on injured reserve.
Activated Jitter Field and Larry Hargrove, wide receiver-defensive backs, from injured reserve.
New Orleans Night -- Signed Jackie Cooper, wide receiver-defensive back.
Placed Milton Barney, wide receiver-defensive back, on injured reserve.
Tampa Bay Storm -- Placed John Darnell, quarterback, and Tracey Perkins, wide receiver-defensive back, on injured reserve.
Activated Jay Gruden, quarterback, and Kevin Guidry, wide receiver-defensive back, from injured reserve.


Market Place; Holding the Edge In Paper Business
THESE are not the best of times for paper companies.
The recession has left them with sinking profits, sagging demand and eroding prices for a number of products.
For example, the price of market pulp, the material from which paper is manufactured, has plunged 35 percent in two years, while prices of coated paper -- the slick paper used in magazines and advertising supplements -- are down 10 percent in that period.
Even bleached board, the profitable paper used for frozen-food containers and packaging for cosmetics, has languished.


Public Works Aging Fast, Report Says
New York City's antiquated sewers, water mains, roads and bridges are falling apart faster than the city is fixing them, according to a new engineering study that is the first to measure both the aging of the system and the current pace of repairs.
It paints a grim picture of New York circa 2030 in which pipes are bursting like cheap balloons and citizens are struggling without running water for days on end; in which roads and bridges are being closed for fear of collapse, and every corner of the city is immobilized in epic traffic jams.


Corrections
A front-page article on July 21 about cities' and states' use of their pension funds to help balance their budgets misstated the amount borrowed by Philadelphia from its fund.
It was $37.5 million, not $150 million.


Bridge
Form continued to prevail in the Spingold Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals here Wednesday, but there were some very close matches.
The team led by Zia Mahmood of New York City squeezed through by four imps against a New Zealand foursome.
But another favored team, led by Jim Mahaffey of Winter Park, Fla., and seeded 13th, lost by one imp to George Rapee, John Solodar and Phillip Alder, all of New York City; Dave Treadwell of Wilmington, Del.; Robert Gookin of Falls Church, Va., and Ron Klinger of Australia.
Pairings by captain in the round of 16 today are: Jim Cayne of New York City vs.
Andy Goodman of San Francisco; Malcolm Brachman of Dallas vs.
Philippe De Bourbon of New York City; Bill Root of Boca Raton, Fla., vs.
Richard Schwartz of Palm Beach, Fla.; Cliff Russell of Miami vs.
George Rapee; Steve Robinson of Arlington, Va., vs.
Ralph Cohen of Memphis; Jeff Wolfson of Northbrook, Ill., vs.
Ron Gerard of White Plains; Zia Mahmood vs.
Jerry Goldfein of Chicago; Dan Morse of Houston vs.
Russ Ekeblad of Providence, R.I.
One Upset Among Women
There was only one upset in the Women's Knockout Teams.
Sixth-seeded Rhoda Walsh of Encino, Calif., and her team lost by 11 imps to a Canadian foursome led by Dianna Gordon of Toronto.
Quarterfinal pairings by captain are: Mary Jane Farell of Los Angeles vs.
Sally Wheeler of Houston; Kathie Wei of Houston vs.
Jacqui Mitchell of New York City; Juanita Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., vs.
Dianna Gordon; Edith Freilich of Miami Beach vs.
Nancy Passell of Dallas.


Black Film's Ads Also Targeted Whites
To the Editor:
In reporting that Hollywood is seeking white audiences for new black movies (arts pages, July 17), you describe "Boyz N the Hood" as a film "about a black teen-ager growing up amid gang warfare." Put simply, the film is about three young men coming of age in South Central Los Angeles.
To say this is the same as "amid gang warfare" is a shortcut that is at best misleading.
The film is anti-violence and anti-gang, and advocates family relationships and education as antidotes to violence.


Senate Backs Bush's Call for 'Star Wars' and Stealth Priorities
The Senate today endorsed President Bush's two top military priorities, the Stealth bomber and the "Star Wars" antimissile defense system, rejecting arguments that the easing of cold war tensions and closer United States-Soviet ties made the weapons unnecessary.
In a series of votes, the Senate approved $4.6 billion for the next fiscal year to test sensors in space and begin fielding an antimissile defense system by 1996 that would protect the United States against limited nuclear attacks.


For Children
In "The Great Gatsby," F. Scott Fitzgerald described the area around what is now Flushing Meadows-Corona Park as a "a fantastic farm where ashes grow like wheat into ridges and hills and grotesque gardens." At the time, part of that area was actually an ash dump.
After the 1939-40 World's Fair there, Robert Moses, New York City's Parks Commissioner, dreamed of turning it into a city park.
But afterward it was left virtually idle (except for a few years in the late 1940's when it was the temporary headquarters of the United Nations) until the 1964-65 World's Fair.
Then, with vestiges of the fair remaining, the park was born.
Now Flushing Meadows-Corona Park is characterized by wide tree-lined walks, flat lawns and quiet fountains.


Senate Votes $5.8 Billion For Extended Jobless Pay
The Senate tonight passed a $5.8 billion program to extend unemployment benefits to people who have been out of work more than half a year.
After a week of delaying actions by Republicans in both houses, passage came swiftly tonight on a voice vote with no opposition heard.


Mass Layoff Authorized By CUNY at 2 Colleges
The trustees of the City University of New York yesterday authorized the possible dismissal of half of the 800 faculty and staff members at New York City Technical College in Brooklyn.
Acting at the request of Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds, the trustees declared a financial emergency, a move that is essentially an effort to use the students and tenured professors as leverage to pry loose $23 million in funds from either the city or the state.


Quotation of the Day
"Success is possible. They are the avian equivalent of an elephant or Bengal tiger. No one can be indifferent to a condor soaring. It is very moving." -- Lloyd Kiff, an ornithologist who is working to save the California condor.  [ A1:3. ]


Serial Murder Case Exposes Deep Milwaukee Tensions
Almost day and night for a week, there have been angry news conferences, marches and rallies against the police in this wounded city.
Bitter charges of racism and homophobia in the police department have been provoked by the handling of the Jeffrey L. Dahmer serial murder case and the belief that some of the killings could have been prevented.


Yanks Find Talk and Homers Go a Long Way
When a team is spiraling lower and lower and carrying a losing streak around like the proverbial monkey that will not leave its back alone, there are several possible cures.
A players-only team meeting, a solid pitching effort by Greg Cadaret and two home runs from Matt Nokes were the remedies the Yankees used yesterday in pounding out an 8-3 victory over the Minnesota Twins at Yankee Stadium.
For New York, the effort cured a four-game losing streak.


Cancer Society Prepares Antismoking Matches
Some new matchbooks strike an unconventional advertising pose: they are actually an antismoking pitch.
The matchbooks bear typical huckstering slogans like "Get rich quick" and "Improve your love life." But the inside covers offer a different message: "Quit smoking." And the matches inside have no heads.


Banking Legislation in Doubt Before Congress Recesses
The Senate Banking Committee moved at a snail's pace today through a series of votes on amendments to a bill overhauling the nation's banking laws.
The slow deliberations threw into doubt whether the panel could complete the effort before its August recess, a delay that would be a political setback for the legislation.
For the second day in a row, the committee members spent more time bickering than voting and put off debate on most of the key elements of the legislation, leaving them to further negotiations behind closed doors.


Review/Art; A Color Field Painter From the 60's to Now
In recent years, Dan Christensen has been more an absence than a presence on the New York art scene, a prime candidate for the dreaded game of "Whatever happened to . . .?" This wasn't always the case.
In the late 1960's, Mr.
Christensen was a rising star in the Color Field, or Formalist, painting firmament.
His work appeared in Artforum magazine when he was only 26 years old and in two Whitney Biennials before he was 30.
He was famous for making his abstract paintings with a spray gun, looping lines of hazy color into repeating, Slinky-like configurations that had a stylish leanness and a soft optical buzz.
By the mid-70s, the Color Field's light had dimmed and, with it, Mr.
Christensen's.
Although he continued to exhibit his work regularly, it became less original, and less noticed.
It followed the lead of other Color Field painters, especially Jules Olitski, as they turned to thickly troweled paint in the quest for pure abstraction and the elimination of spatial illusion. (The story of how the quest for absolute flatness in postwar painting produced a lot of inert bumpiness has yet to be told.)


Lionel Fitzgerald Payne, Civic Leader, 80
Lionel Fitzgerald Payne, a retired New York City employee and a civic leader in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, died on July 20 at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 80 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
He died of cancer, said his son Richard.


When Politics Topples Precedent, That's Chaos; New Anti-Catholicism
To the Editor:
It was not surprising that Gov.
Doug Wilder rankled Roman Catholics all over the country with his poorly worded suggestion that Clarence Thomas's Catholicism is cause for rigorous inquiry into the connection between the nominee's religious beliefs and constitutional principles.
But given the increasing vehemence with which the Catholic bishops have demanded fidelity to their political directives on abortion, Mr.
Wilder voiced a legitimate concern.


John Underhill Crandell, Publisher, 74
John Underhill Crandell, a former publisher of Money magazine, died yesterday at his home in Manchester, Vt.
He was 74 years old.
He died of cancer, a family spokeswoman said.


Review/Film; The Fall of a Rock Star In 'Street of No Return'
Samuel Fuller's "Street of No Return" was made only two years ago and has a plot incorporating rock video, but neither of those things places it firmly in the present.
Hard edges, tough-guy bravado and a total inability to mince words anchor this bizarre, impassioned hybrid in the film noir past.
Based on the 1954 novel by David Goodis (whose work was also the basis for Truffaut's "Shoot the Piano Player"), the film tells of a singer who is brutally punished for loving the wrong woman, and who as a consequence falls from the peak of success to the gutter.
Thanks to Mr.
Fuller's directorial relentlessness, which is still very much intact, it's possible to find this tale peculiarly gripping without believing it in the slightest.


Review/Art; French Landscape Painting, The Seed of Impressionism
AT the conclusion of the catalogue essay for his groundbreaking 1962 exhibition, "Barbizon Revisited," the art historian Robert L. Herbert wrote that an appreciation of 19th-century French pastoral painters like Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot, Charles Daubigny, Jean-Francois Millet and Theodore Rousseau depends upon not "seeing Barbizon art as merely the cradle of Impressionism, or as the repository of 19th-century sentimentality."
Thirty years later, another groundbreaking exhibition, "The Rise of Landscape Painting in France: Corot to Monet," is fighting a similar battle.
Its cause is, once again, the appreciation of early and mid-19th-century landscape painters who remain familiar to many, beloved by a few, and essentially on the margins of modernist art history.
Far more directly than the earlier exhibition, this one sets out to challenge the popular assumption that Impressionism is the be-all-and-end-all of French landscape painting and the birthplace of modern art.


New York and Yale Officials To Confer on Needle Study
Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that New York City health officials would meet with Yale University researchers to discuss a recent study that showed a New Haven needle-exhange program has curbed the spread of AIDS among drug addicts.
The Mayor canceled a similar program in New York City last year, saying it encouraged drug abuse.


New Hip for Wooden
Former U.C.L.A. basketball coach JOHN WOODEN was reported to be resting comfortably after a successful three-and-a-half hour hip-replacement operation in Los Angeles.
The 80-year-old Wooden is expected to remain hospitalized for about two weeks. (AP)


Issue by Ambac To Yield 9.442%
Ambac Inc., the holding company for Ambac Indemnity Corporation, a major municipal bond insurance firm, yesterday offered $150 million of 9 3/8 percent debentures due in 2011 at a price of 99.40 to yield 9.442 percent.
The offering was made through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.


Savaged, Then Saved by Man, Condors Will Return to Wild
Just four years after Federal wildlife officials rounded up the last wild California condors in a Dunkirk-like evacuation to save the species from extinction, they have decided to start restoring the giant ancient birds to the wild.
The decision is a milestone for what is probably the most ambitious and costly effort ever undertaken to replenish a nearly extinct species.
Two condor chicks are to be released in September or October into a rugged mountainous sanctuary in Los Padres National Forest, about 50 miles northwest of downtown Los Angeles.
If that first step is successful, the hope is ultimately to create two separate wild populations of about 100 birds each.


The Comptroller Stumbles
For eight months Elizabeth Holtzman showed admirable empathy for New Yorkers suffering through hard times.
The City Comptroller, following Mayor David Dinkins's lead, took a 5 percent salary cut last October and imposed similar cuts on seven staff members.
Since she and her aides were all earning at least $100,000, their sacrifice was welcome but hardly daunting.
Symbolism helps, though, as the Comptroller noted at the time: "We all have to share the pain."
Not for long, however.
Ms.
Holtzman, the city's chief fiscal officer, cheapened her gesture by restoring the cuts -- very quietly, through publication in The City Record, a compendium of public notices.


U.S. and Mexico Draft Plan to Fight Pollution
Trying to meet criticism that a pending free trade agreement could result in increased pollution, the United States and Mexico released a draft plan today to improve the quality of the environment along the border.
The detailed document calls for extra investment in wastewater treatment plants, greater restrictions on hazardous-waste shipments across the border and the hiring of more officials to enforce environmental laws in Mexico.


Art in Review
Tony Feher, Paula Hayes and Curtis Mitchell Andrea Rosen Gallery 130 Prince Street Manhattan Through Aug. 14
This exhibition reflects the current rage for chaos among younger artists: that is, the trend of recycling slightly fatigued, casually dispersed objects and materials.
What's intriguing is that, trend or no trend, these three artists are very different from one another.


A Diffident Rock Stylist Who's Just Starting at 67
Sitting in a conference room at the offices of Elektra Records, Johnnie Johnson doesn't have the demeanor of a premier rock-and-roll stylist.
He is casually dressed in a khaki button-down shirt and slacks, and he wears a navy-blue captain's hat with gold-plait fringe.
He has heavy eyelids and jowls, and a smile as warm as any you could hope to find on the streets of a small town.
His hands, which added graceful blues-boogie piano to Chuck Berry classics like "Maybellene," "Back in the U.S.A." and "Sweet Little Sixteen," are strong and solid as a construction worker's, with short, squat fingers and beefy palms.
His forearms look like Popeye the Sailor's.
At the age of 67, after almost 40 years in the music business, Mr.
Johnson has reached a momentous juncture in his career: He has just released his first major-label solo album, "Johnnie B. Bad," through Elektra's new American Explorer series.
Tomorrow he'll perform shows in Central Park and at the Lone Star Roadhouse to celebrate.
But if "Johnnie B. Bad" comes as a long-overdue tribute to one of rock-and-roll's most talented unsung heroes, Mr.
Johnson seems to be making the move from sideman to center stage with great modesty and ease.
"It's beginning to catch on now," he says in a rough, deep voice.
"I've often said I'm used to playing, getting paid and going home. It's a little different now. But it's exciting." Troubled by 'Mike Fright'
"Johnnie B. Bad" includes 12 variations on the blues and rock-and-roll, from sweltering new originals like Mr.
Johnson's own "Tanqueray" to older numbers by blues masters like Jimmie Reed and Roosevelt Sykes.
Most of the album was produced by Terry Adams, the guitarist for the band NRBQ; two tracks were produced by Keith Richards.
While Mr.
Johnson's piano playing is featured throughout, he handles lead vocals only on two songs.
"I've always had what musicians call 'mike fright,' " he says.
"I was scared of a mike. Just like I'm talking now, if you were out in the audience, I couldn't talk to you over a mike. They finally pushed me into doing it, and each time I do it the tension got less and less."


Croatia Ousts Defense Chief As Serbs Outgun Its Forces
As thousands of Croatian refugees fled their homes before advancing Serbian rebels, Croatia's President dismissed his Defense Minister today and acknowledged that his republic was being badly outgunned in the widening conflict.
President Franjo Tudjman's grim-faced address to the Parliament drew sharp rebukes from hard-line members of his own party, who demanded a general mobilization and declaration of war against both the Republic of Serbia and the Yugoslav Army.


Jordan Badly in Need of Peace Accord
When Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d arrives here on Friday to seek King Hussein's renewed support for the American peace initiative for the Middle East, he will find the Jordanian King eager to improve ties with America and badly in need of a settlement with Israel.
But while the King has already accepted the American proposal in principle, Mr.
Baker will also find Jordan's support limited by the suspicions of many of the nearly two million Palestinians who live in Jordan.
The influence of these doubters has been enhanced by the recent democratic openings here.


ISRAELIS GIVE U.S. CONDITIONAL 'YES' ON MIDEAST TALKS
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir announced today that Israel would join in Middle East peace negotiations so long as its conditions on the composition of a Palestinian delegation are met.
His statement to reporters that he would seek Cabinet approval Sunday of the decision to attend the meeting tentatively scheduled in October was made after meeting with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, who flew here from Moscow with instructions from President Bush to seek Israel's official acceptance of the peace conference proposal.


Midair Collision Kills Pilots
Two small cargo planes under contract to United Parcel Service collided near this town Wednesday, killing the two pilots.
The planes, which carried no passengers, had taken off from Wichita Mid-Continent Airport shortly before the crash, said Jerome Walburn, assistant air traffic manager at the Wichita tower.


A Year Later, Kuwait Sinks Into Malaise
A year after the Iraqi invasion, this gulf nation has been enveloped by a malaise as numbing as the August heat and as depressing as the oily soot that hangs over the city.
President Saddam Hussein of Iraq still looms, larger than life, over Kuwait.
The political changes promised by the ruling Sabah family, including parliamentary elections in 1992, strike many as tepid.
And it is becoming clear that the recovery of the country, including the capping of 500 burning oil wells and the clearing of several million land mines, is one or two years away.


Prosecutors Rest in Fire Trial
The prosecution rested in the Happy Land trial yesterday, calling as its final witness the Bronx social club's disk jockey, his hands still encased in protective gloves for injuries suffered in the fire that killed 87 people there 16 months ago.
But before the witness finished testifying in the murder trial of Julio Gonzalez, who is accused of setting the fire, a mother of a victim began sobbing loudly and uncontrollably, forcing the judge to send the jury out of the courtroom and to call a recess.


Sports of The Times; Mattingly's Dream Very Much Alive
THOUGH it is not yet a paradise of pennant contention, Yankee Stadium is a fine place to work again for Don Mattingly.
As it appears the modestly resurgent Yankees may have a future after all, Mattingly's dream of reaching a World Series before he or his aching back decide he has had enough baseball is suddenly very much alive.
There are no guarantees, but hope goes a long way when dragging one's body through the New York summer.
Mattingly, who less than two years ago entertained serious thoughts of escaping the George Steinbrenner-led Yankees, no longer thinks of bidding New York adieu.


8 Tied to Gambino Family Are Indicted in Racket Case
Eight reputed members of a Gambino crime family crew, including a man who law-enforcement officials believe has assumed some of John Gotti's power, have been indicted on murder and a host of other charges.
Operating out of a Lower East Side pastry shop, the crew conducted a lucrative business in gambling, loan sharking, extortion, dealing in drugs and weapons, and the production and distribution of forged credit cards, a Manhattan grand jury said..


In Court, a Bitter Duel for the Right to Be a Bozo
Over the years, plenty of clowns have appeared before the United States Supreme Court.
But now the Court has been asked to hear what could be called Bozo v.
Bozo, a case pitting the "world's most famous clown" against what some say is Tennessee's best barbecue.
Larry Harmon was about to be born in Toledo, Ohio, when, in 1923, Thomas Jefferson (Bozo) Williams opened his first barbecue restaurant in this hamlet in cotton-farming country, 30 miles northeast of Memphis, and named it after himself.
Nearly three more decades would pass before Mr.
Harmon first donned his corona of orange hair, his bell-bottom pants and size 83-AAA shoes, and unveiled his crowning creation: Bozo the Clown.


Economic Scene; Seeking Fairer Health Coverage
MOST business executives, Government officials and union spokesmen deplore the failure of the health-care system to serve the growing numbers of Americans who do not have medical insurance.
For one thing, with at least 33 million people uninsured, their largely unpaid hospital and doctor bills are often passed along in higher costs to employers and others who pay for health care.
Companies that have good health plans pay for the care of 16 million employees' spouses, for example, who have jobs with other employers that do not provide coverage.
And millions of Americans are covered only for big-ticket emergencies.


Woman, 93, Who Prized Her Independence Is Slain
Even at the age of 93, Mathilde Poggensee stubbornly refused help from anyone.
Though her sight and hearing were almost gone, she rebuffed suggestions from neighbors in her Bronx apartment building that she hire a live-in nurse so she would not have to live alone.


America's Drum-Beating for Soccer Is Premature
EVERY few years, to the rattle of drums and tin cups, we are solemnly told that soccer's time has come in America.
Wishful thinking dies hard.
Once, the great Pele was going to lead us to the promised game.
He was the best-known athlete in the world, except in America where he might stop traffic in an immigrant neighborhood but couldn't fill a news conference.
His promotors told us that he would ignite soccer madness, which would trickle down to the next generation.
This was premature.
In the 70's, when schoolboy football budgets were cut and gender equality was in the air, thousands of small-fry soccer leagues bloomed.
We were told that the game would trickle up, that we would cultivate our own Peles.
This was premature.


U.N. Nuclear Agency Submits a Plan for Iraq
A tough, all-encompassing plan for long-range monitoring of Iraq's nuclear technologu has been submitted to the Security Council by the International Atomic Energy Agency, an arm of the United Nations.
The plan, a copy of which was obtained today by The New York Times, would give the agency virtually complete control of Iraq's future nuclear development as well as unlimited right of movement within Iraq and across its borders.
Diplomats here said the plan called for the most stringent inspection requirements in the United Nations' history.


Ex-Contras Clash With Sandinistas
This isolated mountain village was asleep the other day when about 80 rearmed veterans of the contra rebellion attacked the local police station in a six-hour battle that grew out of growing tension between the former rebels and their old foes, the Sandinistas.
A day later, the village's muddy streets were filled with more than 200 reinforcements from the police and army, which are still controlled by the Sandinista Front despite the party's ouster from power in national elections last year.
As the reinforcements searched houses for suspected collaborators, people began to feel the enormity of the most significant action since some of the contras, who laid down their arms after the new center-right President, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, came to power, began rearming early this year.


An Unfamiliar Image Emerges in Atlanta
Ted Turner is talking about "Damn Yankees" and its saga of the baseball dead rising once again.
"This is kind of like a miracle," said Turner before his long-suffering Atlanta Braves completed a four-game sweep of the powerful Pittsburgh Pirates here Wednesday night.
"We've been down for so long, you begin to start believing it, that there's no way out. You almost get suicidal. This is like 'Damn Yankees.' "


The Heat Is On Again As a Jet Cornerback Fights to Keep His Job
In baseball, the hot corner is third base.
In football, it is the area covered by the greenest cornerback.
Last year that was the Jets' left corner, manned by Tony Stargell.
Opposing quarterbacks tested the Jets' third-round pick out of Tennessee State by throwing his way.
Television crews focused isolated cameras on him and reporters kept tabs on how many times he was beaten.
But Stargell endured, starting all 16 games.
He intercepted only two passes, but he was credited with defensing nine, second on the team, recorded 89 tackles, the third-highest total on the team, and was named to a number of all-rookie teams.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
Federal Express Corp.'s $150 million of 10 percent noncallable notes, due Sept. 1, 1998, were priced at 99.346 to yield 10.14 percent by Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The yield was about 2.10 percentage points above comparable Treasury notes. *
California Federal Bank, a unit of CalFed Inc., has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $500 million of mortgage pass-through certificates.
They will be backed by fixed- or adjustable-rate mortgages originated by California Federal or its units.


U.S. Note and Bond Prices Slip
A surprising decline in the nation's money supply announced by the Federal Reserve yesterday caused prices of Treasury notes and bonds to rebound late in the day, closing with only slight losses.
Although analysts and traders do not expect a quick move by the Federal Reserve to reduce short-term interest rates in response to slow growth of the money supply, they noted that the weak monetary growth was a symptom of the sluggishness in the economy, which would eventually favor low inflation and lower interest rates.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.75
5.85
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.54
5.51
7.43
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.67
5.65
7.31
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
8.01
7.99
8.29
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.35
8.33
8.45
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.30
9.30
9.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.09
7.11
7.31
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


American Express Gets Some Help From Buffett
The American Express Company, hungry for capital after six months of unexpectedly weak earnings, said yesterday that it was getting $300 million from one of the most celebrated friends of management in American finance -- the billionaire investor Warren E. Buffett.
Mr.
Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway Inc., the investment vehicle of which he is chairman, will get a non-transferable issue of preferred stock that can be converted to 12.2 million shares of common.
If converted today, that would be equivalent to about 2.6 percent of American Express.


Du Pont to Cut Engineer Jobs
The Du Pont Company said today that it would eliminate 550 engineering jobs in the company's first round of cuts to reduce costs by $1 billion over two years.
The layoffs will account for about $50 million in a plan to cut Du Pont Engineering's $440 million operating budget by nearly half, said Michael B. Emery, senior vice president for engineering.


Calling Computer-Age Andrew Carnegies
To the Editor:
In an article trumpeting how much information is available via the home computer, you state, "researchers acknowledge that they must resolve several questions of privacy and pricing" before they can put such high-speed digital networks on the market (Business Day, July 3).


Support for 5-Cent Gasoline Tax Collapses Abruptly in the House
Congressional support for a proposed 5-cent-a-gallon increase in the gasoline tax collapsed abruptly tonight when two Democratic committee chairmen angrily dropped efforts to negotiate the issue in the House Rules Committee.
Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, and Representative Robert A. Roe of New Jersey, the chairman of the Public Works and Transportation Committee, disagreed on the best way to present the measure on the House floor, aides said.


Review/Film; A Dutch Voyeur, Mom, Dad And Freud
Abel, the protagonist of Alex van Warmerdam's Freudian comedy "Voyeur," is the ultimate passive-aggressive milquetoast with a streak of demonic mischief.
At the age of 31, he has not set foot outside his parents' apartment in 10 years.
Loafing about the house, Abel (Mr. van Warmerdam) spends hours peering into the windows across the street through binoculars and chasing flies with a pair of scissors.
When his parents pack him off to a psychiatrist, he puts on an act and becomes a gibbering maniac.
He foils the treatment of a magnetic healer by concealing a bent silver spoon in his mouth.
Abel's mother, Dove (Olga Zuderhoek), is doting and overly protective; his father, Victor (Henri Garcin), is a tyrannical business executive with a ferocious temper and a taste for voyeurism himself.
At a peep show one day, Victor meets Sis (Annet Malherbe), a nonchalant exhibitionist with whom he begins a clandestine affair.
It isn't long before the ferociously possessive Dove intuits the relationship and begins ranting and raving.
The situation explodes when Abel, whom Victor finally boots out of the house, is picked up on the street by Sis and taken home to be a sort of boy toy.


GTE Mobile Account To Babbit &amp; Reiman
GTE Mobile Communications, Atlanta, yesterday assigned its estimated $6.5 million advertising account to Babbit &amp; Reiman Advertising, Atlanta.
GTE Mobile said the review on the newly created account involved four finalists, but the company did not identify the three other contenders.
Industry executives, however, said Ogilvy &amp; Mather and Fahlgren Martin, both of Atlanta, were among them.


New Name In Scandal In Japan
An important political link to Japan's stock market scandal was disclosed today in reports that the family of one of Japan's most powerful politicians was among the influential clients who received improper compensation for stock market losses from securities houses.
Okasan Securities confirmed reports in the Japanese press and on television that it paid 21 million yen, or about $150,000, to a company controlled by the family of Shin Kanemaru, a powerful member of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party and a former Deputy Prime Minister.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about security techniques at the nation's nuclear weapons plants, and a front-page cross reference to the article, characterized the report of the Energy Department's inspector general incorrectly.
It did not find that employees who had reported safety problems had been spied on.
Related developments are reported today on page A15.


Nets Want Anderson's Autograph
While the Knicks are creating all the noise with Patrick Ewing, the Nets are quietly going ahead trying to sign Kenny Anderson, their first-round draft choice and the second player selected in June's draft.
"We've had two meetings with his agent, Richard Howell, and things are going well," Willis Reed, the Nets' vice president of basketball operations, said yesterday.
"We will continue to meet and talk and try and get the deal done as quickly as we can."


Maris Without Ruth? It's a Possibility
Roger Maris and his 61 home runs will no longer be Roger Maris* next month if a baseball committee agrees with the recommendation by Commissioner FAY VINCENT to drop Babe Ruth's 60 homers from the record books.
The eight-man committee for statistical accuracy is composed of three baseball officials, a statistician, two reporters and two professors.
It was established by Vincent's predecessor, A. Bartlett Giamatti.


Bear Stearns Profit Up 50%
The Bear Stearns Companies said yesterday that its earnings rose 50 percent in its fiscal fourth quarter, because of an upturn in Wall Street activity.
The New York-based brokerage holding company said it earned $50.3 million, or 50 cents a share, for the quarter ended June 30, compared with $33.5 million, or 30 cents a share, a year ago.
Revenues were down 5.5 percent to $604.5 million, from $640 million a year ago.


U.S. Effort On B.C.C.I. Is Assailed
William von Raab, the former Commissioner of Customs, today accused the Bush Administration of dragging its feet on an investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International and of barring him from sensitive information about the scandal-riddled bank when he pushed for stronger action.
The Treasury Department, under which Mr. von Rabb served as Customs Commissioner, immediately replied that the commissioner was, indeed, kept away from sensitive information for fear he would disclose it.


'Cav' and 'Pag'
The New York City Opera's new productions of Mascagni's "Cavalleria Rusticana" and Leoncavallo's "Pagliacci" are to have their premieres tomorrow at 8 P.M. at the New York State Theater.
In this production, the operas are set in Little Italy in Manhattan at the turn of the century.
Stephen O'Mara and Sharon Graham sing the roles of Turiddu and Santuzza, respectively, in "Cavalleria"; John Absalom is Canio, Gwynne Geyer is Nedda and Robin Buck is Silvio in "Pagliacci." Richard Bradshaw conducts.
Tickets are $8 to $62.
Information: (212) 870-5570.


Diner's Journal
Hudson Valley Bounty
Those interested in learning more about Hudson Valley wines and food may want to make reservations at the Hudson River Club for Aug. 12, when the restaurant will hold the next of its monthly wine dinners.
Featured will be wines and produce from the west side of the Hudson River.
Among the speakers are representatives of West Park Winery and Rivendell Vineyards.


Art in Review
'Evolutions:'  'The Photographs of John Sexton' International Center of Photography Midtown 1133 Avenue of the Americas (at 43d Street) Through Sept. 1
The International Center of Photography Midtown is presenting the landscape photographs of the California photographer John Sexton.
His subjects are standbys of the West Coast school of landscape photography, and they include such familiar themes as dramatically lighted rock forms framed against the surf, rows of aspen trees marching up mountainsides and glistening boulders in the middle of frothing rivers.
Mr.
Sexton worked for a number of years as an assistant to Ansel Adams, who took this kind of romantic nature imagery to its highest point.
While Mr.
Sexton's pictures are worthy successors to this tradition, they add little that is new to it.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in The Home Section yesterday about the Mothers' Network misstated its membership dues.
They are $25 yearly, not monthly.


Chief Leaves Square D As Schneider Moves In
No one was surprised when Jerre L. Stead stepped down yesterday from his job as chairman, president and chief executive of the Square D Company, the $1.65 billion electrical distribution equipment giant.
Once Square D was acquired by Groupe Schneider S.A., the French electrical equipment maker, in May, analysts said it would be only a matter of time until Mr.
Stead moved on.
"He was not entirely in favor of the takeover, so I'm not surprised he is leaving," said Russell Leavitt, an analyst with Salomon Brothers.


Results Are Expected Today In Ethics Inquiry on D'Amato
Members of the Senate Ethics Committee said tonight they had completed the initial phase of their inquiry into charges of unethical conduct by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, and planned to announce the results Friday afternoon.
The members declined to provide any details.
They could decide to proceed with a full investigation, drop it or narrow its focus.


Chris Short, Pitcher, 53
Chris Short, a left-handed pitcher who won 135 games in 15 major league seasons, spending almost all of his career with the Philadelphia Phillies, died today in a convalescent home.
He was 53 years old.
Mr.
Short suffered a ruptured aneurysm and lapsed into a coma in October 1988.
He never regained consciousness.


Grand Jury Will Get Case of Fatal Shots By Jersey City Police
A Hudson County grand jury will investigate the fatal shooting of a Jersey City man by a police officer there, the County Prosecutor announced yesterday after consulting with the New Jersey Attorney General.
The office of the Prosecutor, Paul M. DePascale, announced on Wednesday that he was ready to release a 17-page report on the incident.
But later in the day, Mr.
DePascale canceled the news conference, saying that Attorney General Robert J. Del Tufo had asked that no statement be issued.


Twins Hope Oakland Is Nice Place to Visit
The Minnesota Twins don't have too many like this one, but they did have one just last Sunday when the Milwaukee Brewers clobbered them, 11-2.
"We came back the next day and won," Mike Pagliarulo said after the Yankees clobbered the Twins, 8-3, yesterday." We've been consistent in our approach. I don't think anything will change our approach."


2 New Proposals on Audits
Two proposals were offered yesterday in the House and Senate that would require American auditors to be more vigilant against fraud.
While the Senate version would apply only to auditors of federally insured banks and resembles another banking bill now in the House, the new House bill would apply to all auditors of public companies.


Patients Grilling Health Workers on AIDS
In the past, a framed diploma on the wall answered almost every question.
But these days, in choosing their doctors and dentists, many patients are asking for more reassurances.
How do you sterilize the equipment in your office?
Are those fresh gloves?
Do you treat patients who have AIDS?
Are you married?


Driver Honked Wildly as Bus Led Scouts to Death
Witnesses said today that the driver of a tour bus carrying dozens of Girl Scouts was honking his horn wildly as his vehicle gained speed down a mountain road just before it crashed Wednesday, killing seven people.
Investigators are focusing on brake failure as the possible cause of the crash.
The bus tumbled down a ravine strewn with rocks until it slammed into a boulder, instantly killing the driver and flinging several of the passengers onto the hillside, said Frank Cullen, a spokesman for the City of Palm Springs, where the accident occurred.
Checking Out the Brakes
Officials said that in addition to the driver, Richard A. Gonzales Jr., 23 years old, the crash killed 3 scouts and 3 of their supervisors among the 56 people on board.


Jackson Organizing March From Bridgeport to Hartford
The Rev.
Jesse Jackson plans to lead a march through Connecticut from Aug. 11 to 17 to draw attention to the social impact of the budget crises in the state Capitol and in Bridgeport.
Mr.
Jackson said he intended to walk at least 55 miles from Bridgeport, which yesterday lost its bid for bankruptcy protection, to Hartford, where the failure to pass a state budget caused a partial shutdown in state services in July.


Robert Troutman Jr., Rights Aide, Dies at 73
Robert Battey Troutman Jr., a lawyer who in the 1960's developed a voluntary approach to opening industrial jobs for blacks, died Tuesday at Piedmont Hospital in Atlanta.
He was 73 years old and lived in Atlanta.
He died of cancer, said a son, W. George Troutman, of Arlington, Va.


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
The Administration dragged its feet on the B.C.C.I. investigation, the former Commissioner of Customs said.
He accused officials of barring him from obtaining sensitive information.  [ D1. ]
The U.S. and Mexico released a draft plan to improve the quality of the environment along the border.  [ D2. ]


PRESIDENT REJECTS SENATE AGREEMENT ON RIGHTS MEASURE
President Bush has rejected Senator John C. Danforth's efforts to win agreement on civil rights legislation.
In a letter released today by Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri, Mr.
Bush said the compromise proposal, which would forbid employers from imposing qualifications unnecessary for a particular job, would hurt the Administration's education program.


Gulf War, and Peace, Revisited
Before 100 hours passed, the ground war had turned into a "turkey shoot." With word from Gen.
Norman Schwarzkopf that Saddam Hussein's Republican Guard was shattered and his nuclear capacity "neutralized," the President decided the fighting had gone on long enough.
The invasion of Kuwait that horrified the world a year ago today had been undone.
Americans greeted the Feb. 28 cease-fire with relief and pride -- relief at miraculously few U.S. casualties and pride in the brilliant performance of the allied forces.


Review/Film; A Hollywood Doctor In American Squashland
In "Doc Hollywood," Michael J. Fox plays a big-city doctor who wanders off the beaten track and right into a television sitcom, or at the very least a pilot for one.
In a tiny town called Grady, famed as "the Squash Capital of the South," Mr.
Fox's Ben Stone crashes cute (by driving his vintage red Porsche convertible into a judge's white picket fence) and is sentenced to stay and perform community service.
Supposedly, he is torn between a promising opportunity to perform plastic surgery on a vain Los Angeles clientele and the simpler, more immediate charms of Grady.
And supposedly he has a hard time deciding what to do.
But despite the prodigious efforts of the director, Michael Caton-Jones ("Scandal," "Memphis Belle"), to postpone it for as long as possible, the film's outcome is never in doubt.
Anyone who has failed to notice this summer's epidemic of breast-beating among once-proud careerist yuppies has simply not been paying attention.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9
Israel will join the peace conference so long as its conditions on the composition of the Palestinian delegation are met, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said.
But problems over the delegation still loom.
Page A1


Senate Would Extend Benefits for Jobless
The Senate passed a $5.8 billion program to extend unemployment benefits to people who have been out of work more than half a year.
The House is expected to adopt the measure on Friday, but what President Bush will do when it goes to him is uncertain.
All week long Mr.
Bush's senior aides have been saying that they would advise him to veto the bill.


Investigators Link Damaged Switch to Fatal Amtrak Crash in S. Carolina
A railroad track switch at the spot where an Amtrak passenger train derailed on Wednesday was damaged and askew when investigators examined it after the crash, officials of the National Transportation Safety Board said today.
It is still not clear whether the switch was damaged during the accident, or whether its condition might have caused the crash.
But investigators said today that they have turned up the first evidence that the switch might have been defective before the crash.


Senate Democrats' Honorable Way
We did an injustice to Senators George Mitchell and David Boren, both Democrats, the other day in describing the missing campaign, the absence of debate led by the Democratic opposition on public concerns.
The issue in this case is the need for campaign finance reform to drain private money from politics.
In truth Mr.
Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, who is from Maine, and Oklahoma's Senator Boren deserve unstinting admiration for their leadership in the cause of reform.
Because of it, the Senate passed comprehensive legislation in May, just as it did last year.
This could weaken the grip of rich lobbies on the law.


Quimper Journal; Celts and Proud of It (Even if They Are French)
The wail of two dozen bagpipes announced that it was time for men, women and children wearing the traditional costumes and embroidered headdresses of the nearby village of Ergue-Gaberic to join the parade through the streets of this medieval town.
In the festive crowd of some 40,000, there were also Bretons from farther afield for whom the town's annual Festival of Cornouaille is an excuse to don their parents' costumes, sing and dance the old way and practice their rusty Breton phrases.


Valvano in Havana, With Regret
Jim Valvano, ABC's basketball analyst in Havana for the Pan American Games, was fresh off a victorious two-on-two half-court basketball game when he mused by telephone about what he'd do if he ran into Fidel Castro.
"I'd get him on the sideline and say, 'Hey, I've got Fidel right here. Fidel, do you think Cuba should go to a zone?' "


When Politics Topples Precedent, That's Chaos; Making a Stand
To the Editor:
Terry Eastland's "Bush and the Politics of Race" (Op-Ed, July 3), on the Clarence Thomas nomination, contains at least one correct statement -- "a Supreme Court nomination inevitably involves politics." And while delving into the mind and political convictions of George Bush is treading on murky ground, those less enamored of the Reagan-Bush judiciary than Mr.
Eastland may see intentions less benign than a Presidential attempt to signal sensitivity to the concerns of blacks.


When Politics Topples Precedent, That's Chaos; Cardozo in Context
To the Editor:
The quotation from Benjamin Cardozo by Edward S. Hochman, a lawyer from Paterson, N.J., in "Constable's Blunder" (letter, July 12) is incorrect on at least two counts.
When Cardozo wrote "The criminal is to go free because the constable has blundered," he was a judge on the New York State Court of Appeals.
And it was not asked as a question in "an incredulous dissent"; it was the opinion of the court in the People of the State of New York v.
John Defore (150 N.E. 585). (Judge) TOM STAGG United States District Court Western District of Louisiana Shreveport, La., July 15, 1991


Review/Opera; A German's Grotesque View of 'Oedipus,' in Santa Fe
Tragedy has become a lost word in modern usage.
A child dies of illness.
A mother is hit by a car.
These are calamities, senseless.
Tragedies inspire awe.
They deal with superior people who are in the end humbled by forces greater than they, and make audiences ponder the mysterious contradiction of free will upon which a preordained fate has been superimposed.
In Wolfgang Rihm's "Oedipus," life is hell -- literally.
Its collection of grotesque oppressors and humiliated victims walk over a stage that glows red like oversized coals.
Played here Wednesday on a wet desert night, this 80-minute exercise in unpleasantness -- drawn from the Sophocles play and from German commentaries on it -- turns tragedy into derangement, malice and pornographic violence.


Milton Greenstein, Magazine Executive, 79
Milton Greenstein, a former vice president and assistant secretary of the New Yorker magazine, died on Monday in New York Hospital.
He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of respiratory failure, said his daughter Ruth, of Washington.


Yusuf Idris of Egypt, Playwright, Dies at 64
Yusuf Idris, one of Egypt's best-known playwrights, whose work often reflected his strong anti-Israeli views, died on Thursday in London of heart failure.
He was 64 years old.
The Egyptian Embassy in London confirmed his death.
Mr.
Idris had been a patient at the National Hospital for Nervous Diseases.


Congress Gets in Way Of Microenterprises
To the Editor:
We are pleased that Lorna Hahn (Op-Ed, July 22) recognized the long-term support by the United States Agency for International Development given to South African black private enterprise, and A.I.D.'s microenterprise assistance program, which operates in more than 50 developing countries.
Several points require clarification, however.
A.I.D.'s commitment to its microenterprise program does not depend on Congress passing the microenterprise development portion of the foreign aid bill.
Funds increased from $57.5 million worldwide in 1988 to $85 million in 1990 and are projected to grow to more than $137 million in 1992.
The legislation Ms.
Hahn refers to calls for a program level of only $85 million next year.
As is often the case, apart from setting a target level for spending on microenterprise, the legislation Ms.
Hahn supports contains restrictive provisions that would decrease the agency's flexibility to fashion microenterprise programs to the situation of each recipient country.
Rather than helping microentrepreneurs in South Africa and elsewhere, such restrictions can actually thwart the legislation's purported objectives.
MICHAEL FARBMAN  Director, Office of Small, Micro and Informal Enterprise Agency for Intl.
Development Washington, July 24, 1991


Patents; White Petunia Produced By Genetic Engineering
The DNA Plant Technology Corporation of Cinnaminson, N.J., a small biotechnology concern that specializes in techniques to improve fruits and vegetables, won a patent this week on a genetically engineered white petunia.
The new petunia is derived from a purple variety in which the gene producing the purple pigment has been turned off.
The importance of the invention, company officials say, is that the underlying technology can be applied to block genes in other plants.
Plums could be made to produce less sugar and peanuts to produce less oil.
The technique consists of identifying the gene responsible for a particular process, duplicating it and then adding the twin to the original plant.
For reasons that remain unclear, the two genes tend to cancel each other out.
Richard A. Jorgensen and Carolyn A. Napoli, two former researchers at the company, received patent 5,034,323.
Patents are available by number for $1.50 from the Patent and Trademark Office, Washington, D.C. 20231.


Jobless Rate Cut as Labor Dropouts Rise
The nation's unemployment rate dropped slightly last month, not because more people had jobs but because people dropped out of the labor market.
As a result, the Labor Department's monthly employment report, released today, the first comprehensive data about the state of the economy in July, was inconclusive.
It showed mainly what economists already knew: that the economy was not growing at a robust pace.


Sports Leisure; Enjoy the Water but Display Respect for It
If you're an adult and cannot swim, chances are that you've developed a fear of water from personal experience.
You may have been thrown into a pool as a child or you may have fallen off a dock.
The memories make it harder to teach adults how to swim than children, the experts say.
Knowing how to relax in the water often rids people of old fears, said John Naber of Pasadena, Calif., winner of four gold medals in swimming at the 1976 Olympics.
But taking that first step -- signing up for a swimming lesson -- can be the hardest part.


Home Voice Mail: Privacy, but at a Price
Regional telephone companies around the country are starting to offer a home version of voice mail, the automated answering system that is the boon, and sometimes the bane, of the modern office.
The telephone companies are betting that in some areas, many consumers are ready to throw out their answering machines and pay installation charges of as much as $30 and a basic monthly fee of $5 to $10 for the service.
The advantages of voice mail over an answering machine include the ability to take messages when the phone is in use, and greater privacy.


The Case for Clean Needles
A steady accumulation of evidence suggests that providing clean needles to drug addicts can slow the spread of the AIDS virus without the dire consequences so often predicted.
Indeed, a well-designed needle exchange program could now help public officials achieve two valued goals that were once thought contradictory.
It could retard the spread of AIDS and help wean many drug abusers from their long-term addictions.
The need to control AIDS infection among addicts has been rising.
In some cities, intravenous drug addicts are the major risk group for AIDS and the major threat for transmitting the virus to heterosexual lovers and to children, through exposure in the womb.
The virus is typically spread from one addict to another when they share needles and syringes that have been contaminated with infected blood.
Health officials have long suggested that such transmission could be slowed by distributing clean needles to addicts.
But there has been scant evidence that such programs would work, certainly not enough to reassure many troubled public officials.
They worry that giving needles also gives tacit approval of addiction -- thus promoting another kind of epidemic, also deadly.
This week early results from a study in New Haven, Conn., provided the latest evidence that needle exchange programs can help combat both AIDS and drug abuse.
The New Haven program provided sterile needles over seven and a half months to more than 700 addicts, who got a new needle every time they returned a used one.
The free needles were less likely to become contaminated than those used on the street or in drug shooting galleries.
And the rate of contamination in the distributed needles fell over time.
A mathematical model estimated that the program was cutting new AIDS infections among participants by a third.
Equally important, the program provided counseling to addicts on drug abuse, AIDS and other health issues.
One in four has asked for help and more than 100 have already been placed in treatment programs.
These encouraging results reinforce a smattering of studies in Europe, Australia and North America.
They found little evidence that needle programs entice people to shoot drugs; participants are almost always long-term abusers, not new recruits.
A Swedish program that has followed more than 500 addicts for several years has yet to find a single new AIDS infection among them.
The data support easing laws against distributing clean needles.
But to do that alone misses the larger point.
Addicts cannot long be saved from either AIDS or addiction for the cost of a few needles.
The honest price of a needle exchange program has to be a commitment to provide treatment for all addicts who want it.


In Bronx, a Former Chef to Pompidou Earns 520 Stars
The air smelled of chickens roasting, potatoes frying.
As the day's lunches came flying off the stoves, Gerard Potel, multiple-star French chef, looked over the assembly of food.
He knew his customers well.
This one disliked beef stew, baked fish and green beans.
That one hated kasha and sweet potatoes and insisted on four sugars for her Sanka.
This one wouldn't tolerate apple sauce but had to have two dishes of Jell-O.
"Nothing, of course, for Yolanda," Mr.
Potel said.
"She never has lunch. She has toast for breakfast and for dinner she has salami, Rice Krispies and bananas. Every single day. God forbid, I should give her bologna. She would kill me."


A Special Opportunity for In Excess
Horse racing has no Triple Crown winner this year because Strike the Gold won the Kentucky Derby but lost the Preakness and the Belmont Stakes to Hansel.
It has no Triple Tiara winner for fillies, either, because Meadow Star won the Acorn and the Mother Goose but lost the Coaching Club American Oaks to Lite Light.
But one horse still has a shot at a "triple" in a sport that lavishes honor and fame on horses that can win three races in a series.
He is the handicap star In Excess, who won the Metropolitan Handicap at Belmont Park on May 27 and then broke the track record for a mile and a quarter in winning the Suburban on July 4.


The Language We Use
To the Editor
Your review of the Random House Webster's College Dictionary (Book of the Times, July 9) makes a fundamental error in assuming that dictionaries enter only those words they approve of.
Modern dictionaries enter and explain all words that appear frequently in print and in speech, including nonstandard ones, chiefly for the benefit of readers and listeners who want to know more about them.
Thus we do not tend to side with prevailing usage over tradition; what we do is report old and new usages as we find them in our research.
The review also contains several egregiously misleading statements.
For example, charging that the dictionary is "quite laissez-faire when it comes to proper and precise usage," it cites as examples "Mirandize," listed as a transitive verb, and "malling," listed as a noun.
These examples prove nothing.
Many verbs ending in "-ize" are transitive (for example, dramatize, sterilize, itemize, Americanize), and many words ending in "-ing" are nouns (how else would one classify "malling"?).
The review describes "hopefully," meaning "it is hoped (that)," as ungrammatical.
No current dictionary or usage guide considers this use of "hopefully" ungrammatical.
It is this kind of authoritarian attitude that we have tried our best to avoid in our dictionary.
SOL STEINMETZ  Executive Editor Random House Dictionaries New York, July 18, 1991


British Could Prove Nazi Plot to Kidnap Pope
To the Editor:
It really is a surprise that the Rome-based magazine "30 Giorni" published a story claiming "Hitler planned during World War II to take over the Vatican, seize Pope Pius XII and his cardinals and hold them hostage outside Italy" (news article, July 21).
This plot was covered by the Hungarian-American author Ladislas Farago on pages 174-78 of his 1974 book, "Aftermath," although he did not mention the views of Gen.
Karl O. Wolff of the SS (elite corps), but did imply opposition to the plot by Rudolf Rahn, Berlin's Ambassador to Italy, without naming him.


Precious Metals Off Sharply; Platinum Leads the Decline
Precious metal futures prices fell sharply yesterday.
Platinum led the decline in reaction to heavy Japanese selling, fears of Soviet selling and perceptions that industrial demand is fading.
Platinum futures settled $9 to $9.20 lower on the New York Mercantile Exchange, with the contract for delivery in October at $355.10 an ounce, the lowest price since early 1986.


TRANSACTIONS  Football  National Football League    DALLAS COWBOYS -- Waived Eric Mitchel, running back.   DETROIT LIONS -- Signed Mark Brown, linebacker, and Eric Sanders, offensive lineman.   PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Kevin McArthur, linebacker. Waived Chad Fortune, tight end.   WASHINGTON REDSKINS -- Waived Chris Shale, punter. Canadian Football League   BRITISH COLUMBIA LIONS -- Added Mark Jones and Allen Perkins, linebackers, to the roster.   WINNIPEG BLUE BOMBERS -- Activated Craig Harrison, fullback, from the practice roster, and Leotha Hull, wide receiver, and Darryl Sampson, defensive back, from the reserve list. Transferred Eric Streater, wide receiver, to the reserve list. Released Rick House, slotback, and Eddie Taylor, defensive back, and added them to the practice roster. Added Emanuel McNeil, defensive tackle, and Dave Vankoughnett, offensive guard, to the practice roster.


CHRONICLE
A little less than a year after becoming the chairman of the U.S.O. of Metropolitan New York, OLIVER M. MENDELL is looking forward to the opening of its new home.
The new center, at 151 West 46th Street, will open next month, when the organization celebrates its 50th anniversary.
A nonprofit organization financed by contributions from businesses and individuals, the U.S.O. welcomes members of the armed services, providing such amenities as free food and tickets to the theater, movies and sporting events.
"They can sit and rest their tired tootsies," Mr.
Mendell said yesterday.
Volunteers meet every American military ship that comes to New York, giving crews maps showing where to go, and where not to.
During Fleet Week and New York's welcome-home festivities for the troops from the Persian Gulf, which coincided in June, the center, now at Broadway and 41st Street, had nearly 7,000 visitors.


Senate Panel Finds No Evidence To Warrant Action on D'Amato
The Senate Ethics Committee announced today that it had found no evidence to support charges that Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato violated Senate rules and Federal laws on behalf of campaign contributors and other political associates.
But the committee found in one instance that Mr.
D'Amato, a Long Island Republican, had "conducted the business of his office in an improper and inappropriate manner" that allowed his brother Armand to use the office on behalf of a law client seeking a Defense Department contract.


Cellular Merger
Two cellular telephone operators, the Pactel Corporation and Cellular Communications Inc., said they would merge their operations in Ohio and Michigan.
Pactel, a division of the San Francisco-based regional phone company Pacific Telesis Group, said it formed a venture with New York-based Cellular Communications to operate the combined systems.
Pactel said that as part of the deal it bought about 5 percent of Cellular Communications' stock for about $87 million.
Pactel said it also had the right to increase its ownership in the company gradually until it might acquire it entirely.
The companies said a year ago that they would merge their operations.


Corrections
A table in Business Day yesterday with an article about the Mutual Life Insurance Company of New York misstated the relationship of mortgage investment to statutory equity in one listing of figures for several insurance companies.
The figures, which were correct, were for mortgages as a multiple of equity, not as a percentage of equity.


More Disturbances Over People's Park in Berkeley


Corrections
The Events listing in Weekend yesterday included outdated items.
A corrected version, for activities today and tomorrow, appears today on page 10.


Police Accuse 3 Of July Slaying Of Restaurateur
A 36-year-old homeless woman and two teen-agers have been charged with the abduction and murder of a popular Staten Island restaurateur last month, the police said yesterday.
The police believe that the woman and the two youths robbed the victim, Mark Raffone, 28 years old, early on the morning of July 18 and then beat him with a golf club before tossing him into the Kill Van Kull.


BAKER MAKES CASE TO 3 PALESTINIANS FOR OCTOBER TALKS
Armed with Israel's conditional agreement to a Middle East peace conference, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d today sought to convince the Palestinians, the last party yet to agree, that even if they accepted Israel's terms they still stood to gain the most from the process.
Mr.
Baker first met for four hours with three prominent Palestinians in Jerusalem, then flew to the Jordanian capital, Amman, for talks with King Hussein.
Under the American plan, the Palestinians would take part in the first stage of the peace conference in a delegation with Jordan.


PRESIDENT IS SENT MEASURE TO WIDEN JOBLESS BENEFITS
Congress today sent President Bush a $5.8 billion measure to aid people who remain unemployed for more than half a year, a total of about three million Americans.
But Mr.
Bush is expected to keep the extended benefits from flowing, according to White House aides and Republican lawmakers.
Mr.
Bush would not commit himself at a news conference, but he warned against increasing the Federal budget deficit.


Up to 80 Reported Dead in Croatia Strife
Croatia's military forces have suffered another serious defeat, with reports today that as many as 80 police officers and national guardsmen were killed in an unsuccessful attempt on Thursday to hold three strategic towns in eastern Croatia.
If the casualty figure is confirmed, it would mark the highest one-day death toll in Croatia's efforts to defend its territory against Serbian rebels.
The death toll also underscores what appears to be a decisive advantage in firepower by the rebel forces.


Music in Review
Washington Square Music Festival
Washington Square Park
The Washington Square Music Festival faced up to this year's cuts in city support for the arts with a brave pragmatism.
Instead of assembling a freelance orchestra, as it has in recent seasons, the festival turned its gaze to the chamber music literature.
Henry Schuman, the oboist, put together a flexible ensemble, and with the help of a reasonably sensitive sound system, the players made themselves heard over the park's natural and unnatural sounds.


Michael Arceneaux, Fashion Producer, 47
Michael Arceneaux, a producer and director of fashion shows, died on Sunday at his home in Greenwich Village.
He was 47 years old.
He died of a cerebral hemorrhage, said Mark Hummel, a spokesman for the family.


Reds Make Use of Long Ball To Short-Circuit Giant Streak
San Francisco's longest winning streak in a quarter-century ended at 11 games tonight as Barry Larkin and Joe Oliver hit two-run homers and the Cincinnati Reds rallied to beat the Giants, 5-4.
Cincinnati overcame 3-0 and 4-3 deficits against Bud Black (8-9) and won for just the sixth time in 22 games.
Larkin's 16th homer of the season tied the score at 3-3 in the second innning and Oliver's fifth home run put the Reds ahead, 5-4, in the fourth.


U.S. Bonds Rise Sharply On Jobs Data
Treasury bond prices rose sharply yesterday after a weaker-than-expected employment report for July gave rise to hopes for lower interest rates, with or without a push by the Federal Reserve.
The buoyancy of the Treasury market quickly spread to the corporate sector, inspiring a flurry of new offerings by corporate treasurers eager to take advantage of good investor demand.
By the end of the day, new corporate issues totaling $1.05 billion were offered by Tenneco, the Shell Oil Company, the Norwest Financial Corporation, the Sonoco Products Company and Dillard Department Stores.


Irving Lash, Teacher, 82
Irving Lash, who taught several generations of musicians during his more than 30 years as a teacher at the High School of Performing Arts, died on Monday at the North Shore Medical Center in Miami.
He was 82 years old and lived in Miami.
He died of complications of Alzheimer's disease, said his wife, Marjorie.





Paris Journal; In a Class by Itself, and Now, Dear Paris, Classless
Liberte to travel always existed, even fraternite among passengers has been recorded, but for all but a few of the last 91 years, the pointed absence of egalite was what most distinguished the Paris Metro from all other subways of the world.
As trains swept into stations, the single yellow car that carried the No. 1 was always emptier than the others, offering a safe haven from crowds and wandering minstrels to anyone willing to pay 50 percent more than the price of the ordinary ticket.


Keating's Trial Begins With Emotion Flaring
Charles H. Keating Jr.'s trial on securities-fraud charges got under way here today with few legal developments but a dramatic illustration of the emotions stirred by the case.
Just minutes after the trial's first session ended, an elderly 5-foot-tall woman rushed to the front of the courtroom, elbowed her way past a defense lawyer and grabbed the 6-foot-4-inch Mr.
Keating by the lapels of his blue suit.
Screaming, "You took all my money. Give me my money back," the woman shook Mr.
Keating with both arms for a moment, witnesses said, before being hustled away by sheriff's deputies.


Guilty Plea in Tax Evasion
The founder of Kinder-Care, the nation's largest child day-care chain, pleaded guilty today to evading taxes on $482,500 he received in a junk bond deal with Drexel Burnham Lambert.
The executive, Perry Mendel, 69 years old, entered the plea in Federal District Court after the case was transferred from New York, where he and the former president of Kinder-Care, Richard Grassgreen, were indicted in a spinoff from the prosecution of Michael R. Milken, the former junk bond financier.


Philadelphia Journal; Egan for Mayor. Ah, but Which One?
The Republican City Committee met one night this week in Palumbo's Nostalgia Room in South Philadelphia to nominate a candidate to replace Frank L. Rizzo, who died of a heart attack last month in the middle of his fifth mayoral campaign.
But everybody already knew that the new candidate had been selected, though there has been much confusion involving his name and exactly who he is.
Earlier this week, William A. Meehan, the last big-city Republican Party boss in America, gave his endorsement and, for all practical purposes, that was that.
The rest was cigar smoke.
"I've never lost a roll-call vote, but there is always a first time," Mr.
Meehan, a 66-year-old lawyer, predicted Thursday afternoon, just before the ward leaders voted unanimously to accept his choice. (Never mind that the Republicans have not had a mayoral victory since 1947 and have won only a few citywide races in those years.)


Management Team At Saatchi Revamped
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide, New York, yesterday named Edward L. Wax as chairman and Richard Humphreys as president to consolidate the chain of command in the Saatchi &amp; Saatchi empire.
The agency, which is owned by Saatchi &amp; Saatchi P.L.C., London, also announced that the two men would be the senior members in a new four-person office of the chief executive that will manage the agency.


Germany to Cut Aid to Countries That Spend Heavily on Weapons
In a move that may set a precedent for other industrialized nations, Germany will soon begin cutting its foreign aid to countries that spend too much on weapons.
The German foreign aid budget for 1992, which is due to be presented in September, will be the first to reflect this new policy, the Minister of Economic Cooperation, Carl-Dieter Spranger, said in an interview today.


Mayor of Milwaukee Accuses Police of Racial Insensitivity
Mayor John O. Norquist said today that racial insensitivity was partly to blame when the police returned a naked Laotian boy to Jeffrey L. Dahmer's apartment even though black neighbors pleaded the boy needed help.
The body of the 14-year-old boy, Konerak Sinthasomphone, was later found in Mr.
Dahmer's apartment among 11 dismembered corpses.
The police recordings from May 27 show that the officers decided that the boy, who appeared to be intoxicated, was the homosexual lover of Mr.
Dahmer, who is white.
They joked about needing to be "deloused" afterward.
The Mayor said: "There's no way you can't conclude racial sensitivity is an issue. There is no question in my mind the relationship has to be improved."
Earlier, in an interview with NBC-News program "A Closer Look," Mr.
Norquist was asked if Mr.
Dahmer would have been treated differently if he was black.
Mr.
Norquist answered yes but did not elaborate.


Icy Debut for Japan's Opposition Chief
The Government of Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu is in disarray, plagued by endless internal bickering.
Voters seem to feel that his Cabinet is soft on corruption, or simply a collection of wheeler-dealers stuck in a rut of their old ways of doing things.
So, where is the Socialist opposition?
Well, these days it is in disarray, plagued by endless bickering.
And the voters seem to feel that its leaders are soft on corruption, a collection of wheeler-dealers stuck in a rut of their old ways of doing things.


Indians Unearth the Past In a Bronx Warehouse
The nearly one million American Indian artifacts stored in an East Bronx building are alive with the whisper of ancestors, the murmur of forest creatures and the life-giving force of Bi keh go'i'hi da n (He who is in charge of life).
So say a dozen or more American Indians who since early June have trooped through the research branch of the Museum of the American Indian to select objects for the 1993 inaugural exhibition of a new Indian museum at the Old Customs House on Bowling Green in Lower Manhattan.


Review/Film; A Replacement Limb With an Evil Mind of Its Own
One morning, the handsome criminal psychologist Bill Chrushank (Jeff Fahey) kisses his smiling, suburban-cute family goodbye and heads off to work.
The scene is so unmitigatedly happy that the Chrushanks, at least in movie terms, might as well have bull's-eyes on their backs.
Sure enough, tragedy strikes: Bill is injured in a ghastly traffic accident, and as a consequence he loses his arm.
But the cool, elegant Dr.
Alice Webb (Lindsay Duncan) assures him that he can have a new arm in a jiffy.
There's just one catch: it's an arm that will quite literally go to his head.
"Body Parts," which opened yesterday and was directed by Eric Red, is the story of what happens to Bill once he recovers sufficiently from transplant surgery to begin asking some very necessary questions.
The answers are worrisome.
The film turns out to be a powerful warning against accepting used limbs unless you know where they've been.


About New York
You see the stories in the newspaper, almost never long enough to answer all the questions.
The ones about abandoned children.
They are found on a street corner, in a garbage compactor, in a trash can.
You read them, feel something hard and empty in your stomach and try to imagine how anyone could do such a thing.
You wonder what happened before, have no idea what will happen next.
You think the worst.


Connecticut House Puts Off Tax Vote
Still without a budget after 33 days, Connecticut faces a shutdown of state offices on Monday if no agreement is reached by then.
Yet another budget built around an income tax was prepared by Democrats in the House today, but a vote was put off because of doubts whether the State Senate would follow suit if the House approved it.


D'Amato's Hometown Disdains Inquiry
Art Catenacci, fire chief of Island Park, pointed up and down Long Beach Road and motioned to the railroad station and the rows of houses where the lawn mowers were going and the hoses were being uncoiled.
"Here," he said.
"This is where I know Al D'Amato. He's been here when he had to be here. The rest of it -- that's stuff that happens in Washington, where sometimes they like to pretend that politicians don't have to get involved in politics."


10 Children Taken From Father in Sex Case
Ten of the adopted children of Kodzo Dobosu, a man who won prominence as an exemplary father willing to take on troubled children, were taken away from him yesterday.
A Family Court judge in Manhattan issued the order after a two-day hearing in which Mr.
Dobosu was accused of sexually molesting his adopted sons and overseeing harsh beatings of his children with a wooden plank or switch.
Seventeen children were living with him at the time.


Dollar Plunges on Report Of Continued U.S. Layoffs
The dollar fell sharply yesterday in heavy trading after the release of a report that indicated United States companies continued to lay off workers in July.
The Labor Department reported that the nation's unemployment rate slipped to 6.8 percent in July from a five-year high of 7 percent in June, but the improvement was attributed to job seekers giving up the search.
Separately, the Government said non-farm payrolls declined last month by 51,000.


Corrections
A television review on Tuesday about "A Little Vicious," a documentary shown in the PBS series "P.O.V.," referred incorrectly to the film maker, Immy Humes.
She is a woman.


U.S. Again Threatens Force To Stop Iraqi Atom Program
The Bush Administration today repeated its threat to use military force to destroy Iraq's nuclear program as the Senate voted overwhelmingly to back use of "all necessary means" to eliminate President Saddam Hussein's ability to produce atomic, biological or chemical weapons.
Appearing in a series of television interviews on the first anniversary of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said that if President Bush gave the order, the military could bomb Mr.
Hussein's nuclear plants "almost immediately."


Airline Accord On Reservations
The European Commission cleared a venture between two travel computer reservation systems, Sabre of American Airlines and Amadeus of Lufthansa, Air France and Iberia.
Through the agreement, Sabre will get access to markets within the 12-nation community and Amadeus will benefit from new technologies, said a spokesman for the commission, the executive body of the European Community.
Travel agents will now be able to get both systems on one computer screen, making it easier to see all available flights.
The agreement will reduce competition between Sabre and Amadeus, but the commission said it would also open Amadeus's home markets of France, Germany and Spain to more competition from other reservation systems.
The commission was concerned that the link-up could have distorted competition in the home markets, but has accepted assurances from the companies involved that they will not discriminate against other systems.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Dr.
F.
Brantley Scott misattributed the invention of the inflatable penile prosthesis to treat impotence.
The first patent on it was granted in 1973 to Dr.
Barish Strauch, who transferred development rights to American Medical Systems, with which Dr.
Scott was associated.
Dr.
Scott developed the prosthesis, which has been implanted in more than 100,000 patients.


Scientists Know a Great Deal About the Origin of New Species
To the Editor:
The claim that evolution is not happening today because no one has seen a new species evolve ("We Haven't Seen Any Evolution Since the Pleistocene Epoch," letter, July 20) is simply a canard.
It is wrong to equate evolution with the origin of species.
Any change in the genetic composition of a population is an instance of evolution, ranging from the origin of drug-resistant bacteria over a period of a few years to the evolution of humans over the last three million years.
The evidence is very strong that such changes are indeed brought about by natural selection acting on random mutations.


Atom Arms Labs Defend Role In the Post-Cold-War Future
Budgets for nuclear weapons will shrink with the ending of the cold war and the conclusion of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, but "nuclear competence," a very expensive commodity, remains essential to the nation's defense, say directors of the laboratories that design America's nuclear weapons.
Conserving that competence, which consists of specialized laboratories and equipment as well as a cadre of scientific specialists in nuclear weapons technology, now costs some $3 billion a year, not counting the cost of manufacturing the weapons themselves.


Tyson-Holyfield a Sellout
A grand jury investigation involving Mike Tyson has not damaged the commercial luster of Tyson's scheduled heavyweight-title bout against the champion, Evander Holyfield, on Nov. 8.
"We're sold out," Phil Cooper, an executive at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nev., the site for the bout, said yesterday in a telephone interview.
"We sold out in 14 days and broke our previous record, 16 days for Hagler-Leonard."
The outdoor arena at Caesars Palace holds more than 15,000 seats, and tickets were scaled from $200 to $1,200.


The Three Palestinians Who Met With Baker in Jerusalem
Faisal al-Husseini
51 years old . . .
From East Jerusalem . . .
Top P.L.O. representative in occupied territories . . .
Well respected by Palestinians because of the time he has spent in prison and because of his family background. . . .
Scion of aristocratic Jerusalem family, he was imprisoned for at least two of the three and a half years of the Palestinian uprising and is considered by many in Israel as one of its leaders . . .
Born in Baghdad and came to Jerusalem as young child with his father, Abed al-Qatar, a leader of Palestinian resistance to Israel who died in battle outside Jerusalem in the 1948 war . . .
After completing his studie in Syria, Mr.
Husseini returned to Jerusalem after the 1967 war and has lived there since. . . .
Heads Arab Study Center in East Jerusalem.


Public &amp; Private; Two on Trial
I've had a hundred arguments about the William Kennedy Smith case, about whether sometimes women say no when we really mean maybe, about whether we should have certain expectations when we agree to go certain places with certain people, about whether anybody really believes innocent until proven guilty anymore.
And ever since prosecutors released the depositions of three women who say that Mr.
Smith also attacked them -- two alleged attempts, one alleged rape, none reported to the police, all described in some detail -- I've even argued with myself.


Dow Declines 11.41 Points, to 3,006.26
The prices of blue chip stocks fell slightly yesterday, with analysts citing disappointingly weak employment numbers released in the morning.
They said the decline reflected investor concern that the current economic recovery may be anemic, at best.
Falling for a second day after a three-day advance, the Dow Jones industrial average lost 11.41 points, to close at 3,006.26.
Still, the Dow remained above the 3,000 mark and ended 33.76 points higher than when the week began.
The day's volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 162.3 million shares, down from 170.6 million on Thursday.


Football; Giants Pull Reverse and GIve Bavaro A New Pact
Forget Mark Bavaro's bitterness when the Giants unceremoniously cut him loose almost three weeks ago.
Forget the Giants' defensiveness after waiving a player who had given so much, including his left knee, in his six pro seasons as a prototype tight end.
Today, the Giants and Bavaro concluded an agreement that Wellington Mara, the Giants' president and co-owner, called "the final disposition of the situation."


Intelligence Agency Used B.C.C.I., Official Says
The Central Intelligence Agency disseminated several reports beginning in the early 1980's to other agencies of the Federal Government about the illegal activities of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International even as the agency was using the bank to finance operations abroad, a senior C.I.A. official and other American Government officials said today.
Richard Kerr, the C.I.A.'s deputy director, told a student audience that the agency had used the international bank for normal legal transactions.
"In terms of using B.C.C.I., we, C.I.A., used it as anybody would use a bank, not in any illegal way and not in any way that the bankers knew the objective of it," Mr.
Kerr said in response to a question posed by a student at the annual meeting of the National Young Leaders' Conference, a group of high school seniors from around the country.


Antonaccis Go for 4th Hambletonian
Breeding and training trotters has brought plenty of success to Frank Antonacci and his family with three Hambletonian winners and a record fourth for an owner only a drive away.
A victory on Saturday at the Meadowlands would also be a record three in a row for the Antonaccis in the 66th edition of the most prestigious of all harness races.
The family's Lindy Farms Racing Stable in Somers, Conn., has three horses in the field of 19.


Personal Scale Grips, Weighs, Then Stores Practically Anywhere
When postal rates increased a few months ago, a Los Angeles-based manufacturer of office and banking equipment dusted off one of its old products and has found it quite useful -- and popular once more.
The product is a small, hand-held scale that enables people to determine how many stamps to put on the envelopes they are about to mail.


A Car? Free Agent Wants to Be a Jet
No matter what happens to Leroy Kinard in the next few weeks, the rookie running back will be able to sit down years from now and recount how he won more than just a cup of coffee at the New York Jets' training camp.
A free agent from Liberty Baptist College in Lynchburg, Va., Kinard has already won a Pontiac Grand Prix, the grand prize in the Jets' home-run derby contest.
The baseball diversion was organized by defensive coordinator Pete Carroll after Thursday's practice to relieve training-camp tedium.


Polycarbonate Lenses Protect the Eyes
To the Editor:
Your information to the consumer on eyeglasses ("Yet Another High-Tech Innovation: Eyeglasses to Shake, Rattle and Roll," Consumer's World page, July 13) does not mention the most important consideration in buying eyeglasses -- eye safety.
Glass lenses and ordinary plastic lenses do not give adequate eye protection for active people.


Patents; Faster Computers Seen With New Amplifier
Scientists at the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation in Austin, Tex., have invented a tiny amplifier that can combine the benefits of semiconductors and superconductors on the same computer chip.
The researchers at Microelectronics, a consortium owned by a group of electronics companies, contend that the devices make it possible to build much faster computers.
Superconductors conduct electricity with no resistance.
Traditional superconductors must be cooled to almost absolute zero, or 273 degrees below zero Centigrade, and newer materials function at somewhat higher temperatures.
For electrical circuits, the advantage of superconductors lies in their speed and their sensitivity to faint electrical signals, traits that can help overcome bottlenecks in high-speed processing circuits.
But superconductors are far less efficient that semiconductor devices for storing information, which is a crucial component for all computer operations.
The problem has been linking superconductor transistors, which produce signals with tiny voltages, and semiconductors that require much higher voltages.
The key to the new invention is a tiny amplifier, small enough so that 1,000 can be placed on a single computer chip.
Dr. Harry Kroger and Uttam Ghoshal, a research associate, received patent 5,024,993.
Patents are available by number for $1.50 from the Patent and Trademark Office, Washington, D.C. 20231.


Erma Campbell Actress, 49
Erma Campbell, an actress in theater, television and films, died on Tuesday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City.
She was 49 years old.
She died of cancer, said Margo Britton, a friend of the family.


Words From Gotti's Mouth: Secret Tapes of Inner Circle
You can get killed for disagreeing with John Gotti, and you can get killed for failing to come when he calls, according to secretly taped conversations released yesterday.
"And anytime you got a partner who don't agree with us, we kill him," Mr.
Gotti told a top aide.


Prudential and Metropolitan Likely to Aid Mutual Benefit
Concerned that the recent takeover of the giant Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company by New Jersey had badly shaken policyholder confidence, the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company and the Prudential Insurance Company of America said yesterday that they were likely to pick up some of Mutual Benefit's liabilities related to life insurance, annuities and other obligations.
In a joint statement, Metropolitan, based in New York, and Prudential, based in Newark, emphasized that they had not formally agreed to assume any Mutual Benefit liabilities or to pay any money toward a bailout of the Newark-based insurer.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.76
5.86
7.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.48
5.54
7.33
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.55
5.67
7.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.88
8.01
8.32
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.24
8.35
8.55
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.20
9.30
9.60
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.07
7.09
7.34
*Estimated dailyaverage,source Salomon Brothers*Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Kovner Quits Lawyer's Post For New York
Victor A. Kovner, New York City's chief lawyer and a close adviser to Mayor David N. Dinkins, announced yesterday that he is leaving to return to private practice.
His successor will be New York State Solicitor General O. Peter Sherwood, a highly regarded civil rights lawyer never active in politics.
A friend of the Mayor since the 1960's, Mr.
Kovner headed the committee that Mr.
Dinkins set up in late 1988 to advise him on whether to run for mayor.
Mr.
Dinkins chose Mr.
Kovner, a respected member of the legal establishment, to be the Corporation Counsel even before his election, with many political insiders seeing the move as a way to reassure New Yorkers that a Dinkins mayoralty would not signal a vast change at City Hall.


Music in Review
Cleveland String Quartet  Mostly Mozart Festival Avery Fisher Hall
Until a decade or so ago, Beethoven stood at the pinnacle of Western music.
His output seemed inevitable, immutable, monumental.
Others were judged in relation to him, but he stood alone, almost outside history.
Now, for this year at least and probably beyond, Mozart is on top.
Beethoven, like everyone else, is judged in relation to the older composer.
One consequence is that Beethoven's highly personal style can more readily be seen as the radical departure it is known to have been historically, and in the context of so much Mozartean suavity, often genuinely abrasive.


OPEC Is Said to Top Quota
Oil production by OPEC exceeded 23 million barrels a day in June and July, the highest level since March and more than the organization's limit, according to two estimates that were released today.
The consumer group, the International Energy Agency, which monitors the energy interests of industrialized countries, said output in July among members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries reached 23.1 million barrels, a drop of 100,000 barrels a day from the June level.


GTE Raises Dividend
The GTE Corporation, the nation's largest telephone holding company and one of the most widely held stocks in the country, has raised its quarterly dividend to 42.5 cents, from 39.5 cents.
The dividend is payable on Oct. 1 to shareholders of record Aug. 22.
GTE has raised its dividend in 37 of the last 38 years, but an added reason for expecting the latest increase was this year's $6.6 billion merger of GTE and the Contel Corporation.
With the merger, GTE's annual revenues are expected to rise to $21.40 billion, from $18.37 billion.


Abortion Clinic Under Siege
After a one-day respite, anti-abortion protesters resumed their blockade this morning at a clinic they have kept under siege for much of the last two weeks.
The new demonstrations kept the clinic's director, Dr.
George Tiller, from entering the building and led to another round of arrests.


Atlantis Roars Into Earth Orbit In a Perfect Sky
The space shuttle Atlantis today carried a giant X-shaped communications satellite into space to help channel the flow of large volumes information from low-orbiting spacecraft back to the Earth.
Overcoming a series of technical problems and postponements, the Atlantis and its crew of five was launched after a perfect countdown, rising from the launching pad on a column of cream-colored smoke in a perfect sky.


Despite Calls, Girl in Cooler Is Not Identified
The police call her "Baby Hope" -- hoping that someone will come forward with information to identify her.
The dead girl, 3 to 5 years old, was found July 23 in a picnic cooler in the woods off the southbound lanes of the Henry Hudson Parkway near Dyckman Street in upper Manhattan.
Detectives issued a new poster yesterday appealing for leads.


Pan Am Plans to Dismiss 5,000 Employees
More than a fifth of the employees of Pan American World Airways will lose their jobs in the next few weeks, the troubled carrier said yesterday.
Pan Am, which is operating under Federal Bankruptcy Court protection and is in the process of selling most of its assets, said it would dismiss 5,000 of its 22,300 employees worldwide "in all work categories." About 10,500 of Pan Am's entire work force, nearly half, works in New York, and it could not be learned yesterday how many of those jobs would be spared.


John Francis Whealon Dies at 70; Archbishop of Hartford 22 Years
John Francis Whealon, Roman Catholic Archbishop of Hartford for 22 years, died yesterday at St.
Francis Hospital and Medical Center in Hartford.
He was 70 years old.
Dr.
Francis L. Geary said the Archbishop "died unexpectedly during a routine surgical procedure" in which the Archbishop's heart rate and rhythm changed severely.


Mets Are Back Home, but They Still Look Lost
Bud Harrelson gave one sign he perhaps should not have and failed to flash another he most certainly should have.
As a result, the Mets ran themselves out of a possible go-ahead run in the seventh inning and set themselves up to lose to the Chicago Cubs, 4-2, in 10 sweaty innings last night at Shea Stadium.
Ryne Sandberg's two-run home run to left-center off Alejandro Pena with Ced Landrum aboard was the decisive blow.
But what the Mets will most remember from this wasted night was the method used to advance Vince Coleman to second base after he led off the seventh inning of a 2-2 game with a walk and how Coleman somehow decided, after there were two outs, that he should try stealing third with Howard Johnson at the plate.


Music in Review
Kalichstein-Laredo-Robinson Trio
Avery Fisher Hall
Even the planners of the Mostly Mozart Festival understand that listeners cannot live on Mozart alone, special anniversaries notwithstanding.
And particularly after a full weekend of Roger Norrington's Mozart Experience, it was refreshing to move at least a decade or two into the 19th century, as the Kalichstein-Laredo-Robinson Trio did in its Mostly Mozart concert on Monday evening.


Sunshine Ends Drox Character
Sunshine Biscuits Inc. said today that it would drop its Drox advertising character to settle charges that it looked too much like the Pillsbury Doughboy.
Terms of the agreement in the lawsuit by the Pillsbury Company were not disclosed today, but the Drox character will be dropped until a new one is created, said Alex Nichols, director of advertising for Sunshine in Woodbridge, N.J.


Secret Peru Account at B.C.C.I. Is Recalled
Officials of Peru's Government today detailed how the Bank of Credit and Commerce International assisted in a secret effort to hide Peru's money from creditors in 1986.
Using terms more akin to loan sharking than international banking, the officials described how B.C.C.I. established a secret Panamanian bank account for Peru with more than $250 million, or about 25 percent of the central bank's total capital.
But B.C.C.I. allowed Peru credit for only half of the country's deposit, indicating that B.C.C.I. recieved an interest-free loan of about $125 million from Peru.
Second Day of Testimony
The disclosures by Peruvian officials came in a second day of testimony about B.C.C.I. before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee's subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics and International Relations.
The subcommittee, headed by Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, has been investigating the activities of B.C.C.I. for several years.
The bank was seized by regulators in several countries on July 5 and is accused of widespread fraud.


Finian Kerwin, Franciscan Friar, 66
The Rev.
Finian Kerwin, a Franciscan friar and former head of the Holy Name Province, the largest province in the Franciscan Order of Friars Minor
, died on Wednesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 66 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, a spokesman for the Franciscans said.


U.N. WON'T RELEASE IRAQ SUPPLIER LIST
The United Nations has declined to make public a list of companies around the world that shared in creating Iraq's formidable chemical-weapon abilities.
United Nations officials responsible for finding and destroying Iraq's weapons of mass destruction acknowledge that such data exist, but they insist that the information should first be seen by the countries whose companies are supposedly involved.


INSIDE
U.S. Repeats Threat to Iraq
The Bush Administration repeated its threat to use military force to destroy Iraq's nuclear program, and the Senate declared its support.
Page 4.
Up to 80 Die in Yugoslavia
Croatian forces have suffered another serious defeat, with reports that as many as 80 policemen and national guardsmen were killed.
Page 3.
New Health-Care Legislation
A leading House chairman offered a bill that would essentially set price controls on health services and lower Medicare eligibility to age 60.
Page 6.
Man Loses 10 Adoptees
A judge ordered that 10 adopted children be taken from a man who won national acclaim for taking in troubled youngsters.
Page 21.
Top Dinkins Aide Resigns
Victor A. Kovner, New York City's Corporation Counsel and a close adviser to the Mayor, is leaving to return to private practice.
Page 21.
Egalite on the Paris Metro
First-class subway tickets have been eliminated from the Paris Metro, doing away with a long-established class distinction.
Page 2.


Judge Ends Ban on Film Of Asylum
"Titicut Follies," the only American film to be censored for reasons other than obscenity or national security, can be released without restriction after having been banned from public showing for 24 years, a Massachusetts judge has ruled.
The ruling on the film, a documentary by Frederick Wiseman about the Bridgewater State Hospital for the Criminally Insane in Bridgewater, Mass., was made Monday by Judge Andrew Gil Meyer of the Massachusetts Superior Court.


Hometown No Help For Yank Rookie
Scott Kamieniecki wondered why this game had to evolve into such a mess tonight.
This game, of all games.
Why did the young pitcher from Detroit have to be buried at Tiger Stadium while 230 of his closest friends were there?
That number is correct.
Not 23, not 30, but 230 friends and relatives witnessed the sour performance as the Tigers bounced Kamieniecki by the fourth inning and coasted to a 7-3 victory.
It meant that plenty of cousins, uncles, aunts and assorted buddies were unhappy as they left the park.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5
Talks between Palestinian leaders and Secretary of State Baker were held in an attempt to persuade the Palestinians that they stood the most to gain from a peace conference, even on Israel's terms.
Page 1
The three Palestinian leaders met for four hours with Secretary of State Baker and said later that although they received "some positive answers" to outstanding questions, vital issues remained unresolved. 5
The threat to use force against Iraq to destroy its nuclear program was repeated by President Bush as the Senate voted to back use of "all necessary means" to eliminate the ability to make atomic and other arms. 4
U.N. won't list companies involved in Iraqi chemical effort 4
The anniversary of the Iraqi invasion was marked in Kuwait with a sense of ambivalence.
Some waved flags and honked horns, while others prayed and visited the graves of those killed by Iraqi soldiers and police. 4
Saudi financier quits Beirut rebuilding plan 4 Price increases set off protests by Iranians 5
Croatia suffered a serious defeat, with reports that as many 80 police officers and national guardsmen were killed in an unsuccessful attempt to hold three strategic towns in eastern Croatia. 3
Germany to cut aid to nations that spend heavily on arms 3
Paris Journal: First-class subways were eliminated.
After 10 years of Socialist government, the subway cars that were one of the cheapest ways of displaying social -- or at least economic -- superiority vanished. 2
A Zulu-based political organization has been damaged by disclosures of covert links to the South African Government.
But members of the Inkatha Freedom Party differ on whether the group is in jeopardy. 2
Disarray plagues Japan's Socialists, the major opposition group to the Government of Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu.
The party's new leader acknowledges that they have failed to live up to hopes. 3  National 6-8, 25
A measure to aid unemployed people who have been out of work for more than half a year was sent to President Bush by Congress.
The $5.8 billion package is aimed at extending benefits for three million people. 1
Jobless rate cut as labor dropouts rise 7
Pan Am plans to dismiss 5,000 employees 33
President Bush will seek re-election unless a health problem deters him, he said at a news conference.
He stopped just short of a formal announcement of his plans. 1
A new policy on wetland development has been drafted by the Bush Administration.
The new rules would open up millions of acres of the environmentally-sensitive areas for development, an official said. 1
Budgets for nuclear arms will shrink with the signing of the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, but "nuclear competence," a costly commodity, remains essential to the nation's defense, experts say. 1
A $291 billion military budget bill for the next year was adopted by the Senate.
The bill adopted lessons from the Persian Gulf war, but otherwise called for continuing to build up the nation's nuclear arsenal. 25
A new tax on snack food in California has transformed a normally dull state board into the arbiter of what among some 5,000 separate products -- from candy apples to Eskimo Pies -- is truly junk food. 1
Price controls on health services, a lowered age for Medicare and new taxes to finance health insurance for those lacking it were part of a bill introduced by the House Ways and Means Committee chairman.  6
U.S. to admit some immigrants with AIDS under new policy 7
After Peace Corps, some ex- volunteers offer help in U.S.  8
Bank bill moves to full Senate 33
Tale of political ties and bad debt 33
The space shuttle Atlantis lifted off and carried a giant communications satellite into space to add to a network that channels the rich flow of information from low-orbiting spacecraft back to the Earth. 6
Art tries to distance itself from life in Milwaukee 8
Philadelphia Journal: Egan for mayor. Ah, but which one?  6
Prudential and Metropolitan likely to aid Mutual Benefit 33
Hoteliers find Sante Fe hospitable 33  Regional 21-24
Charges against Senator D'Amato were dropped by the Senate Ethics Committee, which said it had no evidence that the Long Island Republican broke Senate rules and Federal laws on behalf of associates. 1
In D'Amato's hometown many praise the decision 22
News analysis: The ethics committee in the Senate, by vindicating Senator D'Amato, signaled lawmakers that they can press legal limits in doing favors for political supporters.  22
The chief lawyer for New York City will resign to return to private practice.
The successor to Victor Kovner, a close friend of Mayor Dinkins, will be New York State Solicitor General, Peter Sherwood. 21
The 10th bias incident in Canarsie reported in the last month occurred yesterday when two white teen-agers were beaten with sticks by a group of seven or eight black men. 21
The black teen-ager who was beaten by a group of whites in Atlantic Beach, L.I., two months ago has returned home.
Jermaine Ewell is doing better, but it was unclear how complete his recovery will be. 23 Ten of the adopted children of a man who has been charged with sexually abusing his 14-year-old daughter were ordered placed in foster care by a New York City judge. 21
Failing to come when John Gotti calls can get you killed, as can disagreeing with the reputed head of the Gambino crime family, according to secretly taped conversations. 23
Police accuse three of July slaying of restaurateur 24
A multi-star gourmet French chef has been cooking at a less-than-elite establishment -- a 520-bed nursing home in the Bronx.
But the chef, Gerard Potel, says he ends each day both full and satisfied 21
The Connecticut House puts off a vote on a new budget plan.  23
Supreme Court refuses to block Shoreham plan 23  Business Digest 33  Sports 27-31
Baseball: Cubs beat Mets 27
Yanks fall to Tigers 27
Reds stop Giants' streak at eleven games 28
Column: Berkow on Mets 27
Football: Bavaro has a deal with Giants 27
Jet free agent wins car, but can he win job?  31
Golf: Club pro on leaderboard 31
Harness Racing: Antonaccis seek 4th Hambletonian 29
Horse Racing: Rare chance for In Excess 29
Pan American Games: Lighting the torch 31
Sports Leisure 31
SportsPeople 29
Consumer's World 48
Home voice mail: privacy at a price
For true-to-life live recordings  Custom headsets  A personal postal scale  Guidepost  Obituaries 26
John Francis Whealon, Archbishop of Hartford  Arts/Entertainment
Indians unearth past in Bronx 9
Judge ends ban on film 12
Film: "Body Parts" 9
Music: Tanglewood contemporary 9
Music in reviews 13  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed  Editorials 18
The case for clean needles  Yugoslavs' old world disorder  Less vigilance against fraud?


Beliefs
No one prays in prime time.
That is known as Gallagher's Law to those who heard Michael Gallagher pronounce it more than a decade ago.
Mr.
Gallagher, at that time a commentator on television and movies for the United States Catholic Conference, was reacting skeptically to the alarms being sounded over the influence of television evangelists.
Most of them, he pointed out, were tucked away on cable outlets or presided over Sunday morning sunrises; they never enjoyed a fraction of the audience reached by one of their major critics, Norman Lear.


Sketches of Atlantis Crew Members
John E. Blaha  Mission Commander
Colonel Blaha, a 48-year-old Air Force pilot, made his first trip into space two years ago as pilot of the shuttle Discovery.
After receiving his pilot's wings in 1967, he completed over 360 combat missions in Vietnam and was awarded then Air Force Distinguished Flying Cross.
He then served as a test pilot and instructor pilot before being selected as an astronaut in 1980.
Colonel Blaha received a bachelor's degree in engineering from the Air Force Academy and a master's degree in astronautical engineering from Purdue University.
He and his wife, Brenda, have two sons and one daughter.
His hometown is San Antonio.
Michael A. Baker  Pilot
Commander Baker, a Navy pilot, is making his first trip into space.
NASA chose him as an astronaut in 1985 and since then he has worked to improve the safety in shuttle landings.
Before becoming an astronaut, Commander Baker, 37, served as a pilot on the carrier Midway and later became an instructor at the Navy Test Pilot School.
He earned a bachelor's degree in aerospace engineering from the University of Texas.
Commander Baker and his wife, Deidra, have two daughters.
Lemoore, Calif., is his hometown.
Shannon W. Lucid  Mission Specialist
This will be the third shuttle mission for Dr.
Lucid, who has logged more than 289 hours in space.
She spent the first years of her life with her parents in a Japanese prisoner of war camp in Shanghai, where her parents were serving as missionaries in the 1940's.
Dr.
Lucid, 48, received a bachelor's degree in chemistry and a master's degree and a doctorate in biochemistry from the University of Oklahoma.
Bethany, Okla., is her hometown.
She and her husband, Michael, have two daughters and one son.
G.
David Low  Mission Specialist
Mr.
Low's first space flight, aboard the Columbia in January 1990, was the longest shuttle mission, at 261 hours.
Before becoming an astronaut in 1985, he worked at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., planning and engineering spacecraft.
He graduated with a bachelor's degree in physics-engineering from Washington and Lee University and a bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering from Cornell University.
He also received a master's degree in aeronautics and astronautics from Stanford University.
Mr.
Low, who was born in Cleveland, is 35 and single.
James C. Adamson  Mission Specialist
Colonel Adamson, an Army pilot, is making his second space flight.
After flying helicopter missions in Vietnam and earning two Distinguished Flying Crosses, he became an assistant professor in aerodynamics at the United States Military Academy and worked as a military test pilot.
He received a bachelor's degree from the military academy and a master's degree in aerospace engineering at Princeton University.
He and his wife, Susan, have one son.
He considers Monarch, Mont., his hometown.
He is 45.


Business Digest
The Economy
The Senate Banking Committee narrowly approved a measure to overhaul the nation's banking laws in a way significantly different from either the measure proposed by the Bush Administration or the one passed by the House Banking Committee.  [ Page 33. ]


Albert Bates Lord, 78, Scholar of Folk Tales
Albert Bates Lord, a scholar of oral folk tales who taught at Harvard University for 33 years, died on Monday at New England Baptist Hospital in Boston.
He was 78 years old.
Professor Lord died of pancreatic cancer, the university said.


South Africans Divided Over Scandal's Damage to Inkatha
The Inkatha Freedom Party has been damaged by recent disclosures of covert links to the white minority Government, but its members and others differ over the extent to which its viability as the foremost black rival of the African National Congress is in jeopardy.
The Government of President F. W. de Klerk admitted secretly giving Inkatha $87,000 to pay for two rallies in 1989 and 1990, ostensibly to promulgate its opposition to sanctions.
It said the United Workers Union of South Africa, Inkatha's satellite labor union, received another $525,000.


Donald Day, Author And Editor, Dies at 92
Donald Day, an author and editor who wrote or compiled biographies of Will Rogers, three American Presidents and other historical figures, died on July 22 at the Mediplex Nursing Home in Westport, Conn.
He was 92 years old.
He died of complications from pneumonia and other illnesses, said his wife, Clara.


Patents; Mix, Match. Mix, Match. Keep Going.
MOST people are familiar with reversible jackets and sweaters, which can be worn with either side out -- in effect, two pieces of clothing in one.
Now, a husband-and-wife team in New York City has invented a line of jackets and skirts that can each be flipped four ways.
"It's almost like a magic trick, but it works," said Thomas Shannon, an inventor and sculptor who patented the clothes with his wife, Catherine.
So far, they have designed a jacket and skirt, which together form 16 possible mix-and-match combinations.


Miroslav A. Kriz, Economist, 83
Miroslav A. Kriz, an international economist and retired vice president of Citibank, died yesterday at his home in Hightstown, N.J.
He was 83 years old.
He died of complications of a stroke, his son said.


Losing Two Stars
PATRICK ROY'S sinus operation and MARIO LEMIEUX'S rehabilitation for a back injury will keep the two all-stars off the ice in the 1991 Canada Cup hockey tournament.
Team Canada, which planned to have Lemieux at center, begins practice today at Maple Leaf Gardens.
A Pittsburgh Penguins official, CINDY HIMES, said that Lemieux had decided to miss the international tourney after consulting with team doctors.
They recommended Lemieux avoid competitive hockey and continue rest, rehabilitation and exercise until Penguins camp opens in September.


Larger Loss for McCaw
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. has reported a loss of $133.7 million for the second quarter, more than double its loss of $60.7 million a year ago.
The company, however, had positive income from operations of $39.3 million for the period, up from $22.1 million a year earlier.
Revenues for McCaw, the nation's largest cellular company, rose 26.8 percent, to $342.4 million from $270 million.


Another Bias Crime in Canarsie: 2 Whites Tell Police of Attack
Two white teen-agers have told the police that they were beaten with sticks by a group of seven or eight black men early yesterday on East 95th Street near Flatlands Avenue in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn.
The assault was the 10th bias-related attack or threat reported in the last month in the predominantly white, middle-class community, the police said.
Before beating the two teen-agers, who had been walking down the street, the assailants yelled obscenities and said, "Get out of this neighborhood." The police would not say whether there were witnesses to the incident.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Allied-Lyons P.L.C., London, a beverage and food company, named Peter Macfarlane group finance director. *
Bloomingdale's, New York, a unit of Federated Department Stores Inc., said Kathy Stanton was promoted to a senior vice president and divisional merchandise manager and Marty Nealon was promoted to merchandise vice president.
Teresa Pineda was named a vice president and divisional merchandise manager.


British Could Prove Nazi Plot to Kidnap Pope; Poles at Ravensbruck
To the Editor:
Your report of protest against constructing a shopping center near the former Ravensbruck concentration camp in Germany (news article, July 21) omits any mention of Poles, the most numerous group among the inmates of this infamous camp for women.
The Polish inmates included intellectuals, members of the underground resistance -- in which women played a significant part -- and civilians deported after the suppression of the Warsaw uprising in 1944.
According to a study by Ino Arndt in "Studien zur Geschichte der Konzentrationslager" (Stuttgart, 1970), the fragmentary data do not permit an exact breakdown of Ravensbruck inmates by nationality.
An analysis of a large sample for which data are available indicates that Poles made up 25 percent of the inmates; Germans, 20 percent, and Russians and Ukrainians, 19 percent.
Jews, the group you mention prominently, ranked fourth, with 15 percent, followed by the French, gypsies, Belgians, Czechs, Yugoslavs and others.
The much smaller adjacent camp for men had a similar distribution: 30 percent Polish and 16 percent Jewish.
The former Communist rulers of Central and Eastern Europe failed to transform the victims of Ravensbruck and other camps into Communist heroes; now we ought to correct the widespread erroneous perception in this country that virtually all the inmates of concentration camps were Jewish.
CHARLES CHOTKOWSKI  Fairfield, Conn., July 22, 1991


Saudi Financier Quits Beirut Rebuilding Plan
A Saudi financier who had expressed willingness to invest millions of dollars in the reconstruction of Beirut has backed out, citing Government corruption, officials here say.
The businessman, Rafik Hariri, who is of Lebanese origin, had proposed to set up a joint venture company of landowners and investors to rebuild downtown Beirut.
According to his plan, a modern complex of towers and tunnels was to be put up on the Green Line, the battered area in the central city that served as a dividing line between the city's mainly Muslim and Christian halves for the last 15 years.


Madlock Loses
STEVE GREENBERG, the deputy baseball commissioner, has prevailed in a lawsuit filed against him last Dec. 28 by BILL MADLOCK, one of his former clients and a four-time National League batting champion.
Madlock had charged Greenberg with fraud, negligence and misrepresentation stemming from five limited partnership investments Madlock made in 1981 and '82 when Greenberg, then a lawyer in Los Angeles, represented him.


Dow Declines 11.41 Points, to 3,006.26
The prices of blue chip stocks fell slightly yesterday, with analysts citing disappointingly weak employment numbers released in the morning.
They said the decline reflected investor concern that the current economic recovery may be anemic, at best.
Falling for a second day after a three-day advance, the Dow Jones industrial average lost 11.41 points, to close at 3,006.26.
Still, the Dow remained above the 3,000 mark and ended 33.76 points higher than when the week began.
The day's volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 162.3 million shares, down from 170.6 million on Thursday.


Kuwaitis Recall Invasion's Horrors
Kuwaitis marked the anniversary of the Iraqi invasion of their country with ambivalence today.
Some waved flags and honked horns, while others held special prayers in mosques and visited the graves of those killed by the Iraqi soldiers and police.
Moments after midnight Thursday, gunfire rippled throughout the city and cries of "God is great!" resounded from the rooftops.
The demonstration echoed the protests held on the second day of each month by those who remained behind in Kuwait during the Iraqi occupation.


AFTER PEACE CORPS THEY HELP IN U.S.
With the Peace Corps celebrating its 30th anniversary, 1,500 former volunteers converged on some of the more blighted areas of Washington and shared with Americans what they once shared with the third world.
Proclaiming this "Volunteer Day," one of four days in a conference sponsored by the National Council of Returned Peace Corps Volunteers, the organization's alumni rolled up their sleeves and went to work at 35 nonprofit organizations, recreation centers, parks and schools.


Trump Accord With Midlantic
Trump Castle Funding Inc. and its main bondholder group said yesterday that they had come to an agreement with the Midlantic National Bank on how Trump Castle's debt to Midlantic would be affected by the restructuring of the casino company's public debt.
Under the plan, Midlantic's $50 million loan to Trump Castle would become a $38 million loan bearing interest initially at 9 percent annually.
The loan will mature three years after the reorganization plan is confirmed, but Trump Castle will have the option, if there is no default on payments or breach of the loan terms, to extend the maturity for five more years.


Quotation of the Day
"I came to this job an accountant and a tax law specialist. Now I find my constituents should have elected Julia Child." -- Brad Sherman, a California official charged with identifying taxable junk food.  [ 7:6. ]


Journalist Critical of Beijing Is Held by Police in Shanghai
The police in Shanghai have detained a prominent Chinese journalist who openly criticized the Government in interviews with foreign reporters, family members said today.
Zhang Weiguo, a 35-year-old lawyer and former Beijing correspondent of the World Economic Herald, was released from prison in February after serving 20 months without being charged.
Despite being warned not to cause further trouble, he gave an interview, published in The New York Times on April 5, in which he recounted his prison experience and criticized the authorities.


Davis Wants Time
ERIC DAVIS doesn't want to play again until he's fully healthy, even if it means the Cincinnati Reds will have to try to make a stretch run without him.
Davis said Friday he wants time to recover from chronic tiredness and lower-back pains that have bothered him in recent weeks.
Davis thinks the problems are a result of the severe kidney injury he suffered while attempting a diving catch in the final game of the World Series last fall.


Fujisankei Names Chief Of Overseas Media Unit
Takashi Hoga has been named president of Fujisankei Communications International Inc., the overseas branch of Japan's largest media conglomerate, the Fujisankei Communications Group.
It has directed Mr.
Hoga, 56 years old, to develop Fujisankei International into an independent profit-making center, generating its own business.
The Fujisankei Group gained notice in 1989 when it paid former President Ronald Ronald $2 million for a nine-day tour of Japan.
A private corporation that includes 120 companies, the Fujusankei Group is the world's fourth-largest media organization, with an annual revenue of $5 billion.
It owns the largest radio network in Japan, its largest television network and one of its leading newspaper groups.


In Yugoslavia, Old World Disorder
In President Bush's new world order, leaders are supposed to think globally and act collectively to keep the peace and protect human rights.
Mr.
Bush's hope applied to smaller nations as well.
But in the Balkans, that nice new world order looks a lot like the nasty old world disorder.
Yugoslavs talk about joining Europe but act as if they want to become part of Lebanon.
As Yugoslavia begins to break up into constituent republics, incipient civil war puts human rights at risk and threatens to spill across borders.


CHRONICLE
TOM HAYDEN will lecture on "The Environment and Spirituality" at a California college this fall.
Mr.
Hayden, the Democratic State Assemblyman from Santa Monica, Calif., will give his first lecture at Santa Monica College on Sept. 5.
As a senior adviser to the United Nations Environmental Program, Mr.
Hayden traveled recently to the Amazon rain forest.
"He was very moved by the experience," said BRUCE SMITH, the college's spokesman, "and he decided he had some things to share."
The 16-week course, which Mr.
Hayden will teach with DAVID PHILLIPS, the chairman of the psychology department, begins with the Bible and concludes with the prospects for a new earth-oriented religion.
"We need to see nature as having a sacred quality, so we revere it and are in awe of it," Mr.
Hayden said.
"That forms a barrier to greed and exploitation and overuse."


Keating's Trial Begins With Emotion Flaring
Charles H. Keating Jr.'s trial on securities-fraud charges got under way here today with few legal developments but a dramatic illustration of the emotions stirred by the case.
Just minutes after the trial's first session ended, an elderly 5-foot-tall woman rushed to the front of the courtroom, elbowed her way past a defense lawyer and grabbed the 6-foot-4-inch Mr.
Keating by the lapels of his blue suit.
Screaming, "You took all my money. Give me my money back," the woman shook Mr.
Keating with both arms for a moment, witnesses said, before being hustled away by sheriff's deputies.


Pan American Games; Sun and Torch Burn As the Games Begin
With temperatures soaring to the upper 90's, Christian Laettner stood with his teammates under a scorching sun today as the United States delegation prepared to march into Pan American Stadium for the official beginning of the 11th Pan American Games.
The 6-foot-11-inch forward for Duke is expected to play a crucial role for the United States in its quest for its first major basketball championship in international competition since the victory in the 1984 Olympic Games.


Supreme Court Refuses to Block Shoreham Plan
The United States Supreme Court yesterday rejected a move to block the dismantling of the Shoreham nuclear power plant on Long Island without an environmental impact study.
The decision, issued without comment, upheld plans by New York State and the Long Island Lighting Company to dismantle the plant and further narrowed the legal terrain on which Shoreham's supporters have continued a last-ditch fight to save the 809-megawatt reactor, which was completed in 1984 but has never supplied power for Lilco's 900,000 customers.


Observer; Supreme &amp; P.C. Court
Conservatives are having good sport with liberalism's tyrants of tolerance, also known as the P.C. crowd, where P.C. means "politically correct." The university air is heady with tales of scholars terrorized for expressing the tiniest mouse of an idea disapproved by liberal politburos trying to stamp out Wrongthink and Wrongspeak.
Here is Prof.
C.
Vann Woodward in The New York Review of Books deploring university surrender to these small-bore Lenins.
He cites a professor's open letter to his college president reporting three separate incidents of P.C. terror:


Bank Bill Moves to Full Senate
The Senate Banking Committee narrowly approved a measure today to overhaul the nation's banking laws in a way that is significantly different from either the measure proposed by the Bush Administration or the one passed by the House Banking Committee.
The Senate bill is more generous to consumers than the other bills, but would not allow industrial companies to own banks.
Today's committee action, after three of days of wrangling, moves the legislation to the Senate floor and sharply increases the chances that Congress will adopt broad banking changes this year.
The precise contours will be shaped in the months ahead in continued negotiations between the Administration, the lawmakers and lobbyists from the banks and other industries.
Adopted by 12-to-9 Vote
"We've completed a strong, solid bill, the strongest bill around," said Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr., the Michigan Democrat who heads the committee and who proposed the legislation.
It was adopted by a 12-to-9 vote.


Ellen Kelly Weds William C. Gerard
Ellen Grace Kelly, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Kelly of Spring Lake, N.J., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Dr.
William Christopher Gerard, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Franklyn P. Gerard of Glen Ridge, N.J.
Judge Thomas F. X. Foley of Municipal Court in Sea Bright, N.J., performed the ceremony.
The bride, 31 years old, is an owner of Sweet Pea, a home furnishings store in Spring Lake.
She graduated from Spring Hill College.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Lane &amp; Mittendorf.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Mrs.
Gerard is a granddaughter of Edna Flannery Kelly of Alexandria, Va., and the late Edward Kelly.
Mrs.
Kelly was a member of the House of Representatives from Brooklyn from 1949 to 1969.
Mr.
Kelly was a justice of New York City Court.
The bridegroom, 33, is a dentist and a clinical instructor at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, from which he received a dental degree.
He graduated from Georgetown University.
His father is the president of the Thoracic Cardiovascular Surgical Group in Belleville, N.J. and the vice chairman of the University of Medicine and Dentistry.


Sports of The Times; The Smell Of the Mets In August
WHILE there wasn't any sweet smell of success before last night's game at Shea Stadium -- and no one with all his marbles would have expected it -- there was no faint odor of failure, either.
As the Mets returned from a road trip in which they lost seven of nine games, and saw two pitchers go down from injuries, and had few of the hitters hitting and only an occasional fielder fielding, and which the manager summed up as "a disaster," the clubhouse smelled only of the aromas of old: the scent of leather from the baseball gloves, the whiff of liniment from the trainer's room, and the expected fumes from the inside of their spiked shoes.
On the field, there was the smell of grass and dirt upon which their spiked shoes trod, and, if close enough, one could inhale that welcome sniff of the wood of the bats and the horsehide of the ball.


For Your Ears Only: Custom Headsets
Two brothers in Manhattan, Steven and Jeffrey Stegman, are making custom earpieces designed to stay in place even when the wearer is jogging.
The earpieces, Radio Partner Custom Earsets, look rather like hearing aids.
The Stegman brothers are audiologists who make custom-fitted earpieces for hearing aids.
They came up with the idea of custom earpieces for standard stereo headphones about three years ago.
Since then the company they formed, Radio Partners Inc., has sold more than 3,000 sets.


British Could Prove Nazi Plot to Kidnap Pope; Incident at Auschwitz
To the Editor:
Your report of the American Jewish Congress attack on Alan M. Dershowitz's book "Chutzpah" (arts pages, July 17) states that I "conceded" I had characterized the demonstration of Rabbi Avi Weiss on the grounds of the Carmelite convent in Auschwitz in July 1989 as unhelpful.
I did not "concede" that it was unhelpful; I insisted on it.
That Rabbi Weiss acted on his own, and not on behalf of the organized Jewish community, was at the heart of our argument with the Roman Catholic Church of Poland that it could not use his demonstration as a pretext to violate a solemn agreement entered into with official heads of Jewish organizations.
That agreement called for relocating the Carmelite convent from the grounds of the former concentration camp to some other site.
Mr.
Dershowitz and Rabbi Weiss demand public acclaim for their "courage" in doing their thing in Poland.
But the day after their heroic performances, they returned to the safety of Cambridge, Mass., and the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
A pitifully small, exposed and vulnerable Jewish community, which, unfortunately, continues to live in a hostile and anti-Semitic environment in Poland, is left to deal with the consequences of their "heroism." That may be Mr.
Dershowitz's idea of admirable chutzpah.
It is an example of irresponsible behavior that the Jewish community would do well to avoid.
HENRY SIEGMAN  Executive Director American Jewish Congress New York, July 25, 1991


The Ethics Committee Findings on D'Amato: No Broken Laws
Following are excerpts from a statement by the Senate Select Committee on Ethics about its investigation of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato:  Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.
ALLEGATION: The complaint alleges that in 1985 Senator D'Amato promised to introduce restrictive legislation regarding high-yield securities, or "junk bonds," but failed to do so after Drexel Burnham Lambert, Inc. made substantial contributions to his campaign.
FINDING: The committee finds that there is no evidence to support the allegation that Senator D'Amato changed his position on junk bonds.
Based on the available evidence, the Committee also finds that Senator D'Amato did not violate any law of the United States or Senate rule, nor did he engage in any improper conduct.
Island Park
ALLEGATION: Senator D'Amato is alleged to have engaged in improper conduct in connection with the administration of the Department of Housing and Urban Development's Section 235 Program in Island Park, L.I.
FINDING: With respect to the allegations concerning Senator D'Amato's participation in the Department of Housing and Urban Development Section 235 mortgage subsidy program in Island Park, L.I., the Committee finds that there is insufficient credible evidence to provide substantial cause to conclude that a violation within the Committee's jurisdiction had occurred.
HUD/Puerto Rico
ALLEGATION: Senator D'Amato is alleged to have engaged in improper conduct with regard to Department of Housing and Urban Development moderate rehabilitation projects in Puerto Rico.
FINDING: With regard to the complaint's allegations of misconduct concerning HUD projects in Puerto Rico, the committee has been disadvantaged by the unavailability of several essential witnesses, who have asserted their constitutional privilege against self-incrimination.
Of course, the committee is empowered by law to seek judicial orders of immunity and to compel the testimony of witnesses notwithstanding such claims of privilege.
In this preliminary inquiry, the committee has not hesitated to exercise this power where appropriate.
With respect to these particular witnesses, however, the committee, upon careful deliberation and after extensive consultation with the responsible law-enforcement agencies, determined that judicial orders of immunity might jeopardize ongoing criminal investigations or put contemplated prosecutions at grave risk.
Absent the testimony of these crucial witnesses and based on the evidence available to it, the committee finds that there is insufficient credible evidence to provide substantial cause for the Committee to conclude that a violation within its jurisdiction has occurred.
The committee's inquiry into these allegations is therefore closed without prejudice to reopening if and when additional relevant testimony or evidence becomes available.
Sperry/Unisys
ALLEGATION: The complaint raises questions concerning the actions taken by the Senator on behalf of a Long Island defense contractor, Unisys (and its predecessor company, Sperry).
Specifically, it is alleged that actions by the Senator may have been improperly influenced by allegedly illegal campaign contributions made to his campaign or by the retention by Unisys of the Senator's brother Armand, a Mineola, L.I., attorney, to lobby the Senator's office on its behalf.
FINDING: The Committee has thoroughly investigated these matters.
While the Senator's office did provide some support for Unisys respecting procurements in which it was interested, that support consisted of actions, such as letters of inquiry to Executive Branch officials, that were ordinary and routine.
The committee has found no evidence that the Senator or his staff ever took any actions as a result of campaign contributions from Unisys or its employees or that the Senator or his staff were aware of any allegedly illegal campaign contributions.
With respect to the allegations of misconduct concerning contributions by Unisys to Senator D'Amato and the use of the Senator's office by his brother on behalf of Unisys, the committee does not find that on the basis of the evidence available to it, Senator D'Amato has violated any law of the United States or rule of the Senate.
The Senator denies any knowledge that his brother represented Unisys before his office.
However, the committee notes that it is the duty of every United States Senator to conduct his or her office in a manner that precludes its systematic misuse by members of his or her family for personal gain.
The activities of Senator D'Amato's brother on behalf of Unisys constituted such a misuse.
Senator D'Amato conducted the business of his office in an improper and inappropriate manner.
Based on the evidence available to it, the Committee finds that Senator D'Amato was negligent in failing to establish appropriate standards for the operation of his office.


Administration Proposes Opening Vast Protected Areas to Builders
After months of argument among four Federal agencies and the White House, the Bush Administration has proposed rules intended to open millions of acres of low-lying forests, prairie, bottom lands and other environmentally sensitive areas to development, a White House official said today.
The proposed rules are to be published within two weeks for public comment, and to be effective they would have to survive Congressional review and a likely challenge from environmental groups.


Your Money; Adding Insurance Against Disability
DISABILITY insurance is "an area that is terribly overlooked," says Sam Radin, a lawyer and president of the National Madison Group, a New York planning firm.
"A whole class of people think they have coverage who really haven't" because of limitations in their employer-provided coverage.
Mr.
Radin, like many financial advisers, recommends that people examine what coverage they have and what else may be available to them.
Because of new marketing plans adopted by carriers in recent months, he said, many people can buy supplemental individual disability coverage at group rates to replace income that would be lost should they be disabled.


In Fast Company
Quick, what do BO JACKSON, DEION SANDERS and Toronto Maple Leaf center PETER ZEZEL have in common?
Zezel has joined his more celebrated peers in the ranks of two-sport professionals by signing yesterday with the the North York Rockets of the Canadian Soccer League.
Zezel, who was on the Canadian national under-18 soccer team in 1982, will play striker for the Rockets.
He will remain under contract with the soccer team until Sept. 5, when the Maple Leafs' training camp opens. (AP)


Reebok Is Denied A Ban on Glove
Reebok International Ltd. has lost an attempt to block the sale and distribution of a baseball glove it says uses its pump technology.
Illinois Circuit Judge Edwin Berman rejected Reebok's request to enjoin Spalding Sports Worldwide from marketing its Airflex glove.
Reebok accused its partner in developing the technology, Design Continuum, of improperly sharing its trade secrets with Spalding.
But Judge Berman said there was no point in putting a ban on Spalding.
The glove features a built-in air pump and release valve similar to that used in "Pump" athletic shoes.
The pump molds the glove to the wearer's hand, eliminating the need to break it in.
Reebok, based in Stoughton, Mass., says it has sold four million pairs of "The Pump" since it was introduced in 1989, representing retail sales of about $500 million.


Bank's Assets On Hold in U.S.
A United States Bankruptcy Court Judge said yesterday that he would temporarily restrain governmental agencies from liquidating B.C.C.I. assets, following a request by the London accounting firm Touche Ross.
The firm, which has been appointed by the Bank of England to liquidate the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, asked the judge to protect the bank's assets from an explosion of competing claims.


Bridge
Two top teams were eliminated in the Spingold Knockout Team Championship at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals here on Thursday.
Bill Root of Boca Raton, Fla., and his third-seeded foursome lost by 16 to Richard Schwartz of Palm Beach, Fla., Drew Casen of Delray Beach, Fla., Fred Stewart of Accord, N.Y., and Steve Weinstein of Upper Montclair, N.J.
The fourth-seeded four-man squad, led by Steve Robinson of Arlington, Va., the winners of the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams in March, lost by 35 imps to Ralph Cohen of Memphis.
The other winners were Billy Cohen of Las Vegas, Barry Goren and Ron Smith, both of Chicago, and Jaggy Shivdasani and Santana Ghose, both from India.


Painful Rise in Prices Stirs Discontent in Iran
Iran's painful transition to a freer economy has brought protests over sharp increases in the cost of living and stirred criticism of a five-year plan designed to reduce Government control and encourage privatization.
Iranian economists warn that the fallout from poverty, the country's eight-year war with Iraq and the thwarted expectations of millions of people affected by shortages have created "the foundations for instability."


Art Tries to Distance Itself From Life
The movie "Body Parts" opened without fanfare in 1,300 theaters around the country yesterday, accompanied by revised advertisements intended to remove any association between the film and the grisly discovery of nearly a dozen dismembered corpses in a Milwaukee apartment last week.
Even in Milwaukee, where 31-year-old Jeffrey L. Dahmer now stands accused of having murdered 11 young men, the movie was showing in four theaters.
A television advertisement campaign, halted in southern Wisconsin after the bodies were found July 22, has now resumed, said a spokesman for Paramount Communications, which is distributing the film.


U.S. to Admit Some Immigrants With AIDS Under New Health Policy
Bush Administration officials have decided to permit some immigrants with AIDS into the country while barring others, health officials said Thursday.
After two years of raucous debate, Federal health officials have reached a consensus about the policy they will establish on the immigration of people with AIDS.


Leo Cawley Economist, 47
Leo Cawley, an economist and radio commentater whose weekly program on economics, "Fearful Symmetry," was broadcast on WBAI-FM, died on July 22 in the Seattle Veterans Affairs Medical Center.
He was 47 years old and lived in New York.
He died of complications from a bone-marrow transplant, said Paula Webster, a spokeswoman for the family.
Mr.
Cawley was exposed to the herbicide Agent Orange when he was a marine in Vietnam, and he developed bone cancer in 1980.


PALESTINIANS CALL ISSUES UNRESOLVED
The three Palestinian leaders who met for more than four hours today with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said afterward that although they received "some positive answers" to outstanding questions, other vital issues remained unresolved.
As a result, the leaders said, they put off an acceptance for Palestinian participation at the regional peace conference, planned for October by the United States and the Soviet Union, until they received a written letter of understanding from the United States that would satisfy their conditions.


Bush Says Only Bad Health Would Bar Candidacy in '92
President Bush all but announced his intention to seek re-election at a Rose Garden news conference today, saying that only a change in his health would deter him from seeking a second term.
Mr.
Bush then tested a potential campaign theme by accusing a "frustratingly negative" Congress of blocking his domestic legislative agenda.


Deputy Who Helped Actor Gets Suspension
A sheriff's deputy will be suspended for a day without pay for helping to provide bail money for the actor Pee-Wee Herman, a longtime friend, after his arrest on indecent-exposure charges at an adult-film theater here last week.
The deputy, Cpl.
Joan Verizzo, a seven-year veteran of the Sarasota County Sheriff's Department, wrote in a statement to her superiors that after the arrest of the 38-year-old actor, whose real name is Paul Reubens, he telephoned her and said he did not have enough money to post the $219 bail.


One Toughfella


Pirates' Plunge Hits 7 On Imperfect Ending
Zane Smith was perfect for six innings tonight, but reliever Stan Belinda forced home the winning run with a bases-loaded walk in the ninth as the St.
Louis Cardinals beat Pittsburgh, 4-3, the Pirates' seventh straight loss.
Smith retired 18 consecutive batters before Ray Lankford beat out an infield single in the seventh.
The Cardinals got two runs in the inning and trailed by 3-2 entering the ninth.
Ozzie Smith walked with one out, took third on Gerald Perry's single, and pinch-runner Geronimo Pena stole second.
Todd Zeile's run-scoring groundout tied the score and Felix Jose was intentionally walked, loading the bases.
Belinda (3-3) then walked Bernard Gilkey as the Cardinals rallied to win for the 25th time this season.
Bob McClure (1-0) was the winner in relief of Jose DeLeon, who allowed three runs and five hits in eight innings.
Smith wound up allowing four hits in seven and two-thirds innings.
He struck out three and walked none.


Review/Music; At Tanglewood, Excess to Match the Composer's
Draped in a black gown that looked like a monk's robe, and standing under a spotlight that glared down like hyped-up moonlight, the soprano Elise Ross moaned and sighed and leered.
She seemed a deranged Ophelia out for a night walk.
She lay prone on the stage, clenched her fists or crouched in horror.
In this remarkable performance of Arnold Schoenberg's "Pierrot Lunaire" at the opening concert of Tanglewood's Festival of Contemporary Music on Thursday night, Miss Ross risked as much excess as the composer did when he set these 21 German poems to music in 1912.


Journey to the Top of the Leaderboard for a Club Pro
Mike Joyce stood near the 18th green today, the focus of an unfamiliar picture.
There were autograph seekers, well-wishers and reporters around him, and he was the leader in the clubhouse.
Foreign territory, indeed.
Joyce had just finished a round of four-under-par 68, setting the early pace in the first round of the Northville Classic, the Senior PGA Tour stop at the Meadow Brook Club.
As beads of perspiration ran down his face, Joyce wore the look of a man who had battled a golf course, and lost.


Latin American Music
The Bronx Arts Ensemble is to play works from Puerto Rico, Cuba, Argentina and Uruguay in two free concerts in the Bronx tomorrow.
Brenda Feliciano and Cristina Arsuaga, sopranos, Brannon Hall-Garcia, baritone, and the Trio Musica Hispana will appear with the orchestra, which is under the direction of Pablo Zinger.
Works by Ignacio Cervantes, Angel Lasala, Manuel Gonzalez and Juares Lamarque-Pons are on the program.
Performances are at 2 P.M. at Rockwood Drive Circle in Van Cortlandt Park, and at 4 P.M. in the McGinley Student Center at the Rose Hill Campus of Fordham University, at Southern Boulevard.
Information: (212) 601-7399.


Tale of Political Ties and Bad Debt
A prominent Republican family in New Hampshire with close ties to the White House is hoping to stave off the imminent collapse of its real estate empire, and it says it is close to reaching an agreement on a four-and-a-half-year moratorium on repaying more than $100 million it borrowed from New England lenders.
There is no evidence of any improper interference in the renegotiation of the debts of the Tamposi family of Nashua, N.H.
But regulators and borrowers say such a lengthy moratorium is exceptional, and some New Hampshire businessmen with large debts who have been unable to get the same terms are upset.


Letter: On Science; Weigh Basic vs. 'Big' Research
To the Editor:
"NASA's Untouchable Folly" (editorial, July 14) was right on target.
As chairman of the House Budget Committee task force on defense, foreign policy and space, I held a hearing last week on the budgetary consequences of "big science" projects like the space station and the superconducting supercollider.
The hearing made it clear that financing these projects may very well come at the expense of other compelling science needs that provide a far stronger contribution to the maintenance of America's scientific base and our international economic competitiveness.
Under President Bush's budget proposal, spending on large research and development projects increased by 29 percent over fiscal year 1991 levels, and would consume an increasing share of the domestic discretionary spending during the first half of the 1990's.
The President's proposed increases for the space station and supercollider represent 50 percent of all his proposed increases for domestic discretionary spending in fiscal year 1994.
If we include NASA's earth-observing system, these three largest projects represent 90 percent of the President's request for domestic discretionary spending growth in fiscal year 1994.
These increases stand in sharp contrast to the $3.6 billion in Federal spending reductions in fiscal year 1994 that were imposed by last year's budget agreement.
My task force will hold another hearing to examine our investment in "small science" projects and the contributions which basic and applied research make to United States competitiveness and the maintenance of America's scientific base.
In these times of severe budgetary constraints, Congress must invest scarce Federal research and development dollars wisely and in a way that will insure that the United States gets the greatest possible return for these dollars.
RICHARD J. DURBIN  Member of Congress, 20th Dist., Ill.
Washington, July 16, 1991


CHRONICLE
TIM RENTON, Britain's Arts Minister, got an idea from MICK JAGGER while the two were chatting last month at an opening at the British Museum: that it would be nice to hold a national music day.
He plans to hold the celebration next summer and to make it an annual affair, his office said on Thursday, but no date has been set.
The music would range from Bach to hip-hop, to encourage people to participate in music making and listening.
Mr.
Renton said he envisioned special events on radio and television, local music festivals, outdoor concerts and school performances.
"A showcase for the amateur as well as the professional," he said.
He has appointed an organizing committee.
Funds will come initially from the Government.


Public &amp; Private; Two on Trial
I've had a hundred arguments about the William Kennedy Smith case, about whether sometimes women say no when we really mean maybe, about whether we should have certain expectations when we agree to go certain places with certain people, about whether anybody really believes innocent until proven guilty anymore.
And ever since prosecutors released the depositions of three women who say that Mr.
Smith also attacked them -- two alleged attempts, one alleged rape, none reported to the police, all described in some detail -- I've even argued with myself.


Guidepost; Insuring Money
Despite the bank industry's problems, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation still insures accounts for up to $100,000 per person per institution, including principle and interest.
Yet it is possible for a family to insure much more than that by using a combination of individual, joint and trust accounts.
In the following chart, the Bank Rate Monitor, a weekly publication on bank interest rates, shows how a family of four can protect as much as $1.4 million at a single bank.
Accounts
Individual
Joint
Trust
Husband
$100,000
$100,000
$100,000 w/wife, 100,000
w/child 1, 100,000 w/child 2
Wife
100,000
100,000 and child 1
100,000 w/husband, 100,000
w/child 1, 100,000 w/child 2
Child 1
100,000
100,000
and child 2
Child 2
100,000
100,000
and father
Total
$400,000
400,000
$600,000
(Source: Bank Rate Monitor, North Palm Beach, Fla.)


Less Vigilance Against Fraud?
The global B.C.C.I. banking scandal makes clear how much more vigilance is needed to fight fraud.
How, then, will members of Congress go home and explain why they are considering a bill that would dictate even less?
Yet that's just what a bill misnamed "Civil RICO reform" would do.
The present RICO law provides incentives for fraud victims and their attorneys to augment the work of prosecutors.
This misguided revision would give relief to the agents of fraud, not its victims.


Victim in Racial Assault Comes Home to L.I.
As he stood on his front porch today, surrounded by smiles and a galaxy of balloons heralding his return home, Alfred Jermaine Ewell showed few signs of the brutal beating that horrified people across the country and nearly killed him.
His shorts and MTV T-shirt covered a frame that was just a little on the thin side.
If he was slightly overwhelmed by the attention, he nonetheless joked easily with his mother, Earnestine, who works cleaning houses, and his football coach, Richard Mollo.


Public &amp; Private; Two on Trial
I've had a hundred arguments about the William Kennedy Smith case, about whether sometimes women say no when we really mean maybe, about whether we should have certain expectations when we agree to go certain places with certain people, about whether anybody really believes innocent until proven guilty anymore.
And ever since prosecutors released the depositions of three women who say that Mr.
Smith also attacked them -- two alleged attempts, one alleged rape, none reported to the police, all described in some detail -- I've even argued with myself.


Results Plus
GOLF A One-Stroke Lead For Norman at Buick Greg Norman shot a 65 yesterday to take a one-stroke lead over Scott Hoch at the Buick Open in Grand Blanc, Mich.
Norman's seven-under-par round left him with a total of 132, one stroke better than Hoch, the first-round leader, who followed his tournament-record-tying 63 with a 70.
The defending champion, Chip Beck; Wayne Grady, and Brad Faxon were third at 134, a shot ahead of Gil Morgan and Gene Sauers at Warwick Hills Golf and Country Club.
David Edwards, Barry Jaeckel and rookie Marco Dawson were at 136.
Nick Faldo, Howard Twitty and the 1989 Buick Open winner, Leonard Thompson, were in a group at 137.
Payne Stewart, the United States Open champion, shot a 79 yesterday and missed the cut. (AP) TENNIS Victory for Edberg  Top-seeded Stefan Edberg used his serve-and-volley game to its best advantage to defeat Aaron Krickstein, 6-4, 7-5, yesterday in the quarterfinals of the Volvo tournament in Los Angeles.
Edberg lost only seven points off his serve in the 1-hour-20-minute match and was never broken.
After Edberg broke Krickstein in the third game of the match, the two stayed on serve until the 11th game of the second set.
Edberg got four break points on Krickstein before he was able to convert and take a 6-5 lead.
The Swede won the final game at love.
In another quarterfinal match, fourth-seeded Brad Gilbert cruised to a 6-1, 6-3 victory over Steve Bryan, a qualifier. (AP)


Seagate Efforts To Reduce Costs
Seagate Technology Inc., the leading disk drive manufacturer, said it would take additional steps to consolidate its operations and reduce costs, including laying off another 450 employees.
The reduction is in addition to the 1,200 employees cut on July 12, bringing the total number of layoffs to 1,650, or about 4 percent of Seagate's worldwide work force.
The 450 are primarily in non-manufacturing positions in the United States.
The cost-reduction effort also includes discontinuing Seagate's magnetic head operations in Portugal, which primarily supply the company's older-generation disk drives.
The shutdown of the Portugal plant, which will cause an undisclosed number of layoffs there, will proceed in a gradual process in compliance with Portuguese law.
Money to cover the cost of the shutdown has already been set aside, the company said.


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on July 25 about home-care programs for new mothers omitted some hospitals in the New York region that offer them.
Four hospitals of the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation also have home-care programs; they are the Bronx Municipal Hospital Center, Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center, Elmhurst Hospital Center and Gouverneur Hospital.


Sweeping Health Care Bill Drafted, Charting Path for Congress Next Year
Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, today introduced a bill that would essentially set price controls for health care services, lower the age of eligibility for Medicare to 60 and impose new taxes to finance health insurance for millions of Americans who lack such protection.
Neither Mr.
Rostenkowski's bill nor a similar measure offered by Senate Democratic leaders is likely to be enacted this year.
But they provide a road map for Congressional action in 1992 or 1993, and they stake out a political position from which Democrats plan to chide President Bush and other Republicans in the 1992 campaign.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 3


Is Decision a Signal on Senate Favors?
With its vindication today of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the Senate Ethics Committee signaled lawmakers that they can press the legal limits in doing favors for political supporters.
The six-member bipartisan panel also demonstrated for the second time this year its reluctance to punish its colleagues.


BRIEFS
*
Ashton-Tate Co., Torrance, Calif., a computer software company, said it would reduce its work force by about 15 percent.


More Tests for Gray
Doctors still are seeking the cause of relief pitcher JEFF GRAY'S illness four days after he collapsed in the Boston Red Sox's clubhouse, a spokesman said yesterday.
Dr.
ARTHUR PAPPAS, the Red Sox's team doctor, said no diagnosis has been made and that results of further tests were needed because "we're still dealing with slurring of speech and weakness in the right arm and leg."


Dow Declines 11.41 Points, to 3,006.26
The prices of blue chip stocks fell slightly yesterday, with analysts citing disappointingly weak employment numbers released in the morning.
They said the decline reflected investor concern that the current economic recovery may be anemic, at best.
Falling for a second day after a three-day advance, the Dow Jones industrial average lost 11.41 points, to close at 3,006.26.
Still, the Dow remained above the 3,000 mark and ended 33.76 points higher than when the week began.
The day's volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 162.3 million shares, down from 170.6 million on Thursday.


Alexander Cumming Wed to Dr. Cynthia Harden
Dr.
Cynthia Louise Harden, an assistant professor of neurology at New York Medical College, was married yesterday to Alexander Donald Cumming, a writer and producer at LBS Communications, a television syndication company in New York.
The Rev.
Carlton W. Kangis officiated at Grace Lutheran Church in Augusta, Wis.
Dr.
Harden, who is 33 years old and is keeping her name, graduated and received her M.D. degree from the University of Wisconsin.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Harden of Augusta.
Mr.
Cumming, 29, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Cumming of Elizabeth, N.J.


RECORD BRIEFS
Mozart: Requiem (K. 626), 'Laut verkunde unsre Freude' (K. 623)
Jane Bryden, soprano; Mary Westbrook-Geha, mezzo-soprano; William Hite and William Bastian, tenors; William Sharp, baritone; Stephen Richardson, bass-baritone; Boston Early Music Festival Orchestra and Chorus conducted by Andrew Parrott.
Denon 81757 9152 2; CD.


Yugoslav Fighting Flares as Truce Plan Is Approved
Fighting flared anew between Croats and Serb rebels today, hours after Yugoslavia's collective presidency approved a plan for a cease-fire in a conflict that has claimed more than 200 lives this year.
There were reports of new clashes in Tenja, a farming town south of the Croatian city of Osijek, as three European Community foreign ministers continued their peace mission in Yugoslavia.


Sport Briefings; Sabatini and 55 To Play in Canada
Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina heads up the field of 56 announced Friday in the official draw for next week's women's Canadian Open.
Sabatini, the world's third-ranked player, moved into the favorite's spot after the withdrawal last week of the defending champion, Steffi Graf of Germany, the world's No. 2-ranked player and reigning Wimbledon titleholder.


The Manly Art Of Self-Delusion
WHEN I was small, Joe Louis was the Champ and Franklin D. Roosevelt was the President.
By the time I could read, they had both been hot-typed into media legend: The Brown Bomber was the role model for his race, humble, powerful and nonthreatening to whites, while F.D.R. was the bold aristocrat who used his power for the little people.
They both adored their wives.
We know better now.
Louis was psychologically disturbed, eventually institutionalized, perhaps because of the pressure of a double life.
He was an abuser of alcohol, drugs and women of all colors.
Roosevelt abused his power and cheated on his wife.
The false images were created for the supposed good of the country.
We needed historians to finally tell us the truth because journalists, mostly male and white, didn't want to jeopardize their access to the big league locker rooms.


Lack of Rain Hurts Vineyards on L.I.
Ursula W. Massoud glanced at the struggling vine, and with no hesitation yanked off a cluster of chardonnay grapes and tossed them to the dry soil.
"It hurts me, but if you're growing premium wines, you have to do it," the owner of Paumanok Vineyards said.


The Manly Art Of Self-Delusion
WHEN I was small, Joe Louis was the Champ and Franklin D. Roosevelt was the President.
By the time I could read, they had both been hot-typed into media legend: The Brown Bomber was the role model for his race, humble, powerful and nonthreatening to whites, while F.D.R. was the bold aristocrat who used his power for the little people.
They both adored their wives.
We know better now.
Louis was psychologically disturbed, eventually institutionalized, perhaps because of the pressure of a double life.
He was an abuser of alcohol, drugs and women of all colors.
Roosevelt abused his power and cheated on his wife.
The false images were created for the supposed good of the country.
We needed historians to finally tell us the truth because journalists, mostly male and white, didn't want to jeopardize their access to the big league locker rooms.


Ohio State Can Lease Park
Big Ten Conference athletic directors have reversed an earlier decision and allowed Ohio State to lease Ohio Stadium for a World League of American Football franchise.
The athletic directors voted against the proposal last month.
But on Friday, they agreed to let Ohio State enter negotiations with a group that wants to bring a W.L.A.F expansion team to Columbus.


Louis Plotkin and Jill A. Rubin Marry
Jill Allison Rubin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward Rubin of North Caldwell, N.J., was married last evening at the Livingston (N.J.) Country Club to Louis Lowell Plotkin, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Steven Plotkin of New Orleans.
Rabbi Alan Silverstein performed the ceremony.
The bride, 25 years old, is the editor of the alumni publication and the coordinator of the annual fund at the Isadore Newman School in New Orleans.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is an otolaryngologist and a head and neck surgeon in Denville, N.J.
Her mother, Marian Rubin, is an owner of Partyworks, a shop in Caldwell.


Morality on the Barricades
CAN'T WE MAKE MORAL JUDGEMENTS?
By Mary Midgley. 167 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $24.95.


Pizza Taking On an International Flair
PIZZA has not been the same since California discovered goat cheese.
Not content to leave well enough alone, intrepid chefs are going ever further afield in the quest for novelty.
The latest wrinkle is pizza with international toppings.
Among the more bizarre selections are bratwurst and sauerkraut for German pizza and tuna melt for an American version.
Freed from the yoke of mozzarella and tomato, pizza has become a dumping ground for anything from sushi to kippered herring.
Pizza does lend itself to a wide variety of ingredients, but they should be chosen carefully.
Pesto, tapenade (a Provencal mixture of anchovies, garlic puree, capers and olives), grilled vegetables, sun-dried tomatoes, olive paste, prosciutto and cheeses like ricotta, fontina and Gorgonzola (in addition to the obvious mozzarella and goat cheese) are all good.
The rule is never to put anything on a pizza that takes longer than 15 minutes to cook.


Benn Konner Wed to Linda Jo Laping
Linda Jo Laping, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Laping of Buffalo, was married there last evening to Benn Aron Konner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Konner of Caldwell, N.J.
Rabbi Arnold Fink officiated at Temple Beth Zion.
Mrs.
Konner, 25 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan, as did her husband.
Until recently she was a media planner at the Chiat/Day/Mojo advertising agency in New York.
She expects to join the Weiden &amp; Kennedy agency in Philadelphia this month.
Her father is the president of Kideney Architects in Buffalo and a past vice president of the American Institute of Architects.
Her mother, Dr.
Toby F. Laping, is a partner in Laping, Sayers &amp; Associates, a geriatric consulting firm in Buffalo.


Ahab Seethes Anew In Revised 'Moby Dick'
IN the 1953 musical "Wonderful Town," during an excruciating social lull, a fast-talking character is desperately and awkwardly trying to make small talk.
Against groaning music, she utters, in a monotone, "I was rereading 'Moby Dick' the other day and -- oh, I haven't read it since -- I'm sure none of us has -- it's worth picking up again -- it's about this whale."
Not only has the fearsome white whale been a mighty vessel destroyer and a musical conversation killer, but also it has wrecked the attempts of stage, screen and television adapters to get it off the page.


Dr. Rhonda Schiff to Wed Eric Press, Law Student
Mr. and Mrs.
Chester Schiff of Kings Point, L.I., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Dr.
Rhonda Ann Schiff and Eric Lurie Press, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hank Press of Ardsley, N.Y.
Dr.
Schiff, 25 years old, is a resident in anesthesiology at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She is a 1990 graduate of the six-year honors medical program at Northwestern University.
Her father is an electrical engineering consultant in New York.
Her mother, Vivian Schiff, is an artist and the president of the North Shore (L.I.) chapter of the National Spinal Cord Injury Association.


Who's Counting?
To be under fire because something funny happened to some Government money is the sort of thing that happens to politicians, businessmen and the like -- not university presidents.
So Stanford University has been aflutter since it was discovered earlier this year that the university had inappropriately billed the Government for as much as $200 million over the last decade.
The consternation deepened when it came to light that some of the $1.35 million in overcharges in 1990 was spent on luxury accouterments for the home of Stanford's president, Donald Kennedy.
For months Mr.
Kennedy appeared determined to ride out the storm, but in a surprise move last week he announced that he would resign at the end of the coming academic year.
Mr.
Kennedy said he made his decisions after weeks of reflection in which he sought the opinions of friends and colleagues.
Explaining his change of heart, he said, "It is very difficult, I have concluded, for a person identified with a problem to be a spokesman for its solution."


In the World of Roses, the Quest Is for a Beautiful New Face
LOUISE COLEMAN'S work is at times sub rosa she is a financial planner -- but her hobby is rosy indeed.
Mrs.
Coleman grows roses, so many and so well that she has won national acclaim.
In spring, traffic clogs the street she lives on here as drivers stop to admire her 400 rosebushes of every hue but blue.
Why there is no such thing as a blue rose, why flowers of such fabled beauty have thorns that tear and scar, are not questions that concern Mrs.
Coleman.
Spare her the metaphysical musings, the forays into symbolism and metaphor.
Just let her show you a roundly petaled flower with a high centered bloom, a rose of perfect symmetry that sits straight upon its stem, and share for a moment the beauty that moves her.


Football; Jets and Eagles Are Well Acquainted
Besides playing the national anthem before the start of the Jets' exhibition opener against the Philadelphia Eagles in Giants Stadium tonight, they could have played "Auld Lang Syne."
The Eagles have a host of former Jet players and coaches, including the longtime Jet tight end Mickey Shuler and Philadelphia's new head coach, Rich Kotite.


Pizza Taking On an International Flair
PIZZA has not been the same since California discovered goat cheese.
Not content to leave well enough alone, intrepid chefs are going ever further afield in the quest for novelty.
The latest wrinkle is pizza with international toppings.
Among the more bizarre selections are bratwurst and sauerkraut for German pizza and tuna melt for an American version.
Freed from the yoke of mozzarella and tomato, pizza has become a dumping ground for anything from sushi to kippered herring.
Pizza does lend itself to a wide variety of ingredients, but they should be chosen carefully.
Pesto, tapenade (a Provencal mixture of anchovies, garlic puree, capers and olives), grilled vegetables, sun-dried tomatoes, olive paste, prosciutto and cheeses like ricotta, fontina and Gorgonzola (in addition to the obvious mozzarella and goat cheese) are all good.
The rule is never to put anything on a pizza that takes longer than 15 minutes to cook.


Sunday Menu; Boil Water; Pick Corn; Make a Salad
This meatless meal takes advantage of summer's culinary pleasures.
I cannot deny that beans cooked at home have better texture than beans from a can.
If you want to cook up a pot at your leisure you can use some for this menu and freeze the rest.
Black Bean And Fresh Corn Salad  2 tablespoons apple cider vinegar  1 tablespoon sugar  1 tablespoon water  1/2 teaspoon ground cumin  5 ears corn, cooked and drained  1 16-ounce can black beans, rinsed under cold water and drained  8 ounces red bell pepper, washed, trimmed and finely chopped  1 tablespoon chopped fresh coriander.
1. In a serving bowl, stir the vinegar, sugar, water and cumin.
2.
Scrape the kernels from the corn and measure 1 1/2 cups.
Add to the dressing with the beans, pepper and coriander, and stir to mix well.
Yield: 2 servings.
Potatoes With Warm Vinaigrette  9 ounces tiny new potatoes, scrubbed but not peeled  2 teaspoons olive oil  2 teaspoons balsamic vinegar  2 scallions, finely sliced  Freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1.
Put the potatoes in a covered pot with water to cover.
Cook until they are firm but tender, 15 to 25 minutes, depending on size.
2. In a serving bowl, whisk the oil with vinegar; stir in the scallions.
3.
When the potatoes are cooked, drain them, cut into quarters, add them to the serving bowl and toss to mix well.
Season with pepper.
Yield: 2 servings.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have a persistent problem with algae on my porous sandstone patio.
It is surrounded by ground cover and slopes slightly so water drains off.
I know that algae can be removed with acid, but this would kill the ground cover as it drained off.
Last year I used an algaecide that I bought, but over the winter and since then the moss has come back worse than ever.
Annual scrubbing is growing into too much of a chore.
Can you suggest a solution?
A.
Moss and algae grow where there is moisture and a lack of sunlight.
Try to prune any trees or large shrubs shading that patio, and try to improve drainage.
Also, you might try using a clear sealer on the stone so it will not absorb and hold water the way it now does.
Test the sealer in one corner first, to see if it affects the color.
Otherwise periodic scrubbing with an algaecide may be your only answer.


David Lesser Engaged To Wed Danielle Geller
Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Geller of Great Neck, L.I., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Danielle Caroline Geller and David Harris Lesser, the son of Stanley C. Lesser of New York and the late Elaine B. Lesser.
Ms.
Geller, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from Cornell University and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is to become an associate in the New York law firm of Morrison Cohen Singer &amp; Weinstein next month.
Her father is a regional director in New York for the Department of Housing and Urban Development.


Florio Seeks Clean-Water Act
Gov.
Jim Florio urged the Legislature last night to place a $325 million clean-water bond act on the November ballot and to tighten rules to end uncontrolled growth at the shore.
Mr.
Florio, in a televised address, also asked New Jerseyans to oppose the gun lobby's effort to weaken the state's ban on assault firearms, the toughest such law in the nation.


Ms. Subak Is Engaged To Douglas C. Eberlee
Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Subak of Haverford, Pa., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Kate Elizabeth Subak and Douglas Charles Eberlee, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Charles Eberlee of Toronto.
Ms.
Subak, 29 years old, is a management consultant in Toronto for McKinsey &amp; Company.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in finance from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her father is a group vice president and the general counsel of Rohm &amp; Haas, a chemicals and plastics manufacturer in Philadelphia.


Oh, Brother
At the very least, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato should have known enough to lock up his stationery when his brother was in the office.
That was the gist of the Senate Ethics Committee's findings after a 19-month investigation of allegations of various improprieties by Mr.
D'Amato.
The panel said last week that the New York Republican had acted "in an improper and inappropriate manner" in allowing his brother, Armand, to use the Senator's office to lobby for a Long Island defense contractor, but the committee found no proof that the Senator had broken the law or Senate rules.
Mr.
D'Amato said that he was unaware that his brother had used his signature and letterhead to make inquiries on behalf of the contractor.
Some other charges of wrongdoing were dropped for lack of evidence after nearly three dozen witnesses refused to testify on Fifth Amendment grounds.
Mark Green, who brought the charges after his unsuccessful attempt to unseat Mr.
D'Amato in 1988, accused the ethics panel of being reluctant "to punish fellow politicians."


CHILDREN'S BOOKS: Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
DINAH'S EGG.
Written and illustrated by Lee Lorenz.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $13.95. (Ages 5 to 9) As a result of a storm, the pretty blue egg Dinah the dinosaur has been sitting on rolls out of the nest and into a series of perilous adventures, before ending up back in the nest in time to hatch.


'Late Bloomer' In Her Prime
"Sometimes I think I'm a late bloomer," said Abbey Lincoln, the jazz singer.
"My instrument started to expand when I turned 40." Ms.
Lincoln, who will turn 61 this month, has transformed herself over the decades from a sexy chanteuse on the supper club circuit to Hollywood actress to jazz vocalist in the company of innovators like Max Roach and Sonny Rollins to, in the last 10 years, consummate vocalist, lyricist and songwriter.
Last year's critically acclaimed album "The World Is Coming Down" (Verve), which featured many of her own buoyant compositions along with intelligent spins on standards, has propelled Ms.
Lincoln once and for all out of the shadow of her early idol, Billie Holiday.
But her refined signature sound -- a timbre laced with sarcasm, longing and a survivor's strength -- still retains her Billie Holiday legacy: the unorthodox use of time, the unexpected flip of a musical phrase.
"For the first time in my life, I like the sound of my voice," she said.


Cindy Salzman to Wed Scott M. Press
The engagement of Cindy Jane Salzman to Dr.
Scott Mitchell Press, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Press of Jericho, L.I., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Martin J. Salzman of Orangeburg, N.Y.
A June 1992 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Salzman, 24 years old and a cum laude graduate of Tufts University, is studying for a master's degree in special education at New York University.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York accounting concern of Reminick, Aarons &amp; Company.
Her mother, Andrea Salzman, is the children's librarian at the Orangeburg Library.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Education Life/Section 4A


Susan Milburn-Pyle to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
John Milburn-Pyle of Sydney, Australia, have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Susan Estelle Milburn-Pyle and Gavin Joseph Doyle, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
John J. Doyle of Rye Beach, N.H.
Miss Milburn-Pyle, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Melbourne and is a computer consultant in London.
Mr.
Doyle, 32, graduated from Wesleyan University and is an executive director in the fixed-income division of Morgan Stanley in London.


After 6 Months of Changes, Haiti Is Surprised by Its Leader's Moderation
When the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide overwhelmed his rivals in December in Haiti's first democratic elections, many supporters hoped and opponents feared that his inauguration presaged a period of jarring economic and social change for the country.
The leftist Roman Catholic priest, champion of ambitious programs like a radical reorganization of the peasantry and universal literacy, continues to chant his campaign mantra of "justice, openness and participation," themes that have been used to encourage crackdowns on people thought to be connected to past dictatorships and urge the poor not to wait passively for government to address their grievances.


Ventura Is Honored
Chicago's ROBIN VENTURA, who hit .357 with 12 homers and 33 r.b.i. in July, was named American League player for the month.
Ventura also had eight doubles and a .739 slugging percentage.
He scored 27 runs, drew 14 walks and had a .431 on-base percentage.
Seattle's BILL KRUEGER, who was 4-0 with a 1.19 earned run average in July, was named American League pitcher of the month. (AP)


Campus Life: Bucknell; For 20 Students At 2-Year College, A Step Upward
It may seem an unex pected marriage of two very different educational traditions, but a summer program that introduces students of the Community College of Philadelphia to the four-year college experience at Bucknell University is shaping up as a success.
For the second consecutive summer, a racially diverse group of Philadelphia students, ages 19 to 49, took their place, tuition free, at Bucknell's liberal-arts and engineering schools.
Generally the schools serve young, white, middle-class, suburban students.


Camera
A photographic journey starts with an idea.
Driven by a good idea, pictures can take a photographer on bountiful adventures.
Top photographers like the award-winning photojournalist Mary Ellen Mark have personal projects going all the time, above and beyond their assignments.
Self-assignment is a fast way to build character, develop a courageous eye, and feel good about being a photographer.
Here is the chronology of one idea that grew from kitchen talk 23 years ago to a major exhibition opening next spring.


Corrections
The Sound column in the Arts and Leisure section on June 2 misattributed the invention of the acoustic suspension speaker and the dome tweeter.
A reader's letter, sent two weeks after the column appeared, pointed out that both were invented by Edgar Villchur. (This correction was improperly delayed through an oversight.)


Business Diary: July 28 - August 2
COMPANIES Buffet Takes a Stake in American Express
Warren E. Buffett, one of the world's most successful investors, wanted more of the American Express Company than he actually bought last week.
"But Jimmy didn't want to issue that many shares," he said referring to James D. Robinson 3d, chairman of American Express.
So Mr.
Buffett, who is chairman of Berkshire Hathaway Inc., contented himself with a mere $300 million purchase of preferred shares, convertible into 12.2 million common shares at the discretion of American Express.
The cash will help Mr.
Robinson clean up his company's balance sheet.
In return, Berkshire gets higher dividends than common shareholders (the ones that don't call Mr. Robinson "Jimmy").
Berkshire gets 8.6 percent, common shareholders are getting 3.6 percent.
But share appreciation is limited.
"This deal won't make us as rich as the last couple of deals," said Mr.
Buffett.
But then he is already a billionaire.
Dingell Takes On Citicorp
Representative John D. Dingell may be a powerhouse in Washington, but Citicorp thinks he's a pretty poor banking analyst.
Last week, Mr.
Dingell, Democrat of Michigan and an outspoken foe of the Administration's proposal to give banks more powers, said Citicorp was "technically insolvent" and "struggling to survive." He also asserted that Citicorp was borrowing heavily from the Federal Reserve.
Citicorp disagreed.
So did L. William Seidman, the nation's top banking regulator, who added that he did not believe Citicorp was "insolvent under any standard." Citicorp issued a statement saying it had borrowed from the Fed just twice in the last 12 months and only for a day at a time.
Not a bad record.
The big bank's stock barely budged after Mr.
Dingell's diatribe, closing the week at $14.25.
Stumbling Along at T.W.A.
The best deal, they say, is the one that makes all parties equally unhappy.
By that standard, Trans World Airlines's reorganization plan, still to be approved by Federal regulators, is a very good deal.
Under it, T.W.A. would land in bankruptcy court sometime next year.
Carl C. Icahn, who now owns 90 percent of the faltering airline, is to turn over most of his stock to T.W.A.'s creditors.
He loses control.
In return for stock, the creditors, who originally wanted cash, have agreed to wipe out about $1 billion of T.W.A.'s debt.
But what about the airline?
With the nation's oldest planes and a stripped-down route structure, it still needs money to survive.
The deal may not give it enough.
B.C.C.I. - More Charges Fly
For nearly a month, tales of the misdeeds of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International have been circling the globe.
The bank has been home to drug lords, terrorists, spies and money launderers, it is alleged.
Last week, a grand jury in New York City handed up a 12-count indictment naming the bank and two of its officials: Aga Hassan Abedi, the Pakistani who founded B.C.C.I., and Swaleh Naqvi, its former chief operating officer.
But also last week, William von Raab, the former Commissioner of Customs, told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that the Bush Administration had been dragging its feet.
B.C.C.I. should have been investigated years before.
Now the case is before a New York bankruptcy judge.
Those Irksome Gas Contracts
Long-term thinking is supposed to pay off big, right?
It didn't for Columbia Gas System Inc., one of the nation's largest natural gas companies.
It filed for bankruptcy protection under Chapter 11 last week.
The company said its long-term supply contracts were forcing it to pay up to five times the current market price for natural gas.
But according to David N. Fleischer, who follows the company for Prudential Securities, the company's net worth is far greater than the $1 billion it said it would lose from the contracts.
The company agrees.
Mr.
Fleischer says the bankruptcy filing may be a ploy to force a renegotiation of the company's long-term contracts.
Helmsley Still Headed for Jail
New lawyer or not, Leona Helmsley is likely to spend time behind bars.
She was sentenced in August 1989 to four years in prison and ordered to pay a total of $9 million for, among other things, evading taxes by billing luxury items (and some not-so-luxury items, like girdles) to her hotel business.
But last week the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in New York upheld the conviction.
No new trial, the judges said.
One concession: the sentence will be reassessed.
The Supreme Court next?.
INTERNATIONAL
A Favor for the U.S.S.R.
The list of goods the Soviet Union has to trade reads like a description of a neighborhood lawn sale: lots of handicrafts, a few useful and not-so-useful scientific gadgets, but not much in the way of really tantalizing goods.
So last week, when President Bush granted the Soviet Union most-favored-nation status, it was mostly symbolic.
Yet, putting the Soviet Union on equal footing with America's other major trading partners makes it a full participant in the world economy.
The change in status must be submitted to Congress.
Detroit Eats Japan's Dust, Again
In the technology department, Japan already seems to be positioning itself for the next oil shortage.
The Honda Motor Company and Mitsubishi Motors last week revealed new fuel-efficient engines that will go on sale soon.
These engines will improve mileage in cars by 10 to 25 percent -- much more economical than Detroit's offerings.
"Ford and G.M. are working on the same technologies," said Richard Ko, an analyst in Tokyo.
"But the speed with which Japan is bringing these to market will open the gap even further." THE ECONOMY
A Candle in the Gloom
Some economists were beginning to fear the economy might lurch back into recession.
Growth in the gross national product was as weak as a summer breeze.
But last week even the gloomiest economists had at least some of their fears allayed.
Personal income and consumer spending were both up by a surprisingly strong 0.5 percent for June, according to the Commerce Department.
Since the consumer accounts for two-thirds of all economic activity, those numbers have real clout.
"It's another piece of data that the third quarter is locked in as fairly solid," said Lawrence H. Meyer, an economist in St.
Louis who heads his own forecasting firm.
The Economy's Slothful Growth
The Commerce Department's index of 11 leading economic indicators -- the Government's primary forecasting tool of economic growth -- grew by 0.5 percent in June.
That's good news because the indicator usually gives a fairly accurate glimpse of economic activity six to nine months into the future.
But a closer look at the components of the indicator reveals that all is still not well.
Six of the 11 indicators shrunk back.
"The increases are less than we've been accustomed to in a recovery," said Robert G. Dederick, an economist at the Northern Trust Company in Chicago.
That means growth, but just barely.
Behind the Good Numbers
Unemployment dropped in July to 6.8 percent, from 7 percent, the Labor Department said last week.
A tiny shift, granted, but at least a move in the right direction.
Still, economists felt little joy.
The drop in unemployment was accompanied by a decline in the size of the nation's payroll.
According to the Labor Department, 51,000 jobs were eliminated in July, on top of 20,000 the month before.
"The major message is that the decrease in unemployment camouflages weakness underneath," said Samuel D. Kahan, chief economist at Fuji Securities in Chicago.
The Big Board Backs Off
Futurists say the world is supposed to be moving toward global, 24-hour trading.
If it is, last week that march encountered an obstacle.
The Big Board said it would backtrack from a plan to open half an hour earlier and stay open later at night.
The Big Board currently does business from 9:30 A.M. to 4 P.M.
The exchange's West Coast members, who work from 6:30 A.M. to 1 P.M.
Pacific Time, do not want to start at 6:00 A.M.
But what about the 24-hour day?
"It will take 5 to 10 years to evolve," said Joseph Hardiman, president of the National Securities Dealers Association, a rival to the Big Board that is also attempting to trade securities on a longer day.
That still assumes Californians -- and everyone else -- will give up some sleep.
Nice Try, Bridgeport
When Mayor Mary C. Moran, said Bridgeport, Conn., would seek protection from its creditors under Chapter 9 of the Federal bankruptcy law, it was a stretch.
Especially since the city had $25 million in the bank.
Last week U.S.
Bankruptcy Judge Alan H. W. Schiff, ruled against the city.
Chapter 9, he said, is for chronic problems, not for balancing a budget that is temporarily out of whack.


A Local Grocery Tour Is Going on the Road
AN environmental shopping tour that began as a small, grass-roots effort in a northern Westchester town has attracted the attention of more than 125 groups interested in setting up similar programs in their own communities nationwide.
Along the way, it has gained the support of a major corporate sponsor as well as recognition from the White House.
The League of Women Voters of New Castle began giving tours last fall at a local grocery store.
The tours were designed to teach shoppers about the environmental consequences of their purchases.
Shoppers were encouraged to reduce waste by shunning overpackaged products, choosing recyclable packaging and avoiding one-use, disposable items.
Tour leaders also pointed out household cleaners that contained toxic chemicals and offered a booklet of alternative cleaning solutions.


Campus Life: Northwestern; English Classes That Extend Beyond Classroom
Tunde-Ilone Csaszar, 17 years old, fled Romania with her family on a few hours' notice last year during the collapse of the Government.
This summer, she is learning the lambada and reciting haiku as part of a new program at Northwestern University that aims to prepare non-native speakers of English for college.
Ms Csaszar is one of the 34 14- to 17-year-olds participating in the program.
Along with traditional classes in English as a second language, the students, mostly high school freshmen and sophomores, have taken a boat cruise along the Chicago lakefront, made a map of Chicago in the sand and learned the lyrics and a dance to the song "Beautiful City" from the musical "Godspell." Before the six-week session ends on Aug. 16, they will also have ushered at Northwestern's production of "Kiss Me, Kate," and learned to sing a blues number.
The program's directors say they hope that introducing the students to the city and its cultural life will do more than improve their English.
They hope it will encourage them to go to college.
Steven Taylor, the coordinator of the precollegiate programs at Northwestern, said that before the students can plan for university life, they must experience it.
"At their high schools, college is a concept," Mr.
Taylor said.
"They have to learn what college looks like, what college smells like, what it feels like to live in a dorm."
Mr.
Taylor said he hopes the program will give students the language skills they need to excel while still in high school.
"Four years down the line, we're not going to have to compromise our standards to get these kids in," he said.
"We're not going to have to give them a crash course the summer before they come."
To recruit participants, the staff at Northwestern's Summer Program Office sent letters to teachers and conselors in the Chicago public schools last fall, asking them to recommend students.
Then they compared the list to another provided by the Office of Gifted Minority Students.
The last and possibly most difficult step was convincing parents that their children should participate.
"We spent hours going around with the parents about the fact that men and women would be in the same residence hall," Mr.
Taylor said.
"With Latino parents, it was a big problem."
Roughly a third of the students attending the program are Hispanic.
The program aimed at Hispanic students because Northwestern's planners saw them as habitually underserved.
The dropout rate for Hispanic students in the Chicago public schools is 50 percent, Mr.
Taylor said.
The Ouija Board Speaks English
Besides English instruction in class and on excursions, the students encourage one another to speak English during their time off.
'It is very good if there are not so many people from one country," Ms. Csaszar said, because it encourages everyone to speak English.
When students were playing with a Ouija board last week, one asked the board a question in Spanish.
Another insisted that the board could speak only in English.
"Nobody speaks English at my home," said 16-year-old Milcart Robert, who came to Chicago from Haiti a year ago.
"Nobody here speaks Creole, and nobody speaks French. That's why I'm coming here."


STRIKEOUTS AND PSYCH-OUTS
The pineapple is a sign of welcome.
Assuming the Mets did not present Lans with the socks he's wearing, could it be the good doctor is displaying a Freudian need for self-assurance?
ANN D. MERRITT
Kingston, N.J.


In Radio, Sometimes Two's a Crowd
In keeping with its basic political aims, the Reagan Administration was eager to give private investors greater access to the public airwaves.
Accordingly, more than 1,000 new commercial broadcasting stations were licensed by the Federal Communications Commission in the last decade, and many are just getting on the air.
The result is occasionally chaotic.
"The FM band is now becoming overcrowded," says Herb Squire, chief engineer of the New York classical music station WQXR.
"Listeners can no longer separate stations on the dial. We have had lots of complaints that in some out-of-town areas our FM signal is being blocked out by newly authorized local stations."


Ms. Troisi to Wed Barrett N. Rogers
Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Troisi of Plattsburgh, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Rebecca Jeanne Troisi to Barrett Neil Rogers, a son of Richard C. Rogers of Mamaroneck, N.Y., and the late Marilyn F. Rogers.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Troisi, 27 years old, graduated from the State University of New York at Albany with bachelor's and master's degrees in anthropology.
She is a candidate for a doctorate in epidemiology at the Harvard School of Public Health.
Her father is retired from SUNY at Plattsburgh, where he was dean of professional and general studies.


17 Killed, and a Life Is Searched for Clues
On page 98 of Jeffrey L. Dahmer's Ohio high-school yearbook is a photograph of 45 honor society students lined up shoulder to shoulder, their hair well combed, their smiles confident.
One senior three rows from the top has no smile, no eyes, no face at all: his image was blacked out with a marking pen, reduced to a silhouette by an annoyed student editor before the yearbook went to the printer.


Spending Your Dollars in Europe: Greece; In Europe's Best Bargain, the Prices Are Still Antique
Greek tour operators may be shaking their heads and muttering "terrible," but the tourism slump after the Persian Gulf war and the dollar's recent rise against the drachma means 1991 is a very good time to visit one of Western Europe's most inexpensive countries.
Hotel and agency owners never quite recovered from the beating they took late last winter when scores of summer clients canceled, and some are offering discounts of up to 50 percent; especially outside of Athens, travelers can often negotiate room prices.
Travel costs have increased 10 to 15 percent because of Greece's rampant inflation.
Museum fees, however, doubled: entrance to the Acropolis jumped from 800 to 1,500 drachmas (about $7.50).
But because the dollar now equals 190 drachmas rather than the 150 it did in 1990, American travelers may find themselves paying much the same, if not less than last year.
Some examples of average prices: package of four day-trips (Athens, Sounion, Delphi, island cruise), $107 ($109 in 1990); taverna meal, $8.90 ($8); Athens Festival ticket, $5.10 to $87.10 ($3.30 to $66.65); tourist-class ferry, Athens to Mykonos, $11 ($10.30); taxi from the center to most hotels mentioned here, $1.55 ($1.45).


When Good Business Is Bad Medicine . . .
To the Editor:
Richard Rainwater ("Cashing In on Health Care's Troubles," July 21) is said to have "lined up doctors as investors, on the assumption that they will steer patients to the hospitals in which they have personal stakes and consider financial matters when making medical decisions." This type of arrangement creates incentives for participating physicians that may not be in their patients' best interests.
Decision making in medicine can be difficult enough without adding another factor -- additional profit for the physician.
Most patients would object to having their health care determined on factors that make the most profit for the Columbia Hospital Corporation.
Doctors should use hospitals that best meet medical needs.
Financial incentives to use a particular facility may make good business sense but may not be justified medically.


Postings: The Levitt Legend; Quest for a Virgin House
William J. Levitt is the master builder whose mass production techniques gave low-cost housing to thousands of young families on Long Island after World War II.
When it came to style, however, the boxy, no-frills houses Mr.
Levitt built took no design prizes.
But now the Town of Hempstead's Landmark Preservation Commission is searching for pure examples of the Levitt house within the township.
While some 17,400 Levitt houses went up between 1947 and 1951, the task of finding a design virgin will not be an easy one.


Street Patrol Gives Veterans Purpose and a Home
Bathed in the harsh light of a corner bodega, Joseph Durant and Bruce Weems cast a stony glance at the cars that whooshed down Classon Avenue in Brooklyn past blocks lined with abandoned buildings.
Neighbors lounged on nearby stoops and children darted about the sidewalk as the two men stood in warning to the drug dealers who once swaggered on the corner.
"We want the kids to get outside of their houses and do it with safety," said Mr.
Weems, a man with an imposing build and easy smile.
"We want the people who come to this area to know they definitely can't sell drugs here."


In the Nation; Shades Of Sentinel
In the summer of 1967, the People's Republic of China unexpectedly exploded a hydrogen device.
That September, Robert S. McNamara, the Secretary of Defense, announced that the Johnson Administration would deploy Sentinel, a "thin" missile defense, against the possibility of a Chinese attack.
Twenty-four years later, Presidents Bush and Gorbachev signed the first nuclear arms
reduction
treaty between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.
That same day, July 31, 1991, the Senate approved, 60 to 39, another "thin" missile defense, this one to guard against an accidental launch by the Soviets or attacks from third world countries.


STRIKEOUTS AND PSYCH-OUTS
Your article describes a medical model of service.
Other teams are trying the approach of educationally oriented sports psychology.
The Chicago White Sox have a sports psychology and personal development program, for which I serve as a consultant.
It emphasizes development of leadership skills, time-management proficiency, communication skills, effective attention control and constructive use of emotions.
This is coordinated with clinical services, provided through the employee-assistance unit.
CHARLES A. MAHER Professor of Psychology, Rutgers University
Piscataway, N.J.


TRANSACTIONS
Football CANADIAN FOOTBALL LEAGUE


Darwin's Anxieties
To the Editor:
As the author of "To Be an Invalid: The Illness of Charles Darwin" (1977), I should like to elaborate on Geoffrey Cowley's review of "Charles Darwin: A New Life" by John Bowlby (July 14).


A Victorian Line of Reasoning
To the Editor:
In his essay about censorship at the National Museum of American Art  [ "Peering Into Peepholes and Finding Politics," July 21 ] , Michael Kimmelman does an admirable job of exposing the folly of Elizabeth Broun, the museum director turned thought-policewoman.
The argument Ms.
Broun used to justify censoring the expression of the show's curators and smearing the reputation of so distinguished an artist as Sol LeWitt was intellectually jejune.
The idea that Mr.
LeWitt's "Muybridge I" was an acceptable work of art in 1964 ("so long ago," says Ms. Broun) but is now unacceptable because it is "a degrading pornographic experience" is precisely the same line of reasoning that Victorian prudes used when they pasted fig leafs over the naughty bits of classical statues.
It was all right for the Greeks, said the prudes patronizingly, because they didn't know any better; but now that we have arrived at a state of infallibility in the matter of what is morally permissible, it is our duty to protect the innocent from impurity.


Wall Street; The Case of the Teaching Broker
A legal battle over a Miami broker's long career as an adult school teacher -- during which, plaintiffs claim, he recruited clients in the classroom and miseducated them about the risks of products he was selling -- is growing more curious each day.
The case, filed in March, pits six former adult school students against the Dade County School Board, Prudential Securities and James P. McCormick, a former Prudential broker.
The students complain in their lawsuit that the school board was negligent in supervising the broker's classes, and that Prudential and Mr.
McCormick used the classes as part of a scheme to defraud the students.


Ledith M. Blair Marries in Dallas
Ledith Marie Blair and Lance Galen Gilliland, M.B.A. candidates at the University of Texas, were married yesterday at Casa View Baptist Church in Dallas.
The Rev.
Dr.
Charles Haney Jr. performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Gilliland, 26 years old, graduated from Baylor University as did her husband, 23.
Until recently she was a consultant in the financial-services group of Andersen Consulting in New York.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joe N. Blair of Dallas.
Her father is the director of policy administration for Southwestern Life Insurance Company in Dallas.
Her mother, Virginia Blair, is a vocational home-economics teacher at Skyline High School in Dallas.


FLASHCARD
A program allowing parents to use state and local tax dollars to send their children to a public, parochial or private school of their choice is favored by one-half of the American public.
It is opposed by 45 percent of the 1,005 adults surveyed by The Gallup Poll in April.
But 63 percent of those surveyed said "choice" systems would improve education quality.


Switch-Hitter Of Academe
WHEN Barry Munitz was appointed Chancellor of the California State University, the nation's largest four-year university system, both supporters and detractors fixated on the uncanny ease with which he moves between the worlds of public service and private interests.
In the last 25 years, Mr.
Munitz has switched from college teaching to foundation work to major posts at the Universities of Illinois and Houston to his most recent post as vice chairman of Maxxam Inc., a Houston-based holding company involved in several controversial corporate takeovers and in the failure of a large savings and loan association.


Aly Sabry, Former Vice President And Minister in Egypt, Dies at 71
Former Vice President Aly Sabry of Egypt died today at a Cairo hospital.
He was 71 years old.
Officials at the Specialists Hospital said Mr.
Sabry died of internal bleeding.
He had been hospitalized after suffering a blood clot in his left lung, the officials said.


Review/Reggae; Dancehall, the New Sound of the In Crowd From Jamaica
Just as hip-hop has transformed American pop music, dancehall has changed Jamaican reggae.
Dancehall is the updated version of toasting, the rhyming chants by Jamaican disk jockeys that are also entangled with the roots of American rap; over simple, widely shared vamps and sputtering electronic drums, dancehall performers chant at high speed in Jamaican patois, often boasting or getting raunchy.
Reggae reached out to the world in the 1970's and 1980's, while dancehall, with its limited melodic vocabulary and thick accent, seems determined to exclude outsiders.
But it is now the musical language of Jamaican youth on the island and around the world.
The Ram Jam Dub Slam tour, which arrived at the Beacon Theater on Wednesday, showed that even a seasoned reggae band like Steel Pulse, the headliner, has moved to incorporate dancehall in its songs.


FIGHT IN CANARSIE CALLED BIAS CASE
An 18-year-old black man was arrested and charged with attacking three white men yesterday in what the police said was the 11th bias-related incident in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn over the last month.
The police said that the man, Emmanuel Anderson, shouted racial slurs and kicked one of the three men in a car after they had stopped at a delicatessen on Rockaway Parkway about 12:45 A.M.


Wendy H. Baker Plans a Wedding
Jane W. Baker of New Canaan, Conn., and Charles W. Baker 3d of Potomac, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Wendy Holladay Baker, to Richard Francis McGowan, the son of Mrs.
Richard F. McGowan of Rome, Me., and the late Mr.
McGowan.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Baker, 29 years old, graduated from Tufts University.
She is a consultant for Avid Technology in Burlington, Mass., a producer of editing systems for films and video tapes.
Her father is a stockbroker at Cardy &amp; Company in Rockville, Md.
Her mother is the merchandizing coordinator for Nationwide Papers, a division of Champion International in Stamford, Conn.
The prospective bride's stepmother, Priscilla R. Baker, is the director of tourism for the National Park Service in Washington.


Football; Finding Laughter Among Saints
During a 517-day hiatus in which Bobby Hebert missed the entire 1990 season as quarterback of the New Orleans Saints, his grandmother died, his father underwent surgery for colon cancer, and his sister committed suicide.
During the layoff, Hebert moved from Mandeville, La., to Los Angeles for seven weeks, certain he would be traded to the Raiders.


Ex-Firefighters Draw 5-Year Terms in Arson
Two former volunteer firefighters have been sentenced to five years in prison for setting fire to two abandoned homes in Holland Township, N.J.
The two, Mark E. McGlothlin, 20 years old, and Alden Fulcomer, 22, pleaded guilty in May to charges of second-degree arson.
They admitted setting fires on Sept. 23 and Nov. 4, 1990, when they were members of the Holland Township Volunteer Fire Department.


Connecticut's Latest Budget Showdown Runs Down to Wire
With another shutdown of state offices threatened for Monday, the State Capitol complex was quiet today, except for occasional knots of tourists and two small meetings of legislators.
Party leaders canceled caucuses and a House session scheduled for today, leaving everything to the last day of a temporary budget that expires at midnight Sunday.
The House and Senate will both meet, though it remains to be determined which chamber will vote first, and on what.


The Executive Life; Heard the One About Henny and Recession?
A little light touch goes a long way at corporate gatherings in these gloomy days.
ON a stifling Sunday night in late July, 200 people gathered at New York's Pierre Hotel in tuxedos and party dresses for the annual dinner of the Cultured Pearl Association of America.
Just after 10:15, the evening's celebrity star, Henny Youngman, broke through the heat and the cigar smoke.
"I feel right at home here," Mr.
Youngman told the crowd.
"My grandfather had a jewelry business, too. He had an antique watch and on his deathbed guess what he did? He sold it to me."


Teen-Ager Found Fatally Shot
A 16-year-old boy was found shot to death on Friday night between parked cars on a Washington Heights street, the police said.
The youth, Ruben Campimo, of 2695 Briggs Avenue in the Bedford Park section of the Bronx, was found just before 10 P.M. in front of 22 Fairview Avenue near 193d Street, shot once in the back, said Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman.
He was pronounced dead at the scene.


Making a Difference; More Orbits Planned by Mr. Anselmo
RENE V. ANSELMO, the mercurial and sometimes improbable satellite entrepreneur, reached a potentially important milestone last week in creating a privately owned global satellite network.
As founder of the Pan American Satellite Corporation in Greenwich, Conn., the 65-year-old Mr.
Anselmo broke into the international satellite business several years ago by becoming the first person to launch a private satellite linking Europe, North America and South America.
Overcoming enormous risks, the venture has generated healthy profits, largely from relaying television programming.
Mr.
Anselmo has since created Alpha Lyracom Space Communications to expand his operations.


INSIDE
The Past Troubles Hungary
Hungary is having trouble deciding how to compensate the victims of Communist persecution and judge the guilty.
Page 3.
Moderation in Haiti


Postings: An Irish Project; A Restoration For the Dover
The Dover Hotel, a 17-story lodging on Lexington Avenue between 56th and 57th Streets, is being rescued from an identity crisis that left it closed for the last nine years.
The Fitzpatrick Hotel Group, an Irish hotelier, bought the building for $11.5 million in June and is now restoring it for a planned reopening, as the Fitzpatrick Manhattan Hotel, by early October.
The Dover, built in 1926 with 50 suites and 42 studios -- all including pantries or small kitchens, was used until World War II as a pied-a-terre mainly by wealthy suburbanites.
Later, until it was closed in 1982, it became a transient hotel.
But since it was covered by rent regulation, many of its long-term residents could not be evicted.


Campus Life: Georgia; A Drug for Drying Out Lowers Alcohol Levels
David Whit mire has spent almost a decade pursuing one goal: creating a drug that speeds the process of drying out.
After preliminary tests showed that he could significantly decrease the time it takes to lower a person's blood alcohol content, that goal seems more attainable.
"This isn't a mind-fool drug that makes you feel sober," said Professor Whitmire, a chemical engineer at the University of Georgia.
"This actually makes you sober."


New Writer On Wines
I appreciate the kind mention of our book in the works on the Long Island wine region in your issue of June 23.
One of the challenges of a book on such a dynamic subject is making sure it is not out of date before it is published.
That appears also to be a hazard in writing about books in the works.
Recently, because of other responsibilities, my colleague, Jerome Smith, had to give up his work on the book.
I fortunately have persuaded Ed Beltrami to pick up Jerome's pen and tasting glass and to join me as co-author.


Foreign Affairs; Do They Have the Nerve?
President Bush came home from his virtuoso performance in the Soviet Union only to resume the posture of a petulant preppy.
Democrats are "frustratingly negative on everything" and "We need more farsighted people like me in Congress," he said like a Professor Henry Higgins lamenting Democratic Eliza Doolittles.
There is a way for Mr.
Bush to have his wish and for Democrats to have a better chance to reclaim the White House -- if they have the nerve.
Let's call the idea "modified parliamentary democracy," and it can be done without changing the Constitution.


Ann Albern Wed To J. W. Olmsted
Ann Lee Albern, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Albern of Wilmington, Del., was married yesterday in Middlebury, Vt., to James Ward Olmsted, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Olmsted of Wayland, Mass.
The Rev.
Larry Yarbrough performed the Episcopal ceremony in Mead Chapel at Middlebury College.
Mrs.
Olmsted, 26 years old, is a graduate of Middlebury.
She is an assistant director of the Harvard College Fund.
Her father is a financial planner in Wilmington.


Home-Nation Edge Pays Off for Cubans
With the pleasantries of the opening ceremonies out of the way, 6,000 athletes today began the business of competing in the 11th Pan American Games.
The first event allowed the people of Havana to wake up to a pleasant surprise as one of Cuba's favorite sons, Alberto Cuba Carrero, won the early-morning marathon with a time of 2 hours 19 minutes 27 seconds.
Jose Santana of Brazil finished second, about 10 yards back, and Radames Gonzalez of Cuba was third.


Food; The Composed Salad
WINTER, SUMMER, SPRING OR FALL, WE ALWAYS eat salads at my house.
When I have guests, I serve the salad in the classic manner, between the meat and the cheese courses.
At family dinners, however, more often than not the salad is eaten first.
This is the only way my daughter and my wife will eat salad; they claim they are not in the mood for it any longer when I serve it later in the meal.
So I'll end up with a whole bowlful for myself and, of course, I eat it all because I love salad so much.
Thirty or so years ago, when I first came to the United States, the salads offered by restaurants were usually of the simple tossed variety, composed of iceberg lettuce, underripe tomatoes and a choice of French, Russian or Italian dressing.
In fact, until a few years ago, the chefs themselves did not even deign to make the restaurant salad; it was left to the pantry man or dishwasher to prepare this part of the meal, which was thought to have little prestige and not much importance.


Sport Briefings; Pistons' Edwards Signs in Italy
James Edwards of the Detroit Pistons has signed a three-year, $4.5 million contract that will take him to Knorr Bologna of the Italian League if he's released from the final year of his existing contract.
Edwards, a 35-year-old center, also must clear waivers in the National Basketball Association, which would probably happen because no teams are interested in him, said his agent, Reggie Turner.


Bank Rates, Low Now, Even Lower Later
There are people around -- this columnist among them -- who can remember a savings account paying 3 percent interest.
But for many Americans, such low interest rates seem outrageous.
"Savers rolling over C.D.'s are beyond being surprised," says Chuck Clough, Merrill Lynch's chief strategist.
"Now they're getting madder and madder." Rates are nearing 5 percent.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
British Isle Bloomers
Q.
Driving through Ireland recently, we were overwhelmed by an evergreen covered with yellow flowers growing wild along much of the coast.
I was told it's called furze there.
What is its name, and is it available here? -- Gloria Taradash, Clifton, N.J.


Technology; CD's Store the Data, But Sifting's a Chore
The amount of information being stored by government and industry on compact disks is growing rapidly, largely because the contents of a five-drawer file cabinet can be placed on just one disk.
A personal computer is then used to quickly locate and display information.
The problem with the technology, known as CD-ROM, is the confusing welter of programs that makes it difficult for the disks to be transferred from one type of computer to another.


Urban Outposts Keep Fighting the War on Poverty
WHEN the United States declared war on poverty in the 1960's, New Haven was one of the first targets.
In 1962 the nation's first community-based antipoverty agency, Community Progress Inc., opened in the city and became the incubator for lasting national programs like Head Start, the Neighborhood Youth Corps and others that offered legal services and job training.
Like other Great Society initiatives, Community Progress ultimately suffered from a tarnished reputation and was replaced by a reconstituted successor.
But in New Haven and 13 other communities in the state, local agencies begun in the idealism of the 60's have survived into the 90's, serving some 400,000 people.
And as the Federal Government seeks new directions for its current scaled-back efforts to address the lingering problems of poverty, the people who run those programs say they are eager to offer ideas as well as evidence of success, despite the less-than-enthusiastic support they have received from Washington.


Brazil's President Backs Army Over Congress
Drawing on a century-old tradition among Brazil's civilian politicians, President Fernando Collor de Mello is courting support of what some with tongue in cheek call Brazil's green party -- the military.
The President recently joined forces with the heads of the army, navy and air force to condemn recent votes by Brazil's Congress.
Recalling that the military ruled Brazil from 1964 to 1985, many analysts called Mr.
Collor's recent alliance inappropriate for the nation's first democratically elected President in 30 years.


'Me and My Girl' Revived With Energy
IF any one word can be used to describe a production at Theater Three in Port Jefferson, that word would be energetic.
Energy seems to flow from every pore of each actor, singer and dancer in any show at this theater.
The sets, costumes, lighting, acting and direction might be barely above the standards of a community theater, but the spirit always makes up for any lack.


Decline in Fish Spurs Moves To Limit Catch
THE populations of several of the most popular species of edible fish have been so severely depleted that state and Federal agencies have begun to draft regulations to reduce the size of the catch for commercial and recreational fishermen off the New Jersey coast.
One such proposal would reduce the allowable catch of fluke and weakfish by more than half, starting next season.
Also under consideration is a plan to place limits on fishing of bluefin tuna, mako and other open-sea sharks, sea bass, porgy and bluefish.


Milton's Accusers
To the Editor:
I have an objection to register concerning Linda Simon's review of "The Tree of Knowledge" by Eva Figes (June 16).


Replacing Broken Panes
REPLACE broken window glass promptly, even if it is only cracked.
Besides being dangerous, broken glass lets moisture penetrate window parts, fostering other problems.
And by letting air in, the broken glass constitutes a potential energy leak, which can mean higher utility bills.
The first step is to remove the broken pane.
Wear thick work gloves.
Place a cardboard box near the window.
Then wiggle the shards free and carefully put them in the box.
To avoid injury in case a piece of glass falls, work from the top of the window to the bottom.


On Language; Ode on a G-String
CHIEF JUSTICE WILLIAM H. Rehnquist announced the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Barnes v.
Glen Theater -- in which Justices Scalia and Souter concurred -- and delivered an opinion in which Justices O'Connor and Kennedy joined. (You can
concur in
a judgment without
joining
an opinion; you cannot
concur in
an opinion without
joining
in a judgment.)
"We . . . now hold," goes the law of the land, "that the Indiana statutory requirement that the dancers in the establishments involved in this case must wear pasties and a G-string does not violate the First Amendment."


Weak Job Data Undercut Dollar
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
137.20
137.60
149.42
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7405
1.7440
1.5875
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1501
1.1491
1.1507
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6895
1.6817
1.8585
U.S.
Dollar per British Pound Gold $355.90 $366.00 $377.25 Republic National Bank Currency: Friday NY Close


The Shopping Mall Wars
HEAT
And Other Stories.
By Joyce Carol Oates. 397 pp.
New York: A William Abrahams Book/ E. P. Dutton. $21.95.


The Region; New Jersey's Highest Court Defends Its Course
IN the nine years since capital punishment was reinstituted in New Jersey, the state Supreme Court has thrown out all but one of the 29 death sentences it has reviewed.
The only death sentence to be upheld was that imposed on Robert O. Marshall, a 50-year-old Toms River businessman convicted of hiring someone to kill his wife, Maria, who was shot to death in 1984.
All of the death sentences imposed on people who killed by their own hand have been overturned for a variety of reasons: prosecutorial misconduct, improper jury charges by judges and, most frequently in recent years, the failure of courts to have juries clearly determine that the killer "knowingly and purposely" intended the death of the victim.


Officer Is Held in '88 Killings
The police said today that they had arrested a white officer and were seeking four former police assistants in the killings of 11 blacks at a 1988 funeral vigil.
The arrest of Capt.
B.
V.
Mitchell followed testimony on Friday by two former police constables about the Dec. 3, 1988, attack in a black township in Natal Province.


Replacing Broken Panes
REPLACE broken window glass promptly, even if it is only cracked.
Besides being dangerous, broken glass lets moisture penetrate window parts, fostering other problems.
And by letting air in, the broken glass constitutes a potential energy leak, which can mean higher utility bills.
The first step is to remove the broken pane.
Wear thick work gloves.
Place a cardboard box near the window.
Then wiggle the shards free and carefully put them in the box.
To avoid injury in case a piece of glass falls, work from the top of the window to the bottom.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 4


Coleman Caught By Cubs' Catcher
The catcher, Rick Wilkins, had just the day before introduced himself to Vince Coleman.
The two crossed paths in a men's clothing store on the east side of Manhattan, near the hotel in which the Chicago Cubs were housed.


10 Stubborn Plants That Bedevil Americans
EVERYONE who grows plants confronts weeds at one time or another.
Some weeds are pretty to look at and some are just plain nuisances.
Usually when weeds appear in someone's garden, the plants are frowned upon and the garden is relegated to an unkempt category.
Besides, weeds compete with desirable plants for soil moisture and nutrients.
Other gardeners are tolerant of weeds, however, and consider them nothing more than plants out of place.
After all, they admit, for every weed or unwanted plant there is someone in the world who likes it and covets it.


Their Own Words
To the Editor:
The statement in the July 28 Week in Review article on plagiarism by James Atlas that "Syndicated columnists like Evans and Novak employ 'research assistants' to help write their columns" is incorrect.
We have two full-time assistants for phones, schedules, travel and accounts and one full-time reporter for our news letters, plus a college intern who helps research our weekly CNN interview and our magazine articles.
No assistant, research or otherwise, has ever helped us write or report for our column since it began nearly 30 years ago.
ROWLAND EVANS JR., ROBERT D. NOVAK Washington, July 30, 1991


Style, Sustenance and Value in Bridgeport
ON a reader's tip, we went to downtown Bridgeport looking for a Haitian restaurant -- only to discover that the scrawled word "Haitian" was really "Italian." When we entered Ralph 'n' Rich's, we suspected we had made another mistake: the dark bar seemed just for drinking rather than dining as well.
But as we started to slide into an upholstered booth in the rear, a waitress appeared and asked if we wouldn't prefer the dining room.
"Of course," we all but shouted.
Past the bar and the kitchen, we found a stylishly modern, high-ceilinged dining room.
Large Art Deco mirrors faced each other on opposite walls; beneath them were banquettes upholstered in soft blue fabric.
Wainscoting and trim painted a delicate orchid, with a plum-colored carpet on the floor, well-napped and well-spaced tables, and curtained windows facing a side street, all bore signs of a caring management.


Kuwait Hotel Set to Reopen
The Kuwait Sheraton Hotel, which was taken over by the Iraqis after the invasion of Kuwait last August, will reopen in September after extensive repairs, ITT Sheraton Corporation announced.
The hotel suffered considerable damage to rooms and public areas during the seven-month occupation.


Betsy Mitchell Marries Glen R. Sundin
Elizabeth Dianne Mitchell and Glen Roy Sundin were married yesterday at the Lamington Presbyterian Church in Bedminster, N.J., by the Rev.
John Worthington, who was assisted by the Rev.
Raymond J. Leonard, a Roman Catholic priest.
The bride, 24 years old, is known as Betsy.
She is a daughter of Barbara R. Mitchell of Morristown, N.J., and Clyde Mitchell of New York.
The bridegroom, 24, is a son Mr. and Mrs.
Roy S. Sundin of Larchmont, N.Y.


Drought Taking Its Toll on California Environment
The California economy has proved remarkably resistant to five years of drought, but the state's slow and short-sighted response may have inflicted irreversible damage on the environment.
That is a central conclusion of a broad study, made public on Thursday, of the economic and environmental effects of the severe drought that has gripped the West.
The study was conducted by the Pacific Institute for Studies in Development, Environment and Security, a nonpartisan research organization based in Berkeley, and was requested by the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Health and the Environment, which held a hearing on the subject Thursday in Washington.


Deaths at School in Japan Put Focus on Rules
Officials at a private institution for troubled children found two teen-agers smoking in violation of school rules.
To teach them a lesson, the school principal locked them in a windowless metal shed.
After 45 hours in the shed, where daytime temperatures went as high as 122 degrees, the 14-year-old boy and the 16-year-old girl died.
The incident, at a remote school on an island in the Inland Sea, has shocked the Japanese and revived a debate over the near obsession of some school authorities in enforcing rules.


I Sing of Cyberspace
VIRTUAL REALITY
By Howard Rheingold. 415 pp. New York: Summit Books. $22.95.


Molly McDougald To Wed in the Fall
Molly F. McDougald, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank A. McDougald of Pennington, N.J., and Daniel Auslander, a son of Elinor Auslander of New York and Louis Auslander of Pelham Manor, N.Y., plan to be married in October.
Ms.
McDougald, 28 years old, is the senior social worker at the Red Hook Prevention Program of the Catholic Guardian Society of Brooklyn and Queens, a family counseling service.
She graduated cum laude from St.
Lawrence University.
She received a master's degree in social work from New York University.
Her father is a managing director at the Marsh &amp; McLennan insurance brokerage in New York.
Her mother, Martha L. McDougald, is a social worker in Flemington, N.J.


Data Bank/Aug. 4, 1991
Personal Income
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.5
0.1
Personal Spending
Monthly percent change
0.5
1.2
-0.5
New Home Sales
Monthly percent change
7.4
-3.2
2.0
Index of Leading Indicators
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.8
0.3
Factory Orders
Monthly percent change
-1.4
2.3
2.1
Construction Spending
Monthly percent change
0.3
--1.7
1.0
Cash Wheat Price
Aug. 2
July 26
July 19
No. 1 K.C., per bushel
$3.12
$3.03
$2.86
Auto Production
Aug. 2
July 26
July 19
In units, weekly total
79,343
79,416
91,440


Spending Your Dollars in Europe: Poland; Hotel Rates Have Gotten Higher, but One Can Dine For Little
Those familiar with the "people's prices" of old -- $2 steak dinners, 50-cent tins of beluga caviar and $15 hotel rooms -- will be shocked to discover that Poland is indeed joining the rest of Europe, at least in cost.
Prices for most goods and services have risen steeply since January 1990, when the country's economic reforms were implemented, doubling costs overnight.
Since last year, the cost of moderate and deluxe hotels has risen about 15 percent; depending on the class, they range from $45 to $225.
But dining, by any standard, remains very reasonable: meals for two with drinks, coffee and dessert rarely top $30.
The Polish currency, the zloty, is pegged to the dollar, and tourists can eat, drink and sleep well for a week for about $700.


Businesses Are Joining Forces To Lure More Tourists to Town
THE citizens of Norfolk have banded together against the British, a pack of wolves on Haystack Mountain, the Confederacy and even progress.
But in the last few years they have come up against a most formidable foe: the economy.
Michele Sloane, the 37-year-old owner of the Mountain View Inn, issued a call to arms in March, rallying local business owners to respond to last summer's poor economic showing.
True to the town's history, they rallied.


Corrections
A chart on July 21 with the Travel Advisory column, headed "Vacation Travel at the Wheel," misstated the meaning of the figures.
They represented the number of trips made to places more than 100 miles from home, not the number of people who traveled that far.


Ms. Lewis Plans A May Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey B. Lewis of Harrison, N.Y., have announced May wedding plans for their daughter Kimberly Lynn Lewis and Brent Peter Forester, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Bruce Forester of Bronxville, N.Y.
Ms.
Lewis, 23 years old, is an editorial assistant at Little, Brown in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the two Lewis of Woodhaven department stores in Woodhaven, Queens.
Her mother, Marlin Lewis, is a saleswoman at Julia B. Fee, a real-estate concern in Rye, N.Y.


Catering to a New Crowd
EIGHT YEARS AGO, Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond allocated about $147,000 for child-care services, which provide developmental programs and meals for children of students throughout the workday.
That budget has since grown 61 percent, to more than $200,000, for the school year ending this spring.
The increase largely reflects the higher number of older students with children who are returning to the university to complete degrees or entering the university later in life to pursue a deferred ambition of higher education, university administrators say.


It's a Quiet Time Now for Meadow Star
At the height of the racing season at old Saratoga Race Course, at the height of the celebrity season in the backstretch barns where the stars are stabled, where is the missing star Meadow Star?
Everybody else of consequence in the racing world is present or accounted for, the fillies preening for the Alabama Stakes next Saturday, the colts primed for the Travers Stakes one week later.
Anybody who is anybody (and a 3-year-old horse) has to be aiming for those two races, the main events of the Saratoga season and the main launching pads for the season's ultimate goals.


Greyhound Bus Accident Near Ithaca Injures 30
More than 30 people were injured today when a Greyhound bus flipped over after the driver apparently fell asleep, the police said.
Hospitals reported no critical injuries among the passengers, who suffered contusions, internal injuries and broken bones.


A Hot Springs Education
THE BOOKMAKER'S DAUGHTER
A Memory Unbound. By Shirley Abbott. 290 pp. New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.


Gary MacDougal, Executive, to Wed Charlene Gehm, Joffrey Ballet Dancer
Charlene Gehm, a dancer with the Joffrey Ballet in New York, and Gary MacDougal, an industrialist and foundation executive, plan to marry in June.
Miss Gehm, 39 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Gehm of Daytona Beach, Fla.
The prospective bridegroom, 55, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas W. MacDougal of Fallbrook, Calif.
Miss Gehm, who has performed at the White House and in "West Side Story" and "The Phantom of the Opera," plans to begin studies in arts management at New York University in the fall.
Her parents are retired, her father as a high school teacher and her mother, Verna Mae Gehm, as a caterer.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have a persistent problem with algae on my porous sandstone patio.
It is surrounded by ground cover and slopes slightly so water drains off.
I know that algae can be removed with acid, but this would kill the ground cover as it drained off.
Last year I used an algaecide that I bought, but over the winter and since then the moss has come back worse than ever.
Annual scrubbing is growing into too much of a chore.
Can you suggest a solution?
A.
Moss and algae grow where there is moisture and a lack of sunlight.
Try to prune any trees or large shrubs shading that patio, and try to improve drainage.
Also, you might try using a clear sealer on the stone so it will not absorb and hold water the way it now does.
Test the sealer in one corner first, to see if it affects the color.
Otherwise periodic scrubbing with an algaecide may be your only answer.


British to Salute Japan's Culture With a Festival
The Japan Festival, the largest celebration of another nation's culture ever held in Britain, will take place from September through next January, featuring 350 events at 200 venues around the country.
Highlights of the festival in London will be a major exhibition at the Victoria and Albert Museum called "Visions of Japan" (Sept. 17 to Jan. 5); a collection of the latest Japanese industrial robots at the Science Museum; an exhibition called "Kamakura: The Renaissance of Japanese Sculpture 1185-1333" at the British Museum (Sept. 18 to Nov. 24) and "Japan and Britain: An Esthetic Dialogue 1850-1930" at the Barbican Art Gallery (Oct. 17- to Jan. 12).
Other events will include a sumo wrestling tournament, to be held at the Royal Albert Hall from Oct. 9 to 13.


Joan B. Collins Is Married
Joan B. Collins, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward E. Collins 3d of Little Silver, N.J., was married yesterday in Santa Fe, N.M., to John A. Bernasconi Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernasconi of Milton, Mass.
The Rev.
Richard Gundrey, a Roman Catholic, officiated at the Loretto Chapel.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from Sweet Briar College; the bridegroom, 31, from the University of Lowell.
She is an actress; he is an artist.


The Quiz
Looking skyward has been an episodic preoccupation of earthlings over the centuries, and this year is shaping up as one of those episodes.
Astronomers have been busily discovering intriguing celestial objects, including a few where there wasn't supposed to be much of anything; then the world discovered that a good old-fashioned solar eclipse can be akin to an out-of-body experience.
Time to brush up on a few fundamentals of astronomy, just so we know what we're seeing when we see it. (Answers on page 26.)


Spending Your Dollars in Europe: France; Paris Is a Shock, but Bistro-Crawling Can Pay
It was only six years ago that a dollar was worth 9 French francs and $100 could buy a tasty dinner for four.
Today, while the dollar may have valiantly climbed from around 4.90 to 5.90 francs so far this year (it actually reached 6.15 francs early July), there is not much change left from $100 after dinner for two.
And that will not be at a restaurant worth name-dropping.
Add a Michelin star or two and a vintage bottle of Bordeaux and the check can easily exceed $100 a head.
But it is not hard to find prices that shock, starting with top-flight hotels.
For a double room, the Bristol charges between $525 and $627, the Ritz between $440 and $601, the Plaza-Athenee between $471 and $537.
And, in dollar terms, these prices are at least twice what they were in 1985, when the dollar was at its most recent high.
France may have kept annual inflation to around 3 percent over the last five years, but the prices of luxury goods and services have risen faster, matching France's ever more visible prosperity.


BAKER, IN MOROCCO, PUSHES PEACE PLAN
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d urged King Hassan II today to join as an observer at the Middle East peace conference that the United States is promoting and to use his influence on the Palestinians to bring them to the table.
Neither Mr.
Baker nor King Hassan made any public statement after meeting for almost two hours.
But a State Department official said the Secretary raised the possibility of Morocco's participating as an observer in the opening session of the peace conference.


Gail Paula Bassen to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Nat Bassen of Woodbury, L.I., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Gail Paula Bassen, and Robert Wayne Seiden, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan H. Seiden of Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn.
Miss Bassen, 26 years old, is a buyer for Fabric Bonanza in Hicksville, L.I.
She graduated summa cum laude from New York University.
Mr.
Seiden, 28, is an assistant district attorney in Manhattan.
He graduated cum laude from N.Y.U. and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.


The World; In the Debate On Defense, Some Givens Disappear
NOTHING has so muddled the debate on national defense as the extraordinary circumstance in which the end of the cold war was quickly followed by a large regional war against Saddam Hussein.
Now a new strategic arms treaty signed in Moscow and a new crusade in Congress for building an anti-ballistic missile system to protect the continental United States from accidental launches and well-armed tyrants have only added to the jumble of United States security policy.


Angels Sign Marshall
MIKE MARSHALL has joined his fourth major league team in eight years.
The California Angels purchased Marshall's contract from its Class A Palm Springs farm club Friday, one week after signing the first baseman-outfielder to a free-agent contract.
Marshall, 31 years old, was released by the Boston Red Sox last month after hitting .290 in a part-time role with a home run and and seven runs batted in.
He has 148 home runs and 530 r.b.i. with a .271 average through an injury-plagued eight-year career with the Red Sox, the Los Angeles Dodgers and the Mets.
To make room on the roster, the Angels optioned left-handed pitcher FLOYD BANNISTER to Palm Springs. (AP)


Arms Makers and Military Face a Wrenching New Era
For dozens of communities, hundreds of companies and tens of thousands of workers who have thrived off the nation's vast weapons industry, life may never be the same.
But early indications are that for the nation over all, the effect of sharply lower military budgets will be less severe than many had feared.
Some find the deep military cuts astonishing, some alarming and others long overdue, but no one doubts any longer that the end of the cold war and the monstrous Federal budget deficit make these reductions unavoidable.


Bach and Mozart for Those Who Like to Sing Along
ON the four Mondays of August the public is invited to join one of the Summer Sings organized by the Fairfield County and the Trinity Chorales.
Tomorrow evening at 8 in Trinity Church in Southport, the audience-chorus will read through Bach's B minor Mass under the direction of Harold Rosenbaum.
Bruce Barber leads Haydn's "Lord Nelson" Mass on Aug. 12.
For Aug. 19 the Fairfield Chorale's music director, Johannes Somary, has planned a selection of opera choruses, and a conductor to be announced will oversee the Mozart Requiem at the Aug. 26 finale.
For more details, call 966-0678 or 222-8668.
For those who would prefer just to listen to the Fairfield County Chorale, the ensemble under Mr.
Somary is giving a free concert at 8:30 P.M. on Tuesday as part of the Levitt Pavilion series in Westport.
Among the earlier offerings at the open-air theater on the banks of the Saugatuck are the marches, show tunes, overtures and light classics that mark tonight's return engagement of the 102d Army National Guard Band at 8:30 P.M., and the musical tale of "Cinderella," in a production featuring the Hudson Vagabond Puppets, tomorrow at 7.


Vancouver Ferries
To the Editor: I read with interest your article on Vancouver Island (Travel, June 30), and would like to mention a delightful offbeat trip my wife and I took on a small mail-cargo-passenger riverboat, the Lady Rose, from Port Alberni, Vancouver Island, a few years ago.
The boat sailed on the Alberni Inlet to the Pacific Ocean, stopping on the way to permit vacationing kayakers to off-cargo their little boats and themselves, at the same time loading returning kayakers.
At the last stop, a small fishing village with the almost unpronounceable name of Ucluelet, the boat docked long enough for passengers to go ashore, have a hasty lunch and return.
The entire trip took a full day, and the scenery, as is true throughout the area, was breathtaking, reminiscent of Norwegian fjords.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Freehold 169,000
110 Broad Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 15-year-old colonial; fireplace, 2-car garage, c/a, w/w carpeting; taxes $2,928.
Howell 135,000
6 Stockport Way  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1 1/2-year-old split level; family room, 1-car garage, porch; taxes $3,000.
Oradell 197,000
640 Lake Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 55-year-old Cape Cod; fireplace, h/w floors, full basement; taxes $3,683.
Parsippany 215,000
5 Partridge Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; updated kitchen with new appliances, h/w floors; taxes $3,372.
Ramsey 171,500
420 North Central Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old ranch; deck, w/b stove, underground sprinkler system; taxes $3,475.
Waldwick 166,000
83 Lincoln Place  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 52-year-old colonial; w/b, fenced yard; taxes $3,302.
OTHER AREAS Commack, L.I. 144,500
43 Spinner Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 28- year-old ranch; den, finished basement, patio; taxes $3,400.
Fairfield, Conn. 400,000
1492 Fairfield Beach Road  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 3-year-old contemporary; multiple decks, canal frontage, 50- by 250-foot lot; taxes $4,730.
Larchmont, N.Y. 428,000
20 Lansdowne Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 64-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, pantry, screened porch; taxes $7,817.


Kids Who Can't Sit Still
WHEN I was a girl, back in the 1960's, I knew a boy around my own age who was just a few degrees off the gradient of normalcy.
He seemed intelligent, and he could sometimes be as sweet as a summer morning, but more often than not he was simply and unredeemably irritating.
In the midst of a game with me and my younger brother, he would suddenly jump up and wander off.
He would burst into tears for no apparent reason, interrupt a conversation with a ridiculous non sequitur or unleash a fusillade of curses that impressed even a street-sharp Bronx girl like me.


Residents of Adult Group Home Sue Over Living Conditions
Filthy rodent-infested living quarters that are rife with fire and safety hazards: Oversight agencies in New York State have applied this description over the last 20 years to many adult homes, group residences for mentally ill outpatients and others unable to care for themselves.
A legal group is using a new tactic to try to remedy what it calls substandard conditions in one adult home in Queens, saying that previous inquiries by public and private agencies and legislators have had little effect in improving living conditions for thousands of adult home residents.


Soviet Republics Get New Gorbachev Pitch
With bolstered self-confidence, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev brusquely opened the formal selling campaign for the proposed new treaty of power-sharing worked out with most of the Soviet republics, the latest and perhaps last chance for a concerted new attempt at reconstructing his crisis-weary country.
If there is such a thing as post-summit sadness, Mr.
Gorbachev does not suffer from it, not now that he has converted President Bush into one of his most enthusiatic boosters on the Soviet hustings and thereby opened a new, far more subtle stage of Soviet- American relations.
Article, page 4.


Managing; Generosity Toes the (Bottom) Line
EXECUTIVES in charge of corporate contributions used to worry exclusively about society, while their counterparts on the business side tended to profits.
The philosophical paths never crossed.
Now, as both sides try to make do with slashed budgets, the separatism is ending.
"We won't make a grant that doesn't fit the business strategy," said Cornelia Higginson, the vice president in charge of overseas giving for the American Express Company.
Neither will Paul M. Ostergard, director of corporate contributions for Citibank.
"A professional contributions manager puts the company's interest first," he said.
"It's a classic case of doing well by doing good."
The timing is no coincidence.
As the 1960's hippies and the 1970's yuppies move into positions of power, social conscience and capitalistic pragmatism have replaced social climbing as a prime mover behind corporate giving.
"Old-line C.E.O.'s used donations to get on symphony boards; today's C.E.O.'s use the money as a strategic tool," said Craig Smith, publisher of Corporate Philanthropy Report, a Seattle newsletter.
The recession has caused most companies to cut their marketing and contributions budgets at a time when nonprofit groups are also strapped for cash.
While the trend may hurt small, esoteric nonprofit groups, the larger, savvier ones have used their new entree to marketing departments to get advertising and promotional advice.
And they pander to self-interest -- pointing out that sponsoring an avant-garde arts show will position a company as innovative or that supporting child care programs will help it attract women as customers.
The result: The Chinese wall between giving and selling has come down.
Mr.
Smith says 55 percent of contributions managers have regular contact with marketing directors.
Nissan Motor Corporation in U.S.A. asks line managers to review philanthropic projects.
Citibank, American Express and GTE Northwest offer discounts or free tickets to customers at the events to which they contribute.
When the American Telephone and Telegraph Company sponsors a play, its foundation often pays production costs, while marketing handles promotions.
The International Business Machines Corporation now authorizes local managers to make grants of up to $25,000 -- presumably to causes favored by local customers and employees.
"If a customer is on the board of a worthy museum, why shouldn't that be the one we support?" asked Juan Sabater, director of corporate social policy.
Corporations have grown adept at finding causes that tie in with their products.
Since its acquisitions of Kraft and General Foods, the Philip Morris Companies Inc. has sponsored hunger relief and nutritional education programs.
"Our giving reflects that we're now a food company," said Stephanie T. French, vice president of contributions.
U S West Inc., whose business strategy includes upgrading rural services and courting small businesses, announced a program this year to offer financial help and advice to small businesses in rural areas.
"We always try to marry corporate and community interests," said Jane J. Prancan, executive director of the U S West Foundation.
So does American Express, which is homing in on education projects that stress travel.
It sponsors geography competitions for high schoolers and high school programs to teach travel and tourism.
Local managers often invite airline and hotel executives to serve as program advisers.
Marketers are listening more closely to what their corporate givers have to say.
Stephen Spurgeon, who handles Nissan Motor's contributions, got marketing to join Tread Lightly!, which promotes the prudent use of off-road land.
"It fit with Pathfinder, our off-road vehicle," he said.
And Penny Hunt, who handles philanthropy for Dayton-Hudson department stores, says her marketing counterparts used similar reasoning when they agreed to donate backpacks for kindergarteners.
"The Minneapolis schools asked me to do it, but marketing seemed a better fit," she said.
HOW IT WORKS OVERSEAS
As American companies expand overseas, so do their giving programs.
Following is a sample of such programs.
*
American Express is helping Eastern European countries promote tourism.
It is preserving monuments in the Caribbean.
It runs day-care referral programs in England.
And in Mexico, it is coordinating an industrywide effort to start a high school travel academy.
"We want the Mexican government to see the travel industry as a powerful coalition," said Cornelia Higginson, who runs the company's international giving programs.
*
I.B.M. divides the overseas world into three regions -- Asia Pacific, Latin America and Europe -- and leaves project-picking, such as training in Brazil and environmental work in England, to local management.
*
Citibank has taken the New York Philharmonic to Latin America, Europe and Asia.
Its marketers hold opening night parties for customers in those areas.
*
The General Electric Foundation fundseducation projects in "communities where G.E. does business," said Clifford V. Smith Jr., its president.
It offers college scholarships in Mexico.
It is paying to train doctors in Romania.
And it is helping the Hungarian government teach people about capitalism.
*
A.T.&amp; T. funds dance projects in Brazil and in Egypt and has more overseas arts support on the agenda.
"One reason we bought NCR was to expand internationally, so it makes sense that we'll do more projects," said Timothy J. McClimon, who handles A.T.&amp; T.'s cultural donations.


Bias Rejected in Handling of Beating Case
The judge presiding in the case of four white Los Angeles police officers who are charged in the beating of a black motorist has not shown a bias in his handling of the case, another judge ruled on Friday.
The decision, issued by Judge James L. Smith of Orange County Superior Court, denied a motion by the officers' lawyers to disqualify Judge Bernard Kamins on the ground that he had given the appearance of bias.


Teapots to See, if Not Always to Hold Tea
WHEN is a teapot not really a teapot but still called a teapot?
Answer: when the pot becomes an abstract sculpture, an illustrated story, a page of calligraphic poetry or even a polemic against ecological disaster.
Two exhibitions at the Newark Museum explore the scope of teapot styles from an elegant and functional 17th-century vessel to contemporary exotica that have never been filled, and never will be, with hot water and tasty little tea leaves.


Beauty; The Hair Gurus
Women are peculiar about their hair and, by extension, peculiar about the relationship they have with the folks who play with their hair.
This relationship has its roots, perhaps, in a sort of pan-gender version of the Samson myth.
And the stylist or treatment specialist who's able to negotiate this thicket of sexuality and power stands to make a lot of money.


Paul Monaghan to Marry Ann Schnorr in October
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald P. Schnorr of Wyndmoor, Pa., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Ann D. Schnorr and Paul A. Monaghan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Monaghan Jr. of Bryn Mawr, Pa.
Miss Schnorr, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Virginia and is a broker at Philadelphia Investors.
Mr.
Monaghan, who is 34 and is known as Alec, is a director in Philadelphia for the Cushman &amp; Wakefield real-estate brokerage.
He graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received an M.B.A. degree from Temple University.


Down From The Summit; On the World Stage, Moscow Now Plays Second Banana
SITTING side by side last week to announce that they would jointly try to convene a Middle East peace conference in October, Presidents Bush and Mikhail S. Gorbachev made for a heartening sight.
To all appearances, the great superpowers were laying aside their swords and propaganda mills to join hands and try to bring peace to one of the most stubbornly volatile parts of the world.
"Partnership" was the new buzz word of great-power relations.
Yet when Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d took his new mandate back to the Israelis and Arabs, only one superpower was really in play.
The other -- for all the MIG's, Scuds and Kalashnikovs still littering the region -- was nowhere to be seen.


Luisa M. Kaye, Law Clerk, Weds
Luisa Marian Kaye, the daughter of Judge Judith S. Kaye and Stephen R. Kaye of New York, was married yesterday to Jan Patric Hagemeier, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Heinrich G. Hagemeier of Tequesta, Fla., and Frankfurt, Germany.
Acting Justice Phylis Skloot Bamberger of State Supreme Court in the Bronx performed the ceremony at Le Chateau in Salem, N.Y.
The bride, 26 years old, received a law degree from New York University in May and is to start work this month as a clerk to Judge Robert W. Sweet of Federal District Court in Manhattan.
She graduated from the Dalton School and Amherst College.
Her father is a senior partner in the New York law firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn.
Her mother is an associate judge of the Court of Appeals in Albany.
The bridegroom, 27, is a vice president of international equity sales at the C. J. Lawrence investment bank in New York.
He graduated from the Hill School and Brown University.
His father is an owner of Mitteldeutsche Hartstein Industrie, a manufacturer of building materials in Frankfurt.


The Perils of CAFE
A good way to clean the air is to burn less gasoline.
And the best way to do that is to raise gasoline prices.
But Congress doesn't have the stomach to levy substantially higher gas taxes so it has imposed regulations -- known as CAFE standards -- that have forced automobile manufacturers to raise fuel efficiency on new cars to 27.5 miles per gallon.
CAFE standards are better than nothing.
But they have achieved only modest savings in fuel use and have created a slew of knotty problems.
Yet bills before Congress propose sharply raising the required fuel efficiency, and in a way that threatens to make this second-best policy even worse.


STRIKEOUTS AND PSYCH-OUTS
Like many people, baseball players seem skeptical about seeking psychiatric help.
Assuming, though, that there is an edge to be gained from the counsel of a team psychiatrist, you'd think a good number of these highly competitive individuals would seize the opportunity.
Managers, however, might have the most to gain.
If all goes well and the "analyzed" player performs up to or above expectation, the team benefits.
If the player fails to perform and the team suffers, managers can place the responsibility squarely where it belongs and fire the shrink.
STEVEN GRUNTFEST
Teaneck, N.J.


Access to the Jersey Shore for the Wheelchair-Bound
EARLY last summer beachgoers at Harvey Cedars on Long Beach Island, N.J., discovered that something new had been added over the winter at the 80th Street beach.
A sturdy wooden structure stood at the entrance between the dunes at the head of the street, with a wide ramp leading from designated disabled parking spaces to a center deck with built-in benches, and another walkway going from there down to the beach sand.
An open-air shower and drinking fountain were off to the right.
It was Harvey Cedars' answer to providing beach access to wheelchair users.
Word of the initiative spread quickly; the first week the ramp was opened to the public, residents of a home for the disabled in North Jersey used it for daily excursions during their vacation on Long Beach Island.
Harvey Cedars is not alone in providing beach access for the disabled.
A number of towns up and down the coast have found money for such facilities.
A major financial source for these projects has been the Federal Community Block Grant Program, which funnels Federal funds via the states to counties and ultimately to municipalities for projects of their choosing.


Zeile's Homer in 10th Sends Pirates to 8th Straight Loss
Todd Zeile led off the 10th inning with a home run and the St.
Louis Cardinals sent the Pittsburgh Pirates to their eighth straight loss, 6-5, today.
The Pirates' losing streak is their worst since a nine-game skid in August 1985.
Pittsburgh's lead in the National League East was cut to four and one-half games over both St.
Louis and New York.


'Silent Coup'
To the Editor:
My guess is that the strident harshness and wrongheaded pickiness of Stephen E. Ambrose's review of "Silent Coup: The Removal of a President" by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin (June 23) were prompted by his rivalry with Roger Morris as a Nixon biographer and particularly by remarks Mr.
Morris makes in his foreword to "Silent Coup."


Absolutely Real? Absolutely Fake?
Even after the latest round of tests, the sculpture remains an enigma.
The larger-than-life-size marble version of a naked youth, or kouros, stands in a laboratory behind the J. Paul Getty Museum.
Since its arrival here in late 1983, the Getty kouros has caused scholars, dealers and scientists to choose sides in a heated public debate about whether the work was carved by a late sixth century B.C.
Greek sculptor or by a modern forger.
If authentic, the kouros is one of the most important works of ancient art to enter the United States since World War II.
But it has no documented history, or provenance, and its stylistic links are to a curiously divergent spectrum of genuine kouroi.
Its pasty surface is an anomaly, and it is the only kouros of this period known to be carved from marble from the Greek island of Thasos.
Batteries of scientific tests were conducted and experts from around the world invited to the Getty before the museum, relying heavily on scientific evidence, decided in favor of the work's authenticity and bought it for around $9 million.
It went on view in October 1986.


Rubbing Shoulders With the Celebrities in Amagansett
WELCOME to Amagansett, the out place that's in.
Where Kathleen Turner, the actress, lives down the street from Herb Mulford, the handyman.
"She waves as she walks by in the morning," Mr.
Mulford said.
"She seems very nice."
Ms.
Turner may not be aware that the two-story rambling house she owns sits on former Mulford land.
The Mulfords once owned much of Amagansett, a strip of sand and soil between the manicured lawns of East Hampton and the scrub pines of Montauk.


'Where's Charley?' Revived At Westport Playhouse
FOR sheer outlandishness, George Abbott's book for "Where's Charley?" outmaneuvers the musical's perennially popular source, "Charley's Aunt," by getting Charley Wykeham, the Oxford student, into drag.
In the 19th-century farce by Brandon Thomas, it was Lord Fancourt Babbersly, omitted in the musical, who impersonated the missing rich aunt as chaperone.
But what ultimately makes "Where's Charley?" the version of choice is, of course, the ineffable Frank Loesser score.
Count among the all-time losses for collectors of original cast albums that this one was never recorded, save for a single disk consisting of two songs: "Once in Love with Amy" and "Make a Miracle."


Trickery


Republics Get Kremlin Pitch On New Ties
If there is such a thing as post-summit sadness, Mikhail S. Gorbachev does not suffer from it, not now that he has successfully converted President Bush into one of his most enthusiatic boosters on the explosive Soviet hustings and thereby opened a new, far more subtle stage of Soviet-American relations.
With bolstered self-confidence, the Soviet leader brusquely opened the formal selling campaign this weekend for the proposed new treaty of power-sharing worked out with most of the nation's republics, the latest and perhaps last chance for a concerted new attempt at reconstructing this crisis-weary country.


Tarpley in the Clear
Assault charges against Dallas Mavericks center ROY TARPLEY, have been dropped because the woman he was accused of beating refused to cooperate with prosecutors.
County Court-at-Law Judge MIKE PETERS agreed with prosecutor's recommendations and dropped the charges last month.


EMIRATE HAD DATA ON FRAUD AT BANK
The Government of Abu Dhabi had been "fully briefed" on the huge fraud being conducted within the Bank of Credit and Commerce International long before it was reported to banking regulators earlier this year, a London newspaper reported yesterday.
The Financial Times report, based on a confidential auditor's report in late June to the Bank of England, also provides new details on how the shadowy private bank hid losses and illicit payments, fabricated records and shuffled money around the world to mask its own financial problems and those of its favored customers.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
'HORSE NAMED JACK'
Pamela Palmer has been writing plays at the rate of almost one a year since 1985.
"A Horse Named Jack," which was produced at Marisa's Dinner Theater in Port Chester in 1989, has been revised and will be presented by the Port Chester Council for the Arts at 8:30 P.M. on Thursday and Saturday and at 7:30 next Sunday at the council's headquarters in the Castle on King Street.
"It's a fragmented memory play about an Italian family much like my own, here in Port Chester," Ms.
Palmer said.
Punctuated with serio-comic flashbacks to the 1960's, it deals with a loss of family unity through death, divorce and illness.
The seriousness of the situations is relieved by the comic personalities of the characters, Ms.
Palmer said.
The protagonist is Joanne, a young writer facing the death of her grandmother.
The title refers to a horse about whom the grandmother dreams as a symbol of her hopes for Joanne's future.
"When we did the play two years ago people laughed and cried in all the right places," said Ms.
Palmer.
"And I had Jewish and black members of the audience tell me how alike the characters were to people in their families. Apparently the themes are more universal than Italian."
Tickets are $12 and can be reserved by calling 937-4673 or 937- 0917.
VIVALDI AT BOSCOBEL
The music of Vivaldi will be featured Saturday at Boscobel when the Philharmonia Virtuosi performs at the seventh annual Gala Sunset Concert and Lawn Picnic.
Under the direction of Richard Kapp, the ensemble will perform "The Four Seasons," "Concerto in A minor" for recorder and strings, "Concerto Grosso in B minor" and "Concerto in C minor" for piccolo recorder with Ariel Kemp, recorder soloist.
Picnicking will begin at 6 P.M. (no barbecue grills allowed), and the concert will start at 6:30.
A tent will be provided in case of rain.
Admission will be $9; children under 12 free.
Boscobel, a restored Federal mansion overlooking the Hudson River and highlands in Garrison, can be reached by Route 9D, eight miles north of the Bear Mountain Bridge.
For more information, call 265-3638.
FOLK SINGING
Sandy and Caroline Paton, founders of Folk Legacy Records in 1961, creators of 75 folk music albums and among the best-known American folk musicians, seldom appear in performance free of charge.
But they will do so Friday at 9 P.M. for the last of the County Parks Department's free square dance and folk music jamborees at Kensico Dam Plaza in Valhalla.
Slim Sterling, a square dance caller, will be the host for the program and will call the tunes for dancing.
The plaza, at the north end of the Bronx River Parkway, is three miles north of White Plains.
Call 285-7275 for more information. 'FROG PRINCE' PUPPETS
Puppetworks, a popular puppet-theater company based in Brooklyn, will manipulate life-sized marionettes in a three-part production composed of "The Frog Prince," "Peter and the Wolf" and "Nutcracker Sweets," accompanied by the music of Tchaikovsky.
The company will be in residence at the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck Tuesday through Thursday, giving six performances aimed at 3- through 9-year-olds.
Daily curtain times are 10:30 A.M. and 1 P.M.
All three segments will be included in each performance.
The theater is on Library Lane and tickets are $3.
Call 698-0098 for reservations or more information.
JEWISH STORYTELLING
An evening of Jewish tales will be presented at the New Rochelle Public Library at 7:30 P.M.
Tuesday by Peninnah Schram.
The noted storyteller, author and associate professor of speech and drama at Yeshiva University in Manhattan, is the founding director of the Jewish Storytelling Center at the 92d Street Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. in Manattan.
Ms.
Schram's stories are drawn from written and oral legends and folk tales from Biblical, Talmudic, Midrashic, Yiddish, Sephardic and Israeli sources, as well as from countries around the world where Jews have settled.
She incorporates songs and audience participation in her performances.
The library is in downtown New Rochelle at Library Plaza off North Avenue.
Admission is free.
Call 632-7878 for more information.
PERSONAL FINANCES
Anything you would like to know about your personal finances but were afraid to ask because of the high cost of such advice, you may ask free of charge at the New Rochelle Public Library on Friday from 9:30 A.M. to 12:30 P.M.
Paul McEvoy, a certified financial planner and chartered life underwriter will field questions on a first come first served basis concerning investments, insurance, pensions, real estate, and other elements of individual or family finances.
He is a founding member of the New York City chapter of the Institute of Certified Financial Planners and the Westchester-Rockland chapter of the International Association for Financial Planning.
PERSEID SHOWER
The yearly Perseid meteor shower will occur next weekend and will be the subject of three programs at various Westchester Parks Department sites.
Craig Stevens, an amateur astronomer, will lead a tour of the night sky Friday at 8:30 P.M. at the Trailside Nature Museum of the Ward Pound Ridge Reservation in Cross River.
If the weather cooperates, as many as 60 meteors an hour can be seen during the peak period over the weekend.
Mr.
Stevens will repeat his stargazing program Saturday at 8:30 P.M. at the Lenoir Preserve in Yonkers with a rain date of next Sunday at the same time.
A program at the Marshlands Conservancy in Rye will be conducted by Alison Beall, the curator, beginning at 9 P.M.
Saturday.
The shooting stars are particles of matter radiating from a point in the constellation Perseus.
Pulled by the earth's gravity each year around Aug. 12 they appear to be a shower of stars as they burn up from friction with the earth's atmosphere.
Admission is free except for a parking fee of $5.50 at the Trailside Museum.
For more information about Trailside, call 763-3993; the Lenoir Preserve phone number is 968-5851 and the Marshlands Conservancy number is 835-4466.


Quotation of the Day
"It's very good. Finally, we are going to have peace. It's near. We can see it now much more than months ago." -- Smadar Sananes, an Israeli citizen.  [ 1:3. ]


Indebted Students Gain in Battle on Fraudulent Trade Schools
Students who have been victimized by unscrupulous trade schools may have won a new legal weapon in their attempt to avoid repaying their student loans.
The possible weapon is a letter of opinion, issued a week ago by the staff of the Federal Trade Commission, that says any bank working closely with a trade school that is found to be fraudulent could be required to absorb the loss of loans that the bank issued to that school's students.


Coins
Dollar bills come and go so quickly that hardly anyone ever thinks of the strange design on the back: the great seal of the United States, with its bristling eagle, strange pyramid and hovering eye.
Who would take the time, buying a cup of coffee or an ice-cream cone, to consider the mystery of these symbols, which change hands countless times every day?


Chess
Some of the most prominent players in the world continue to trickle into Germany to take advantage of the high playing fees and lavish perquisites offered by the sponsors of the Bundesliga club teams competition.
The most recent arrival is Artur Yusupov, a 31-year-old world championship candidate in the current cycle, who hails from Moscow.
Yusupov, like the American grandmaster Larry Christiansen, retains his native citizenship, although he will live in Germany.
He is under contract to the Bayern Munchen team.
Bundesliga teams are permitted to recruit foreigners to complement local members.


Victoria Graham, Art Student, Wed
Victoria deRaismes Graham, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome J. Graham Jr. of New Vernon, N.J., was married yesterday to Steven Rigsby Chadick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Chadick of Dallas.
Msgr.
John F. Corr performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of Christ the King in New Vernon.
The bride graduated from Hollins College and expects to receive a master's degree in fine arts in June 1992 from the University of Texas at Dallas.
Her father is a senior partner in the Morristown, N.J. law firm of Ribis, Graham &amp; Curtin.


3-D Survives the Fourth Dimension
In the early 1950's, threedimensional films were Hollywood's big gimmick, its last hope for an antidote to the new-fashioned, theater-emptying medium of television.
The idea was to make movies more lifelike than, well, life.
Big-caliber bullets, flaming arrows, flesh-starved pterodactyl teeth, furry paws more powerful than the one that swept away Fay Wray -- in 3-D films, everything seemed to be jumping off the screen and coming right at you, right there in the 3d or 13th or 30th row.
And then 3-D films disappeared.
So did the cumbersome glasses that moviegoers had to wear to keep the screen from looking like a giant blur.


Victims of Hungary's Past Press for an Accounting, but With Little Success
Ivan Somers's mother was giving him a bath one March evening in 1951 when the Communist secret police came to his house in the provincial city of Szekesfehervar and asked his parents to step outside for questioning.
Two years later, his mother was released from one of Hungary's most notorious political prisons, but Ivan, then 3 years old, never saw his father again.
Almost 40 years later, Mr.
Somers, now a lawyer in Sydney, Australia, began to press Hungary's new democratically elected Government for information about his father's fate.
With some difficulty, he was able to fix the date of his father's death -- Aug. 24, 1951 -- but as he tried to dig deeper, to find out how his father died or where he is buried, Mr.
Somers said he ran into a stone wall.
"They don't want to go into it," he said in a telephone interview from Austrialia.
"It is all handled on the surface. The old bureaucracy is still there, and for them to launch an inquiry into these questions is anathema, taboo."
Tibor Zimanyi, a member of Parliament who heads a group of former prisoners from the infamous labor camp at Recsk, has repeatedly intervened on behalf of people seeking information about relatives who died in Hungarian camps and prisons.
"Unfortunately, there are many such cases," he said, "and none have gotten a proper answer. Relatives would like to know where these prisoners were buried, but we cannot tell them."  Fears of a 'Witch Hunt'
Together with his mother, who emigrated to Australia in 1958, Mr.
Somers came back to Hungary this year to pursue the family's quest up and down the Government bureaucracy.
As they pressed for a full-scale inquiry, they were told several times that Hungary, a small country with a bitter past, can ill afford a "witch hunt."
This answer outraged Mr.
Somers, who now believes a cover-up of past crimes is continuing into the new era.
"There is no recourse against the people who did these things," he said.
"They are being shielded by the present establishment."
The story of the Somogyi family -- Ivan changed his name in Australia -- mirrors Hungary's twisted history.
His father's first family, including a son also named Ivan, died at Auschwitz in 1944.
His father survived and returned to Szekesfehervar, where he married again and picked up his old life as a commodity wholesaler.
But again, he became a target for persecution, this time not because he was Jewish, but because he was successful.
After his arrest in 1951, the family house was taken over by the state, and the largest apartment, with the family furniture still in it, was given to the local Communist Party first secretary.
As it sorts through stories like these, Hungary is having trouble deciding how to compensate the victims and judge the guilty.
The issue of compensation for those who lost land and property during the Communist era has virtually paralyzed Parliament for the last few months, as various proposals get bounced to the Constitutional Court and back.
Mr.
Somers is bitter that under the current draft, he would never be allowed to be more than a guest in his father's old house while, he says, the son of the former Communist boss still has possession of the family furniture.
Some Want Accounting
There are some Hungarians who want to hold someone accountable for past crimes -- starting with the cases of those tried, sentenced and in some cases killed for real or supposed opposition to the Communist Government -- first during the postwar Stalinist period, and later in the aftermath of the 1956 uprising.
Legally, the statute of limitations has run out on the Communist takeover and the uprising, and few here want to suspend the law to try a few dozen surviving pensioners for what they did in the 1940's and 1950's.
But Mr.
Zimanyi, for one, would like at least to expose the guilty, if not to punish them.
"I have proposed that these crimes be brought to light," said Mr.
Zimanyi, who spent seven years as a political prisoner, first under the Nazis, then twice under the Communists.
"The people who created the Recsk camp -- it would not be too difficult to figure out who they were."
Like other countries in the region, Hungary has offered its former political prisoners compensation for the injustices they suffered.
But the sum is meager, pegged to the amount of time served, and averages $15 a month.
So far, 190,000 people have applied for these funds, but many more are eligible, Mr.
Zimanyi said.
Truth Hard to Uncover
But for many victims and their families, the truth is more important than money, and this, even Government officials acknowledge, is proving hard to uncover.
"The files are in so many different places and then many of them are not complete," said Lajos Bosanszky, cabinet chief at the Interior Ministry, where requests for information about victims of the Communist era come in almost daily.
Just recently, Mr.
Bosanszky learned that seven tons of files, covering the crucial years 1956 to 1958, just after the uprising, were destroyed in 1961.
It is a common assumption here that in the months before the Communists lost power in Hungary in 1989, agents of the secret police destroyed other incriminating evidence.
Information derived from the secret police files did surface here once when, in a strange episode, Prime Minister Jozsef Antall all but identified a troublesome leader of a minority party as having been an agent of the secret police.
This incident, prompted by a request from the Smallholders Party itself for a clean bill of health for its top leaders, raised a storm of protest, and underscored the danger that such information could be used for political purposes.
Miklos Vasarhelyi, a member of Parliament who was imprisoned for several years after the 1956 uprising, is one who argues for getting rid of all the old files, as the Spanish did after the death of Franco.
"In my opinion, we should take all the files and burn them," Mr.
Vasarhelyi said.
"Of course, that is not realistic, but any other way is bound to be political."  No Trials So Far
Hungary has been less eager than most of its neighbors in prosecuting those guilty of Communism's worst abuses.
In other countries, former officials of the old governments -- including the former Bulgarian leader, Todor Zhivkov, and East Germany's longtime boss, Erich Honecker -- have been investigated, indicted and judged on a wide range of crimes.
Even in Czechoslovakia, where President Vaclav Havel has repeatedly urged conciliation rather than retribution, a former police chief has been tried for his part in repressing demonstrations in November 1989.
In Hungary so far, no one has been put on trial for crimes committed in the Communist era.
Two former top-ranking Interior Ministry officials were tried for illegally wiretapping opposition politicians, but only after the demise of the single-party state in 1989.
Most people trace Hungary's more forgiving attitude to the mildness of the Government in the last 20 years, when political dissidents here were given wider scope, ordinary citizens had greater freedom to travel and even personal profit was allowed, on a small scale.
"After 1963, there arose a more liberal kind of dictatorship here than in the other countries," Prime Minister Antall said in an interview last spring.
"Therefore the transition here was not so much of an explosion as in other countries, where the dictatorship remained in force until the last minute. Since it was more of an evolutionary process, there was not the same kind of anger released here as elsewhere, and the steam did not have to be let out in the same way."


P. D. Vehslage to Wed Carolyn Thrasher
September wedding plans for Carolyn Lee Thrasher and Peter Drake Vehslage have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Milton F. Thrasher 2d of Rye, N.Y.
Mr.
Vehslage is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley D. Vehslage of Cedar Grove, N.J.
Miss Thrasher, 30 years old, graduated from Lafayette College.
She is the sales manager of Computerland of Scarsdale, N.Y., an International Business Machines dealership.
Her father, who recently retired as a marketing manager for I.B.M. in White Plains, is the eastern regional manager in New York for Computer Design Inc., a software manufacturer in Grand Rapids, Mich.


The Nation; It Isn't Graceful, but the Laws Get on the Books
THE 102d Congress, like its predecessors, is hardly ever elegant in doing its business.
It oversimplifies issues, works irregular hours, plays cheap politics and worships archaic rules that multiply its inefficiency.
And yet it legislates.
Incompletely, so far, with action completed into law in only a handful of important instances, but far more seriously on subjects from abortion to energy to health care costs to the future of the military than its ways of doing business suggest.


Have Play, Will Grovel
THE BEST REVENGE
A Novel of Broadway. By Sol Stein. 225 pp. New York: Random House. $20.


Sport Briefings; World Cup Soccer Could Hurt Phils
The National League will permit the Philadelphia Phillies to stay on the road for up to 18 days if the city becomes one of the host sites for soccer's World Cup in the summer of 1994.
The Phillies' president, Bill Giles, who is a member of the Philadelphia World Cup committee, said Friday that the team was the first given the league's assurances.
He told The Philadelphia Inquirer this could give the city an edge over other cities bidding for World Cup games.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Monday
July auto sales, annualized in millions
6.6
7.0
Wednesday
June consumer credit, in billions
-$0.6
$0.5
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, in thousands
404
400
Friday
Producer prices, percentage change
-0.3
0.0
Tuesday: Productivity and production costs *
Three-year Treasury auction *
Exisiting home sales  Wednesday: Wholesale trade *
Ten-year Treasury auction  Thursday: Thirty-year Treasury auction *
Major retailers announce quarterly results Friday: Hearing on Drexel Burnham Lambert bankruptcy settlement  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


A Chance to See 'Where's Charley?"
FOR sheer outlandishness, George Abbott's book for "Where's Charley?" outmaneuvers the musical's perennially popular source, "Charley's Aunt," by getting Charley Wykeham, the Oxford student, into drag.
In the 19th-century farce by Brandon Thomas, it was Lord Fancourt Babbersly, omitted in the musical, who impersonated the missing rich aunt as chaperone.
But what ultimately makes "Where's Charley?" the version of choice is, of course, the ineffable Frank Loesser score.
Count among the all-time losses for collectors of original cast albums that this one was never recorded, save for a single disk consisting of two songs: "Once in Love with Amy" and "Make a Miracle."


Farr Enjoys the Ride But Keeps It Simple
Steve Farr likes to keep things simple.
If you like the feeling of hopping on a Harley and zooming off, why bother with the helmet?
If strutting in from the bullpen in the ninth inning with a game hanging in doubt is your elixir, why clutter the situation by allowing a run?
No helmet and no runs.
Keep it simple, stupid.
Those words to live by are sponsored by Farr, the quiet relief pitcher who may be the Yankees' most valuable player.


Rooms With a View . . . of the Audience
I have this theory why audiences applaud the sets in the theater.
You've encountered the phenomenon dozens of times.
Up goes the curtain or up come the lights, and there's a loft in SoHo or Lady Bridgewell's summer house on the Riviera.
And suddenly, people who've given no prior sign that they intend to stop talking and let the actors take over are clapping appreciatively for a chintz sofa and floral wallpaper.
It's far too early to know what the playwright is up to, so they can't be applauding the appropriateness of the designer's vision.
They're certainly not happy to see the set the way they were always happy to see Mary Martin, say, and therefore eager to extend her a warm welcome.
And while a big hand can sometimes coax a performer to greater heights, the set isn't going to do much of anything, however strong the encouragement. (I did see one fall over once, but nobody in the theater had clapped for nearly an hour.)


Foes Say Inquiry Hurt D'Amato Re-election Drive
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato's political foes said yesterday that his chances for re-election next year had been set back by a Senate ethics inquiry into his conduct, despite a finding of "no credible evidence" to support allegations of influence-peddling and other wrongdoing.
Some of his opponents also criticized the Senate Ethics Committee's 18-month investigation as inadequate, noted that the Senator still faced other inquiries into his decade in office and said that the voters would ultimately judge his standards of integrity.


Political Talk
Curious Bedfellows
Politics in Buffalo can get so hostile that every once in a while it becomes downright friendly.
That at least seems to be the only way to explain the news last week that left a lot of Buffalonians rubbing their eyes: the pastor of the city's largest black church announced that he was endorsing Mayor James D. Griffin in this fall's race for Erie County Executive.


OTB the Villain In Tracks' Woes
To the Sports Editor:
The New York Racing Association is crying the blues about a drop in attendance and wagering ("Industry's Earnings Running in Circles," The Times, July 23).


A Fall Wedding For Carol Perline
Mr. and Mrs.
Irving W. Perline of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Carol Eve Perline to Jesse Michael Feder, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie Feder of Ossining, N.Y.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Perline, 30 years old, is the director of special events for the Greater New York March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation.
She graduated from Clark University.
Her father owns Orion Fashions Jewelry in New York.
Her mother, Brigitte Perline, is a nursery-school teacher at the Ramaz School in Manhattan.


Wedding Planned For Meg Johnson
Margaret Stuart Johnson, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert E. Gee of Atherton, Calif., and Bruce W. Johnson of New York, is to be married this month to Thomas Buckley Maloney, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James V. Maloney of Los Angeles.
The bride, 27 years old, is known as Meg.
She is an account executive at MCI Telecommunications in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father is the president of Source International, an importing company in New York.


Pizza Taking On an International Flair
PIZZA has not been the same since California discovered goat cheese.
Not content to leave well enough alone, intrepid chefs are going ever further afield in the quest for novelty.
The latest wrinkle is pizza with international toppings.
Among the more bizarre selections are bratwurst and sauerkraut for German pizza and tuna melt for an American version.
Freed from the yoke of mozzarella and tomato, pizza has become a dumping ground for anything from sushi to kippered herring.
Pizza does lend itself to a wide variety of ingredients, but they should be chosen carefully.
Pesto, tapenade (a Provencal mixture of anchovies, garlic puree, capers and olives), grilled vegetables, sun-dried tomatoes, olive paste, prosciutto and cheeses like ricotta, fontina and Gorgonzola (in addition to the obvious mozzarella and goat cheese) are all good.
The rule is never to put anything on a pizza that takes longer than 15 minutes to cook.


Carrie A. Kolinsky Is Wed To Harold Gordon on L.I.
Carrie Alyssa Kolinsky and Harold Keith Gordon were married last evening at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I., by Rabbis Harvey Goldscheider and Daniel Isaak and Cantor David Hiesiger.
The couple are cum laude law graduates of Yeshiva University.
Mrs.
Gordon, 27 years old, graduated from Brandeis University and is an associate in the New York law firm of Marilyn Simon.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Kolinsky of Bellmore, L.I.


October Wedding For Ellen O'Toole
Vitaline O'Connell O'Toole of New York and Thomas P. O'Toole of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ellen Julia O'Toole, to Daniel Deschamps Hubbard, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas J. Hubbard of Bronxville, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss O'Toole, 29 years old, graduated from the National Cathedral School and Duke University.
She is the art curator and publications manager at the Oliver Carr Company, a real-estate development concern in Washington.
Her father, a former science editor of The Washington Post, is a freelance science writer.
Her mother is a former member of the corporate board of Children's Hospital in Washington.


Miss Hasbrouck To Marry in Fall
The engagement of Karin Nightingale Hasbrouck to Bruce Wiley Watkins, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Franklin W. Watkins of Walton Beach, Fla., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Hasbrouck Jr. of New Providence, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Hasbrouck, 28 years old, graduated from Boston College.
She is the advertising director at Cruise Industry News in New York.
Her father, who recently retired as a vice president of Chase Investors Management, is a financial consultant to UBS Asset Management in New York.


RECORD BRIEFS
Mascagni: 'Lodoletta'
Maria Spacagna, soprano; Peter Kelen, tenor; Laszlo Polgar, bass; Hungarian Radio and Television Chorus; Hungarian State Orchestra conducted by Charles Rosekrans.
Hungaroton HCD 31307/8; two CD's.


Black Church Charges Co-op City With Racial Bias Against It
A decision to rent a vacant movie theater in Co-op City to a white bingo operator instead of to an all-black church has unleashed charges of racial discrimination in the huge apartment complex in the Bronx.
The dispute has sent a tremor through Co-op City, the nation's largest apartment complex, with 50,000 tenants in 15,500 apartments and town houses.
The complex is a notable example of gradual and largely smooth integration.
Once overwhelmingly white, the population has become about half black and Hispanic.


Sport Briefings; Cadillac Enters Indianapolis 500
For the first time in 19 years, a Cadillac will pace the field in the Indianapolis 500.
Officials of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway and the Cadillac division of General Motors announced last week that a 1993 Allante convertible would be the pace car for the race on May 24, 1992.


Spending Your Dollars in Europe: Germany; East and West Are Often Equal in Prices, but Not in Amenities
For travelers, Germany has been expensive for decades, but since unification it has become even more so.
Still, cities like Berlin remain less costly than London or Paris.
To be sure, inflation in June, while still a respectable 4 percent, was running higher than in France for the first time since 1973, largely because of recently raised taxes on everything from clothes to gasoline to pay for the rebuilding of eastern Germany.
Nevertheless, the strength of the American dollar actually makes things a bit cheaper, in dollar terms, than last year.
Take hotels.
A comfortable double room at the Savoy, one of the better hotels in Berlin, costs 410 marks this season, compared with 360 last year and only 260 five years ago.
But with the dollar worth 1.8 marks, compared with 1.5 last summer, the price for Americans has actually dropped, to $228 from $240.
The increase in the price in marks, hoteliers say, is purely a result of demand.
Moreover, the summer discounts offered this year are less of a bargain.
Last year a double room that normally costs $250 was discounted to about $130, but this year the $250 room drops only to about $210.
Even so, it's worth asking if summer discounts are available.


Carolyn Cole Weds Robert Paddock 2d
Carolyn Hasbrouck Cole, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert R. Cole of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert Rowe Paddock 2d, the son of Robert R. Paddock of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Virginia Paddock.
The Rev.
Jeffrey P. Rider officiated at the Congregational Church in New Canaan, Conn.
Mrs.
Paddock, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Denver and is attending the Columbia University School of Social Work.
Her father is president of White Oak Capital Management Inc., an investment management concern in New York.


Miss Cathcart Is to Marry R. C. Collins
Mr. and Mrs.
James A. Cathcart 3d of Tuxedo Park, N.Y., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Jamison Ann Cathcart and Robert Clay Collins, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clayton H. Collins of Columbia, S.C.
Miss Cathcart, who is 25 years old and is known as Jamie, graduated from the University of South Carolina.
She is an interior designer for the Carpet One Design Center in Columbia.
Her father is the executive vice president of the Holborn Agency, a reinsurance brokerage in New York.


A Collector and the Wheels of Dreams
JOE BORTZ remembers when he was 9 years old.
It was fall, new car time, and he took his bike and pedaled to all the dealerships in town.
He had just installed a big newspaper basket on the bike, and he filled it with brochures.
Then he went home to salivate.
"I sat there and read the stuff and I was astounded by the beauty of the cars," he said.
"And then, later, from age 12 to maybe 20, my ultimate treat was to go to the Chicago auto show. This was the early 50's, when they were doing all the dream cars, and it never occurred to me that I could actually touch one or sit in one."


The Talk of Fire Island; Problems Have Four Legs In a Tranquil Resort Area
On Fire Island the issues of the day evolve like the geology of the isolated 32-mile-long strip of wave-whipped sand, not much change from year to year, but enough to keep one guessing about what will happen next.
But there is more to disagree about on this automobile-free playground than when to go to the beach and what to make for dinner.
And, if history is a guide, the fights this summer may not be resolved before the island is returned to the sea.
What to Do About Deer
Fire Island has summer and year-round residents, and a herd of deer whose fate has set neighbor against neighbor.
To Jura Vizbaras, the deer are the enemy.
She is convinced that they carried the ticks that carried the Lyme disease that made her son sick in 1987.
She said that was reason enough to reduce the deer population, and she has plenty of company.


Retarded Man Sexually Assaulted And Badly Beaten in Coney Island
A moderately retarded 19-year-old man was severely beaten, sexually assaulted and robbed early yesterday by a group of youths at a Coney Island playground in an attack that the police called unusually cruel.
Six youths, including an 11-year-old boy, a 12-year-old boy and a 15-year-old girl, were arrested.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on July 21 about bed and breakfast guidebooks gave an incomplete address for the American Bed and Breakfast Association.
It is at 1407 Huguenot Road, Midlothian, Va. 23113.


Serena Manfredi Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Manfredi of Valley Stream, L.I., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Serena Marie Manfredi and Robert Benjamin Perlman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Israel Perlman of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Ms.
Manfredi, 23 years old, is an assistant buyer for Ann Taylor Inc. in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father, who is retired, taught art and mathematics in public schools in Queens.
Her mother, Elba Manfredi, owns a clothing design business.


Spending Your Dollars in Europe: Italy; Make a Wish, and Try 5 or 10 Coins in the Fountain
With the unveiling of the restored Trevi fountain, Rome this month is recalling la dolce vita, the postwar era of pleasure and prosperity and, for Americans, a muscular dollar.
The not-so-sweet reality today is that Americans and Italians alike consider Italy one of the most expensive countries in Europe.
But with an exchange rate of about 1,350 lire to the dollar, against 1,200 in 1990, the dollar has risen faster than inflation (6.5 percent in June 1991).
Prices in dollars are more than double 1985 levels, when the dollar broke 2,000, but are slightly better than last year.
In 1985 a double room at a top hotel in Rome cost less than $200.
In 1990 that room cost $466, today $414.
A typical double in a small hotel in Rome cost $39 in 1985, $90 last year and $85 today.


The Answers
1.
The Milky Way is the galaxy in which Earth resides.
Galaxies are the cosmos's largest individual conglomerations of matter comprising stars, gas, dust and planets.
The Milky Way is a spiral galaxy, with a bulge of older, cooler stars at its center surrounded by a spiral-arm pattern of younger, hotter stars in a flattened disk.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-18
Steps to reduce Cuban immigration to the United States have been taken by the Bush Administration.
A surge in Cuban migration this year led officials to temporarily freeze six-month tourist visas.
Page 1
Haiti's new leader appears moderate despite fears that he would bring jarring change and a crackdown on supporters of past dictators.
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide has surprised both skeptics and supporters. 16
Brazil's President sides with military against Congress 17
Israelis welcome the peace meeting, but are divided sharply on whether the talks will actually produce peace.
Some see peace around the corner, while others believe it is as likely as a blizzard on the Mediterranean. 1
Talks between the Kurds and Iraq stand at an impasse as Kurdish leaders decide whether to fight with Saddam Hussein or talk some more.
A total collapse in the talks could lead to renewed violence. 14
Iranians steal in by sea to find work in Kuwait 14
Emirate had data on fraud at bank 15
President Gorbachev' success at the summit meeting was to turn President Bush into a major supporter on the explosive Soviet hustings, thereby opening a new far more subtle state of Soviet-American relations. 4
The families of Hungarians who died in camps and prisons during the Communist regime are finding few answers from the new Government.
So many died that the Government is worried about a "witch hunt." 3
Yugoslav fighting flares as truce plan is approved 6
Japan's finance chief tainted again by scandal 12
Deaths at school in Japan put focus on rules 13
Market revives feudal evil: The sale of wives 11
Mandela's group names moderates to new posts 10
National 20-36
Weapons makers and the military face smaller budgets, but the change may not be as severe for the economy as was feared.
While the initial jolt has been difficult, most are finding ways to adapt. 1
A $291 billion military budget bill was approved by the Senate late Friday that adapts only slightly to improved United States-Soviet relations by continuing to increase the nation's strategic weaponry. 35
Bush and advisers lay groundwork for '92 race 26
A woman who is dying from AIDS contracted because of careless health workers has sent President Bush a letter pleading compassion for AIDS victims and arguing against screening doctors for the disease. 1
The mask that hid Jeffrey Dahmer, the Milwaukee man who confessed to a horrific string of slayings, was one of a normal young man.
But the mask slipped as he drank, turned violent or cried out for attention. 1
The agencies that rate insurers all gave high marks to three giant insurance companies not long before they were seized by regulators.
Now they are scrambling to make their evaluations more accurate. 1
Indebted students gain in battle on fraudulent trade schools 32
In home of movies, using fantasy to lure subway riders 20
M.B.A.'s going east to build up capitalism from ground up 30
Huge anti-abortion actions in Wichita have made the city the nation's most vivid symbol of an emboldened anti-abortion movement.
Over 1,600 people have been arrested at the city's three abortion clinics. 20
Drought taking its toll on California environment 21
Portland Journal: 40's songs by Guthrie for project are found 20
On second day, shuttle crew measures earth's ozone layer 22
Process for recognizing tribes divides Indians 33
Jurors are irked by ruse of TV presence 27 Regional 37-47
A group of bias crimes in Canarsie appears to stem from two factors, the large influx of blacks in the 1980's and long-held anxieties about race and change in the neighborhood. 1
Police report 11th bias incident in Canarsie 38
A black congregation charges bias in Co-op City 38
Connecticut called off budget talks, even as the state faced another shutdown on Monday.
Leaders decided to leave everything until today, when the temporary budget expires. 39
A retarded man was severely beaten, sexually assaulted and robbed by a group of youths at a Coney Island playground in an attack that the police called unusually cruel. 39
Foes of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said that his chances for re-election next year had been set back by a Senate ethics inquiry into his conduct, despite a finding of no evidence to support allegations of wrongdoing. 41
A group of once-homeless veterans patrols the streets near their house in the Prospect Heights section of Brooklyn.
Their lives are bittersweet, as some struggle with old addictions and others find new lives.  42
Residents of adult group home sue over living conditions 37
Problems have four legs in a tranquil resort area 43
Greyhound bus accident near Ithaca injures 30 40
Obituaries 46
Aly Sabry, a former Vice President of Egypt
Arts/Reviews 63-64, 68
Campus Life 51-53
Fashion 56-57
Life Style 54
Pastimes 65-66
Weddings 60-63


Barbados Gets U.S. Hotel Line
The Barbados Hotel Association has set up a central reservations number in the United States.
It says most of the association's 83 members have signed up to use the number, (800) 462-2526.
The association, which includes all the major hotels on Barbados as well as smaller properties and guest houses, hopes the new service will reverse the recent decline in the number of Americans visitors.
Last year 143,000 Americans went to Barbados, a drop of 7.1 percent from the 1989 total.


Lewis Helps Awaken Giants From Deep Slumber
When Willie McGee joined the Oakland Athletics with a month to play last season, he nudged a rookie out of center field.
When McGee rejoined the San Francisco Giants from the disabled list last week, he discovered that this same rookie had moved him out of center field.
Darren Lewis, however, has affected more than McGee's status.
Summoned from the minor leagues when McGee (now San Francisco's right fielder) went on the disabled list with a pulled muscle, he has played an integral role in the Giants' belated awakening from their seasonlong slumber.


Spending Your Dollars in Europe: Spain; The Big City Destinations Are Inexpensive Havens No More
Spain is no longer the cheap option it used to be.
Madrid, Barcelona and Seville can be as expensive as London or Paris.
But for the American visitor, at least, money will stretch almost as far as it did last year.
A stronger dollar against the peseta means that the dramatic jump in prices that so hurt the average American pocket in the late 80's has slowed down over the last 12 months.
In the last six years since the dollar's most recent high, hotel and restaurant prices have risen steeply, with hotels leveling off at the very top over the last year and some offering dramatic discounts this summer because of a slowdown in tourism.
For example, while the price of an overnight stay in a standard double room at Madrid's luxury Hotel Villamagna jumped from $160 in 1985 to $240 in 1987 and to a staggering $700 this year, the hotel is offering a summer-season offer of $390.


Corrections
A letter in the Travel section on July 21 from the Better Business Bureau of Metropolitan New York about complaints filed with the bureau involving travel and tour operators referred incompletely to a 24-hour telephone line that provides access to complaint reports.
The letter should have added that from July 10 on, callers who dialed the line, in the 212 area code, would be referred to (900) 463-2222.
A call to that number costs 85 cents a minute, and the price of an average call is $2.55.


Dragon Boat Regatta on the Hudson
New York City firefighters are slaying dragons these days, but not the fire-breathing sort.
Their dragons are boats, the battlefield a 640-meter course in the Hudson River off Battery Park City.
Eighteen New York area firefighters plan to compete today against seven other teams in the city's first Hong Kong Dragon Boat Regatta.
The crews race long, narrow boats that look like ornate, stretched-out canoes.
Each dragon boat carries 18 to 20 people who paddle in unison to a drummer's beat.


Post Office Goofs Again and Some Cry Racism
On the heels of several blunders in stamp production, the United States Postal Service has done it again, and some say this time with racist overtones.
In a stamp to be issued Sept. 15, the Postal Service will honor Jan E. Matzeliger, the inventor of a machine that molds leather for shoes, as part of the 13-year-old Black Heritage series.


Spending Your Dollars in Europe: Soviet Union; Prices Are Wildly Irrational, but There Is Room to Maneuver
In the economic confusion that is the Soviet Union today, prices for foreigners are about as inscrutable as the political disputes between Mikhail S. Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin.
A Big Mac at McDonald's on Pushkin Square costs the equivalent of 50 cents and a subway ride half a cent, while a hotel room might cost $280.
For most visitors, however, the price of a trip to Moscow is still the price of a package tour with Intourist, the official travel agency, whose prices have remained relatively reasonable.
What has changed, however, is that new opportunies have emerged for the Western tourist seeking to go beyond the Intourist package to venture out into the wilds of fledgling Soviet capitalism.


Late Bloomers Come to Campus
There is a new type of student on campus, distinguished more readily by age, roughly 25 to 32, than by appearance, since 28-year-olds seem to look a lot more like 18-year-olds than their counterparts did a decade or more ago.
But distinctive they are, these children of the "Me Generation" for whom confidence was a credo, pragmatism a creed, diversity a hallmark and education, well, not a high priority -- until now.
Already constituting 43 percent of all students on campus, these late bloomers are changing campus life; they will profoundly affect national life.


Ms. Bublick Wed To David Jacobs
Ellen Michelle Bublick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruce Bublick of Highland Park, Ill., was married last evening to David Fredrick Jacobs, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Jacobs of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Dov Taylor officiated at the Ambassador West Hotel in Chicago.
Ms.
Bublick, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Duke University, and cum laude from the Harvard Law School.
She is to become a clerk next month for Judge Walter J. Cummings of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Chicago.


10 Stubborn Plants That Bedevil Americans
EVERYONE who grows plants confronts weeds at one time or another.
Some weeds are pretty to look at and some are just plain nuisances.
Usually when weeds appear in someone's garden, the plants are frowned upon and the garden is relegated to an unkempt category.
Besides, weeds compete with desirable plants for soil moisture and nutrients.
Other gardeners are tolerant of weeds, however, and consider them nothing more than plants out of place.
After all, they admit, for every weed or unwanted plant there is someone in the world who likes it and covets it.


The Stray Cat Factor in Democracies
To the Editor:
A multiplicity of cats is a phenomenon of democracies.
In Kiev in the Soviet Union, five years ago, I counted only two cats.
Four years ago, I noted three in Cracow, Poland, none in Bucharest, Romania.
From a bridge in Bergama, Turkey, two years ago, I spied a wraith of a scaredy cat lickety-splitting past fishermen on the riverbank and sighted several more just as skinny surviving the uncertain Turkish scene.


Geometric Hair Is Out, Softness Is In, and No Combs!
Forget skirt lengths.
Hairdos, not hemlines, are getting longer.
Hair stylists agree that it's time to grow out those boyish bobs that have been fashionable for the last two years.
That doesn't mean hair has to hang below the shoulders.
It can still be on the short side, but it should be softer and fuller, with no hard edges.
The watchword is feminine.


The Limits of Faith
THE UNSEEN SHORE
Memories of a Christian Science Childhood.
By Thomas Simmons. 173 pp.
Boston: Beacon Press. $17.95.


Nicole Miller Engaged to Peter Gould
The engagement of Nicole Fern Miller to Peter Allen Gould has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Paul S. Miller of Livingston, N.J.
The prospective bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
S.
Stephen Gould of Livingston.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Miller, 26 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a senior account executive with the Burson-Marsteller public relations firm in Washington.
Her father is a vice president and a general counsel at Pfizer in New York.
Her mother, Carol Miller, is a partner in Designers 2, an interior design company in Livingston.


Maynard E. Sensenbrenner Former Mayor, 89
Maynard E. Sensenbrenner, who was Mayor of Columbus for 14 years, died of complications of Alzheimer's disease on Friday.
He was 89 years old.
Mr.
Sensenbrenner, a Democrat, was appointed Mayor in 1953.
He was elected in 1955 and served until 1959, then was elected a second time in 1963 and served through 1971.


Iranians Steal Into Kuwait, by Sea
The Iranian captains who sail wooden dhows to Kuwait have been unloading more than fish and watermelons in recent weeks.
Each night, in moonlight dimmed by the haze of burning oil wells, the boats glide silently off the Kuwaiti coast.


Old Approach, New Help for Homeless
IN small towns a hundred years ago, when a family was homeless community residents sometimes got together and found that family a house.
In Mamaroneck today, a grass-roots nonprofit organization known as Icare, for the Interfaith Council for Affordable Residence, is planning to offer that kind of assistance.


IN SHORT: FICTION
IF NOT ON EARTH, THEN IN HEAVEN  By Joel Redon. St. Martin's, $17.95.


Who's Afraid of the Big, Bad Open? Not Edberg
It is not his favorite spot on the tennis calendar, but Stefan Edberg knows that the United States Open keeps drawing closer like a clumsy giant that he must confront every year in the heat and stifling humidity of the late New York summer.
He is at once attracted and annoyed by it.
He could also think of nicer places to spend two weeks.


Save Bankers From Themselves by Regulation; Victims of Bigness
To the Editor:
It is not very difficult to guess that "Bigger Banks Can Be Better" (editorial, July 18) was written in New York City.
The money-center banking experts and economists, after their great success in supporting deregulation as necessary for the future of the banking industry (we all know what happened), are now telling us and you that larger and fewer banks will alleviate the problems with the banking industry and benefit all Americans, particularly the consumers.


Aldrich Offers Visions of Inhumanity
IT is not a nice day that awaits visitors to the Aldrich Museum's current attractions but, rather, a workout.
"The Art of Advocacy" deals with man's inhumanity to man, "Landscapes of Consequence" with his inhumanity to nature.
Still, the shows don't hurt as much as they should.
This is especially true of "The Art of Advocacy," a large group display that is mostly in the medium of "protest," which has resulted from the fusion of high art and mass media techniques.
Thus, catastrophe gets beautified by art and smothered by the repetitiveness of media routines.


Style Makers; Gloria Gresham, Costume Designer
In the film "V. I. Warshawski," Kathleen Turner, who plays the title role of a detective, runs in high heels and slugs bad guys while wearing an overcoat, jacket, silk blouse and straight (and quite short ) skirt.
She looks professional as well as sexy.
"She runs brilliantly in high heels, and she does her own stunt work and averages seven stitches a picture," said Gloria Gresham, the film's costume designer, who also created the clothes for Ms.
Turner in the film "The War of the Roses."


Hospital Releases Indian Hit by Pitch
Carlos Martinez was released from the hospital today, one day after he was hit on the helmet with a pitch during a 6-4 loss to the Kansas City Royals.
The incident touched off a brief bench-clearing shoving match.
Martinez sustained a slight concussion when he was hit by a slider from Kevin Appier in the eighth inning.
He was kept overnight at Lutheran Medical Center for observation.


VOUS PARLEZ FRANCAIS?
When I was working at the American Embassy in Paris in 1945, I'd have my hair done every week at a beauty shop located between the Embassy and the Crillon. (Fashion: "Vous Parlez Francais?" by Charla Carter, July 14).
Most of the women sitting under the dryers were Americans, and I found it fascinating to study the contrast between the customers and the French operators.
The operators wore plain, pastel-colored cotton wrappers, self belted at the waist.
I can't remember any particular makeup and their hair was styled simply.
But they all had a je ne sais quoi.
I couldn't keep my eyes on my magazine, trying to figure out what their secret was.
MARIE WASTCOAT
Madison, Conn.


Campus Life: Utah; Anti-Bias Rules Are Broadened For Homosexuals
The University of Utah has extended its nondiscrimination policy to homosexuals on campus by adding provisions on sexual orientation to its faculty and student codes of conduct.
But the university declined to extend its affirmative-action policies to cover sexual orientation when admitting students or hiring employees.
It also declined to prohibit financial support of either on- or off-campus organizations that discriminate against homosexuals.


Ethnic Fighting Continues in Yugoslavia


Postings: Restoring Astor Row; A Bucolic Harlem Haven
In the 1880's, William Astor owned much of the land between Fifth Avenue and Lenox Avenue in Harlem, and when 28 brick rowhouses with wooden porches and small front yards was built along the south side 130th Street, the street became known as Astor Row.
The houses were designated landmarks in 1981, and now an ambitious program of loans and grants, including a grant of half a million dollars from the Vincent Astor Foundation, has been created to help restore those brick facades and bucolic porches.


On Land and Sea
The Family Counseling Service of eastern Long Island celebrated its 20th anniversary on July 27 at a fund-raising cocktail party and dance under a big tent on the Westhampton Beach estate of Natalie O'Brien.
The nonsectarian organization, which is sponsored by the Hampton Council of Churches, provides specialized services, including drug, alcohol and adoption counseling.
Awards for outstanding service were given to Helen Hunt and her husband, Harville Hendrix; Edith E. Finke, and Vallorie Turner.


Q and A
Housing for the Elderly  Question: We are looking for information on senior living communities in the New York area.
Are there sources for such information? . . .
Morton Nelkin, Arkville, N.Y.
Answer: Yes.
Such information is available from state and county offices dealing with the elderly, among them the New York State Office for the Aging in Albany, and such private, nonprofit organizations as the American Association of Retired Persons.


Projection on Taxes Is Too Good to Be True
Regarding your article on the probability of a 30 percent increase in Westchester real estate taxes by the end of the decade  [ "With Soaring Taxes Forecast, Development Can Offer Relief," June 30 ] , we feel that this forecast is just too good to be true.
The Westchester County tax rate for our town (Bedford) was $11.21 (per $1,000 of assessed valuation) in 1986, $12.16 in 1987 (an 8.5 percent increase), $14.43 in 1988 (up 18.7 percent), $16.15 in 1989 (up 11.9 percent), $20.86 in 1990 (up 29.2 percent) and $23.87 in 1991 (up 14.5 percent).
The simple average of these increases over the last five years is 16.5 percent a year.


The Region; How Long Can New York Redistribute Wealth Before the Wealthy Leave?
IN New York's City Hall last year, iconologists recorded a subtle shift by Mayor David N. Dinkins.
The portrait of former Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia, a demigod of progressive urban policy, had been moved from Mr.
Dinkins's inner office to a secondary place of honor, opposite a men's room.
The picture of La Guardia, a Republican, was replaced with a photograph of Paul Robeson, a private champion of social justice and a socialist.
Last week, that shift seemed to have taken on new meaning.
From behind his desk, Mr.
Dinkins delivered a televised address in which he publicly questioned some of his fundamental assumptions about the government he inherited 19 months ago.
He lamented that sharp declines in Federal assistance threaten to relegate the legacy of La Guardia and the New Deal to "a sad remembrance of the past." But he has begun to question just how to pay for some of the programs that they -- and he -- advocated and advanced.


Mozarteum, Mostly


Making a Difference; A Second Shot At a Sub
EDWARD J. CAMPBELL, the chief executive of Tenneco Inc.'s Newport News Shipyard, won a big court case last week, but it may turn out to be something of an empty victory.
A Federal judge in Norfolk, Va., agreed with Mr.
Campbell that the Navy had unfairly chosen the company's archrival, the General Dynamics Corporation's Electric Boat division, to build the second Seawolf attack submarine.
The judge ordered the Navy to hold a new round of bidding for the job.
In particular, the judge said the Navy should consider the need to keep two suppliers as well as price when making its choice.


Talking: Marketing; Renting Furniture For a Sale
IT has always been more difficult to sell an empty dwelling than one filled with the furniture and bric-a-brac that makes a house a home.
That is why builders spend thousands of dollars decorating model units -- down to such seductive details as placing an open book with eyeglasses on a lamp table or desk.
As the market has slowed, owners and brokers have begun emulating the marketing strategies of builders through the use of furniture rental companies.


The President's New Pretext
Why there's just one reason after another to explain President Bush's truculent opposition to the modest, reasonable civil rights bill now pending in Congress.
For a long while, he denounced it as a hateful promotion of "quotas" in employment.
That's a reach indeed; Republican Senator John Danforth says "it has always been a red herring." And now Mr.
Bush has come up with another explanation, and this one is a whopper: To protect workers from discrimination, he says, would undermine reform of American education.


Pirate Sacrificer No Lamb at Plate
On his own club, he is easily overshadowed by Pittsburgh's star-studded outfield of Barry Bonds, Bobby Bonilla and Andy Van Slyke.
Among shortstops, he is not rated with Cal Ripken Jr., Barry Larkin, Ozzie Smith and Tony Fernandez.
But Jay Bell has been one of the Pirates' most productive hitters this season and a major reason why they have led the National League East since April 20.
"He's playing like a madman," Jim Leyland, the Pirates' manager, said, clearly in love with his shortstop.
"He comes to beat the other team. His eyes are clear. You know he slept well and ate right. He's not gifted like Ozzie or Tony Fernandez, but he comes to play."


Just a Saturday Night In New York City
To the Editor:
Having had a very bad week at the office, I suggested to my wife that we go to our local, reasonably priced Italian restaurant for dinner.


Queens Attack Suspect Charged in 2 Rapes
A man who had just dropped his fiancee off at her home in Flushing, Queens, saw her being abducted at knifepoint, jumped out of his car and caught the assailant, the police said yesterday.
After charging the suspect in that attack, the police charged him in two rapes in nearby Queens neighborhoods.


Spending Your Dollars in Europe: Britain; The First Thing to Pack For a Visit: Tons of Pounds
If Britain's your destination, bring plenty of money.
Three years of high inflation that peaked at 10.9 percent late last year have made prices here among the highest in Europe.
And thank your stars you didn't visit in January and February, when (because of high interest rates here) the pound soared to about $2.
The dollar has made a partial comeback since then, but only to about $1.65, where it hovered last summer.
Inflation is still running at about 6 percent, and the value added tax (V.A.T.) that is included in the price of everything from souvenirs to hotel rooms was raised from 15 percent to 17 and a half percent last spring.
This means that prices have gone up from 5 to 10 percent since last year.
Over a longer period of time, the cumulative effect of high inflation, plus the dollar's steep decline since its heyday in the mid-1980's, is even more dramatic, particularly in London, where prices are the highest in the British Isles.
An average pair of women's shoes at the Manolo Blahnik shop at 49 Old Church Street that cost $100 in 1984 now costs $330, according to the shop.
A made-to-measure, king-sized polycotton blanket cover at the Monogrammed Linen Shop, 168 Walton Street, that cost $56 in 1985 now costs about $114, $6.60 more than a year ago.
Cashmere twin sets that cost between $95 and $105 in 1985 at Westaway &amp; Westaway, 62-65 Great Russell Street, now cost $327.


Meredith Flynn and Bruce Ripley Are Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Flynn of Pelham Manor, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Meredith Terese Flynn to Bruce Alexander Ripley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Ripley of Essex Fells, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Flynn, 28 years old, is a vice president of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct, a New York advertising agency.
She graduated cum laude from Lehigh University.
Her father is the northeast editor of United States Banker, a trade magazine.


Feudal China's Evil Revived: Wives for Sale
The television scene shows two young women being led to a suburban home where they are told they will be given lucrative new jobs.
They wait in a small, locked room and soon discover to their horror the real nature of the deal: they are being sold, for about $950 each.
The television dramatization is one of a few tools the Government is using to warn women about a feudalistic practice that is doggedly making its way back into rural China: the buying and selling of women to serve as wives.
The partial emergence of a market economy has reinvigorated this variation of slavery, as travel becomes easier and peasants accumulate enough cash to purchase a bride.


Not Exactly A Tyson Fan
To the Sports Editor:
According to Dave Anderson, Mike Tyson is an "old 25" years of age (Sports of The Times, July 15).
The truth of the matter is that Iron Mike was, and is, a pedestrian pugilist.
The reason that this fact went undiscovered until Tyson's many flaws were exposed by a journeyman with a jab -- Buster Douglas -- was that Tyson never fought anyone who could box and punch (even a little).


Collaborator's Tie to Williams Rekindled
IN the bountiful canon of Tennessee Williams, there are indisputable masterpieces and disputable ones.
There are melodramas filled with sex and violence.
There are delicate works, primarily concerned with matters of the soul, and throughout there is an inclination for experimentation and innovation that spans almost four decades.


Shoemaker's Brace Off
The halo neck brace has been removed from former jockey WILLIE SHOEMAKER, hospitalized since sustaining paralyzing injuries in a traffic accident nearly four months ago in southern California.
Shoemaker was sent to Craig Hospital in Englewood, Colo., on April 22, two weeks after his Ford Bronco veered off the road and plunged down an embankment.
The hospital said the halo neck brace is carried on the shoulders and held in place by metal screws into the skull.
The brace immobilizes the area of the injury.
Shoemaker's physician, DR.
INDIRA LANIG, said removal of the brace will allow the jockey to "progress to the next level of rehabilitation."
For the past month, Shoemaker has been doing daily physical and occupational therapy and has gone on several outings, including a picnic and a visit to a horse stable. (AP)


Samaranch Says Cuba Will Be in Barcelona
The president of the International Olympic Committee, JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH, in Havana for the Pan American Games, said that Cuba will participate in the 1992 Olympics next July in Barcelona, Spain.
Samaranch said that Cuban President FIDEL CASTRO had told him he would attend the inauguration ceremony for the Olympics.
"I assure you, the Cuban team will be in Barcelona and President Castro will be there too," he said.


Comoros Chief Ordered Out, But Removal is Forestalled
An opposition leader said the senior judge of the Comoros had deposed President Said Mohammed Djohar today on the grounds that he was in poor health.
But the Government denied that the President of the Indian Ocean archipelago had been deposed.
Information Minister Mohamed Adamo, speaking by telephone from the Comoros, said Mr.
Djohar was still in office.
He said an unsuccessful attempt to remove the President had been mounted by the judge and members of an opposition party.


One Day, Junior Got Too Big
TEN years ago this month, the International Business Machines Corporation introduced its first personal computer, changing the computer industry forever.
Almost overlooked at the time was the company chosen to provide key software for the machine, headed by a nerdy programmer young enough to be the son of many of the I.B.M. executives.
No one is overlooking the results of that decision today.
Seizing on that initial opportunity to provide the MS-DOS operating system for I.B.M. personal computers and the clones that followed, the Microsoft Corporation has grown into the world's largest software company, with revenues of $1.8 billion for the fiscal year ending in June.
Its reach expands into nearly every nook and cranny of the software business.


Men's Style; Men and Their Shadows
GIORGIO ARMANI'S MODELS strode down the runway this summer wearing soft suits accessorized with a hard hint of beard.
Like patched elbows or frayed cuffs, their stubble suggested gentility slightly gone to seed.
But more to the point, it added years to their faces, says the designer, who asked them to skip the razor for several days before his show.
The Italian manufacturer Byblos also displayed its 1992 summer clothes on men whose faces were darkened by a three-day growth.
"Stubble gives a casual but aggressive look," says Pierfilippo Pieri, the company's unshaven communications director.


STRIKEOUTS AND PSYCH-OUTS
I enjoyed your article about the Mets and their in-house psychiatrist -- at least, until I came across Lans's blanket indictment of Florida as a place where "there's nothing to do and the restaurants are terrible." I moved down here 16 years ago and, at that time, the restaurants left much to be desired.
However, since then, the population has increased greatly as has the quality of the restaurants.
If Frank Cashen really wants to help the Mets win this pennant, he might trade the psychiatrist for a good relief pitcher.
JACK LIPSETT
Sarasota, Fla.


LES DELICES DID NOT DELIGHT
I also moved to France with my family when I was 9, but the similarity between Stanley's experience and my own ends there.
In France, I discovered that tomatoes were red and juicy, peas didn't come frozen in little cardboard boxes, bread had a flaky crust and could be bought fresh and hot from the local bakery.
And, oh, the sweets!
Walking to school, I spent my centimes on licorice and meringues, chocolates and caramels.
On the way home, I'd look at the luscious pastries in the window of the local patisserie, agonizing over which one I'd choose.
I can taste them to this day.
A few years ago, we took our almost-3-year-old twins to France for a summer vacation and watched them eat with the same gusto.
We couldn't get through our morning walk without a pain au chocolat and a fresh strawberry ice.
MYREL CHERNICK
New York, N.Y.


From the Country of the Sick
TO THE FRIEND WHO DID NOT SAVE MY LIFE
By Herve Guibert Translated by Linda Coverdale. 246 pp. New York: Atheneum. $18.95.


All About/Foreign Exchange; A Profitable Niche in Today's Grim World of Banking
GOVERNMENTS like to try to keep the value of their currencies stable.
To do that, they buy and sell their currencies in the world's $600 billion-a-day foreign exchange market and coordinate their economic policies with one another.
Corporations with large sales or operations abroad do not like volatility in the foreign exchange market either.
It makes it difficult for them to produce relatively stable quarterly earnings.
But foreign exchange traders love movement: it is a time to make money, not only from trading one currency for another but also from hedging for corporations seeking to protect themselves from the impact of volatility.
Since 1973, when the world abandoned its post-World War II system of fixed exchange rates in favor of the current floating exchange-rate system, traders -- not governments -- have been getting their way.
The markets have been volatile.
From the beginning of this year until July, the dollar rose 27 percent against the German mark.
In the last three weeks, the dollar has fallen 5 percent against the mark.
In the same period, the dollar has moved up sharply against most other currencies.
The quarterly reports for the banks that are active traders in the foreign exchange market show that volatility has been good for them.
Foreign exchange revenues for the first quarter, when the dollar was most volatile, were up 27 percent to $701 million for the 15 major trading banks in the United States, according to figures compiled by Shearson Lehman Brothers.
Two Who Have Won J.P.
Morgan and Bankers Trust
For dozens of banks, revenue from foreign exchange operations has become much more important as other areas of their business have suffered.
Banks earn fees on foreign exchange services for corporate customers and profit from daily and long-term trading, often with their own money.
Fee-based operations, which carry less risk for the bank, are growing.
This makes revenue from the category "foreign exchange" more reliable and stable than its name might otherwise imply.
James M. Rosenberg, a banking analyst at Shearson, has used this argument as the basis of his decision to raise the ratings recently of the stock of Bankers Trust Company and J.P.
Morgan &amp; Company.
Both banks actively conduct trading and hedging operations for their clients.
Mr.
Rosenberg said this dependable stream of earnings means the banks' stocks were "materially undervalued."
In the first half of this year, J.P.
Morgan, the parent of Morgan Guaranty Trust, had revenue from foreign exchange of $149 million, or 30 percent of net income.
Bankers Trust did better, with revenue from foreign exchange of $182 million or 53 percent of net income.
"The balance has shifted a bit more toward customers," said Peter D. Hancock, the managing director for global markets at J.P.
Morgan.
"There is a recognition of the important niche that Morgan holds because of its customer franchise. But this is not to say that we do not have a certain appetite for risk."  What Customers Want The Biggest Banks Are Most Popular
With so many banks competing for business, which ones do corporations prefer?
In foreign exchange, it does not hurt to be big.
Of the top five banks rated as best by corporate treasurers and other customers in Euromoney magazine, four -- Citicorp, Barclays Bank, National Westminster and Union Bank of Switzerland -- are among the 30 largest banks in the world.
Morgan Guaranty Trust, rated third, is 59th in assets worldwide.
The Euromoney list also showed that investment banks are making their mark.
Goldman Sachs &amp; Company and Morgan Stanley &amp; Company are now rated among the world's 20 most preferred currency traders.
But the credit ratings of the banks themselves also seem to play a role in why some are favored.
The banks that rose in the rankings -- like J.P.
Morgan, which went from eighth place to third, and Union Bank of Switzerland, which went from 17th to fifth -- both had credit ratings from the Standard and Poor's Corporation of AAA, five levels higher than the rating for Chemical Bank, which fell from third to seventh, and Chase Manhattan, which fell from sixth to 14th in the rankings.
These higher ratings bring in customers who are concerned about the state of the banking system and want to do their longer-term transactions with banks considered healthy.
The credit rating issue is very important to the new foreign exchange operations that will be created at the merged Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover Trust.
In comments to analysts, John McGillicuddy, who will be chairman of the combined bank, made clear that the key to improving the new bank's foreign exchange revenues will be to make the financial moves necessary to raise the bank's credit rating first to an A and then to an AA.
"We really have professionals that can execute in these areas if we give them an improved rating to operate with," Mr.
McGillicuddy told the analysts.
"There are several banking institutions in this city, for example, that really kind of have the field to themselves right now, and it's not, in our judgment, because they're better than we are." Traders Without Jobs Cost Cutting In Currency Units
The explosive growth of the foreign currency market in the 1980's brought new banks and scores of new traders into the business.
Now they are elbowing each other for a share.
At the same time, cost cutting in the banking industry has spread even to lucrative areas like foreign exchange.
Traders are beginning to feel the pain.
A few foreign banks, like Hill Samuel International of Britain, have closed their New York foreign exchange operations.
On the West Coast, the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group and Barclays Bank of Britain have closed their operations.
The New York market is especially tight.
At Union Bank of Switzerland and many other banks, managers do not move quickly to replace traders who have left.
"Traders are suffering for the first time," said David Rivers, the executive editor of FX Week, a newsletter for currency traders.
Anthony G. Mecca, a former foreign exchange trader turned headhunter, said job listings are down about 40 percent from a year ago.
He has had to turn the efforts of his own firm, the Paulen Company, toward other kinds of job searches because of the slowdown.
"A lot of the people who were unemployed last summer are still unemployed," he said, adding that he has seen more than 30 traders this year who had lost their jobs.
One of the reasons for the cutbacks, beyond cost, is that the boom in foreign exchange trading in the 1980's brought a lot of people into the market who are having trouble handling the business today.
"The 1980's brought in a lot of people who were not up to the quality and talent that you need today," said Robert A. White, vice president at First Interstate Bank in Los Angeles.
He said increased volatility and quick changes in the direction of the foreign exchange market make it much more difficult to make money now than when the dollar was generally going down every day in the mid- and late 1980's.
Traders hired now tend to be more experienced.
"I would look for seasoned traders with a good track record," said Albert Soria, foreign exchange manager at Kansallis-Osake-Pankki, a Finnish bank in New York.
"And a good track record does not mean volatile earnings. A good track record would mean an upward slope in earnings."
The threat of more bank mergers, like the joining of Chemical and Manufacturers Hanover, means there could be other traders on the street soon looking for jobs.
Mr.
Mecca believes Chemical has the stronger foreign exchange operation, which means it will be dominant in the combining of the companies' operations.
But he believes David Puth, manager of foreign exchange at Chemical, will run counter to the rule in the market and take younger people so he can train them.
This time "I think you will see a lot of senior people out on the street," he said.
A bank spokesman, Joyce Oberdorf, said the bank will train younger traders, "but not at the expense of senior people."
For one senior trader in particular, the situation is a little queasy.
J.
Thomas Stanley, who was vice president and manager for corporate exchange at Chemical Bank, left three months ago.
He left to do the same job at Manufacturers Hanover Trust.
At this time, Mr.
Stanley has no comment about his future.
THE DUAL ROLE OF OPTIONS
ON the floor of the Philadelphia Stock Exchange, at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and in banks and investment banks around the world, currency options are being used increasingly to hedge against foreign-exchange losses.
Currency options are a type of right.
They give their owners the opportunity to buy a unit of a currency at a prearranged price sometime in the future.
As a result, they are an insurance policy against unwanted or unanticipated moves in the foreign exchange market.
Options are traded on exchanges in a number of standard forms or individually crafted for special customer needs by banks and investment banks.
While options offer protection, they also give companies the opportunity to take advantage of a positive move.
The cost of combining insurance and opportunity is much higher than traditional forms of hedging, which use forwards -- contracts to buy currencies in the future at current price.
Forwards also offer insurance against adverse moves by locking in an exchange rate, but they offer no chance for gains.
According to International Risk Control Inc., a foreign exchange consulting firm in Redwood City, Calif., a three-month option can cost four times more than a forward contract or about 3 percent of face value.
Even though options are more expensive, their use is growing.
According to Greenwich Associates, a foreign exchange consulting firm in Greenwich, Conn., companies that use options spent a median of $150 million on them last year, up from $90 million the year before.


Campus Life: U.C.L.A.; Student Papers Seek Exemption From New Tax
A coalition of editors and busi ness managers of seven student publications in California is lobbying in Sacramento for a bill exempting free student publications from a new sales tax that the group says could damage or even bankrupt some student newspapers.
The new law, which went into effect July 15, levies a 7.25 percent sales tax on paper and ink for all free publications in the state.
For publication that are not free, the tax is levied on the amount the reader pays.


Postings: Curing Eyesores; New Law on Sidewalk Sheds
What is to prevent a landlord or contractor from keeping a sidewalk shed in place after the work overhead is finished or halted or canceled?
Does the city insist on knowing the reason for these structures?
What leverage can neighbors exercise to force dismantling?
Until Aug. 23, the answers are: Nothing. No. None.


Japan's Finance Chief Tainted Again by Scandal
Japan's financial scandals deepened today when Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto, who has been struggling to keep alive his chances for the prime ministership, acknowledged that a top aide and several close friends were involved in a huge bank-loan scam.
A grim-faced Mr.
Hashimoto appeared at a hastily convened news conference and issued another in a series of apologies, while confirming most of the information in an article in the Mainichi newspaper detailing the affair.


The Works of an Artist Said to Have 'Retired' From Painting
A PAINTER now showing at the Noyes Museum here, Charles Evans 2d, lives where he was born, in Atlantic City.
But he has been around during the 84-year interim.
First there was New York City, where he trained at the Art Students League and the Parsons School of Design and where he encountered "dynamic symmetry." One of the theories that developed after Modernism hit the United States by way of the 1913 Armory Show, dynamic symmetry was propounded by Jay Hambidge, a Canadian writer and lecturer, and it affected many artists, from Robert Henri to George Bellows and Alfred Maurer.


Paris Hotel Is Restored
The Grand Hotel in Paris, home of the Cafe de la Paix, has been restored after a six-year project.
A highlight of the renovation is the addition of a glass-roofed atrium in what was the hotel's original courtyard.
Other new facilities include a fitness center and 10 meeting rooms.
Gold-leaf moldings and a domed ceiling of stained glass were carefully preserved in the ballroom of the hotel, which occupies a block on Place de l'Opera across from the old Opera and dates to 1862.
The Grand has 514 rooms and suites; reservations (800) 327-0200.


His Dog Tags Don't Come Off
HAZARDOUS DUTY
An American Soldier in the Twentieth Century.
By John K. Singlaub with Malcolm McConnell.
Illustrated. 574 pp.
New York: Summit Books. $24.95.


Jurors Are Irked by Ruse Over TV Presence
A judge's decision not to tell members of a jury pool that CBS News was videotaping the trial they were going to hear has angered some lawyers and judges, the news media and some of the prospective jurors themselves.
Eleven of the prospective jurors have now filed a formal complaint about the judge.
A camera crew from CBS came to Burlington to videotape the trial of Todd Streich, a 25-year-old man accused of raping a woman at gunpoint two years ago.
The jury found Mr.
Streich guilty on July 18.
The videotape is to be broadcast Aug. 9 on CBS's new program "Verdict," according to Al Briganti, the co-producer.


Style Makers; Betsy Ross, Potter and Ceramist
One of the unusual things about Betsy Ross is that she works in more than one form of expression.
But before she explained her work, she wanted to get her name out of the way: "Yes, I tell everyone. It's my real name, and can you imagine going through life with a name like that? But it's also been great for business. No one forgets it and it breaks a lot of ice. Now that I'm more and more involved with American crafts, it can get a bit wearing."


Stephen Keyes Weds Lauren Bonfield
Lauren Beth Bonfield, a lawyer in New York, and Stephen Keyes, a law student at Fordham University, were married last evening at the Memorial Union at the University of Iowa in Iowa City.
Rabbi Jay Holstein and the Rev.
George Forell, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 29 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Bonfield of Iowa City.
The bridegroom, 28, is a son of Doris Keyes of Louisville, Ky., and the late Nelson Keyes.


Whitman House Is an L.I. Park
On June 16 you printed "State of the State Parks: Crippled and Decaying." You listed 19 parks as members of the Long Island Region of New York State Parks.
You failed to include Walt Whitman House, the birthplace of America's greatest poet, the only state historic site on Long Island, as a proud member of the Long Island Region of New York State Parks.
The Walt Whitman Birthplace Association has undertaken the preservation and operation of Walt Whitman House in cooperation with the Long Island Region of the New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservations.
BARBARA M. BART Executive Director Walt Whitman Birthplace Association Huntington Station


Northern Ireland
To the Editor: It is to be expected that Hugh O'Neill, chairman, Northern Ireland Tourist Board, in his reply to a reader (Letters, June 16), would minimize the intimidation of American tourists by British soldiers in Northern Ireland.
"The ordinary daily life in Northern Ireland is a lot more peaceful than a lot of big American cities, including New York, " he said.
But this does not answer the genuine concerns of those who travel to Ireland and is unfair to New York.
Midway on the main Dublin-to-Belfast road, the most traveled north-south road in Ireland, is a British Army checkpoint or roadblock, complete with barbed wire, blockhouses and heavily armed soldiers.
It is impossible for a tourist to travel between Dublin and Belfast and not be stopped at this checkpoint, as I have been many times.
Being an American tourist and showing identification is not immunity from having a gun pointed at your face and questioned about why you are in Ireland, or about your politics.


New &amp; Noteworthy
EAST IS EAST, by T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Penguin, $8.95.) A Japanese sailor jumps ship and learns about the subtleties of American culture while hiding from immigration officials in an artists' colony.
"This irresistible novel is T. Coraghessan Boyle's finest yet," Gail Godwin said here last year.
"Mr. Boyle gives us an absolutely stunning work, full of brilliant cross-cultural insights, his usual virtuoso language and one marvelous scene after another."
HIT MEN: Power Brokers and Fast Money Inside the Music Business, by Fredric Dannen. (Vintage, $11.) A journalist finds that it is often the love of money more than the love of music that causes records to be made.
" 'Hit Men' is an entertaining collection of anecdotes about an uproariously unsavory subculture of egomaniacs, sybarites, goniffs and music lovers," Robert Christgau said here last year.
"Exploiting sources that range from trial records, confidential interviews and other journalists' notes to People magazine and the trade publications . . . Mr. Dannen has a knack for the telling quote and a healthy appetite for the juicy story."


1991 Caramoor Festival Is Nearing Its Finale
THE Caramoor Festival is entering its final week, with the last four concerts epitomizing the stylistic variety and artistic standards that have become hallmarks of Katonah summers.
Today at 5:30 P.M.
Misha and Cipa Dichter apply their four hands and two pianos to works of Mozart, Shostakovich, Schubert and Rachmaninoff.
At 9 P.M.
Friday artists of the Bridgehampton Chamber Music Festival will appear -- among them, Marya Martin on flute, Nathaniel Rosen on cello, Ani Kavafian on violin and Andre-Michel Schub on piano -- to let Caramoor hear some of what they have been playing out on Long Island: Dvorak's F minor Trio, Mozart's Quintet for Piano and Winds, K.452, and the witty Poulenc Sextet.


STRIKEOUTS AND PSYCH-OUTS
Corporations and labor unions are offering employee-assistance programs to workers in dramatically increasing numbers.
I can't think of any group who would benefit more from such services than baseball players.
Their performances are scrutinized, criticized and reported constantly.
Frequent travel places additional burdens on marriages and parenting.
I only regret that some baseball players feel embarrassed or stigmatized at the idea of taking advantage of these mental health services.
CLAIRE ASCHNER
Flushing, Queens


Flight Guides
To the Editor: "Flight Guide for Executives" (Travel Advisory, June 9) compares On Time with "the bulky Official Airline Guides, which are the size of telephone directories."
For 21 years, O.A.G. has published the Pocket Flight Guides (4 1/8 inches by 8 3/8 inches) in four geographic versions.
If there is a comparison to be made, it should be to this product rather than our comprehensive desktop editions.
In addition to all the direct flights of the 140 airlines serving the United States, Canada, Mexico and the Caribbean, the North American Pocket Flight Guide shows such desired information as whether a meal or snack is served and names the connecting city, should there be one.
It contains the information that our subscribers have said they want in a pocket flight guide.


Miss Simpson and J. F. Brose Marry
Marcia Vickery Simpson and James Frederick Brose were married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Harwich, Mass.
The Rev.
C.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony.
The bride, 27 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James W. Simpson of New York and Dennis, Mass.
The bridegroom, 28, is the son of Suzanne Brose-Hemmerick of Brooklyn and E. Jerome Brose of Easton, Pa.
Mrs.
Brose is studying for an M.D. at Cornell University and a Ph.D in developmental biology at Rockefeller University.
She graduated summa cum laude from Amherst College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of systems for B. Altman in New York.
Her mother, Anne V. Simpson, is the executive secretary of the Church Club of New York.


Jennifer Jahrling to Wed This Fall
November wedding plans for Jennifer Jahrling and James Anthony Forese, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Forese of Franklin Lakes, N.J., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Van Wyck Jahrling of Ridgewood, N.J.
Miss Jahrling, 26 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
She is an associate at Chase Manhattan and her father is a senior partner at Price Waterhouse, both in New York.
The prospective bridegroom, 28, graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University and is a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
He is a vice president at Salomon Brothers in New York.
His father is the vice president of finance at International Business Machines in Armonk, N.Y.


Directors Take Lead In Drama Readings
TEN years ago, Marvin Kahan produced and directed "You Touched Me!" Off Off Broadway, and Michael Parva played the role originated by Montgomery Clift.
A professional relationship began that led to the formation of the Directors Company.


One Day, Junior Got Too Big
TEN years ago this month, the International Business Machines Corporation introduced its first personal computer, changing the computer industry forever.
Almost overlooked at the time was the company chosen to provide key software for the machine, headed by a nerdy programmer young enough to be the son of many of the I.B.M. executives.
No one is overlooking the results of that decision today.
Seizing on that initial opportunity to provide the MS-DOS operating system for I.B.M. personal computers and the clones that followed, the Microsoft Corporation has grown into the world's largest software company, with revenues of $1.8 billion for the fiscal year ending in June.
Its reach expands into nearly every nook and cranny of the software business.


Errin Bell To Wed in Fall
John H. Bell of Toms River, N.J., and Mrs.
John Davis Hatch 3d of Arlington, Va., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Errin Elizabeth Bell and Harry Griswold Chapin 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Chapin Jr. of Lyons, N.Y.
Ms.
Bell, 28 years old, is a saleswoman in Boston with Kidder, Peabody.
She graduated from Smith College.
Mr.
Chapin, 29, is a senior account executive at CMC Advertising in Watertown, Mass.
He graduated from Ohio State University.


Ann H. Whitman, a Mystery Writer, Is to Wed David P. Hurd, an Executive
Mr. and Mrs.
Marland H. Whitman of Baltimore have announced the engagement of their daughter Ann Hamilton Whitman to David Palmer Hurd, a son of Mrs.
Daniel L. Hertz Jr. of Red Bank, N.J., and the late Richard Melancthon Hurd 3d.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Whitman, 36 years old, is the mystery novelist Kate Morgan.
Her latest book is "Murder Most Fowl," published by Berkley Books this year.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of media relations for Bethlehem Steel in Baltimore.


Health Insurance And Married Couples
A point regarding individual policy premiums was overlooked in the recent article "Blue Cross Struggles to Survive."
Blue Cross/Blue Shield of New Jersey imposes a marriage penalty by requiring any individual who is married (with few exceptions) to buy a family policy.
An eligible married couple without children or with children over 18 is prohibited from buying two individual insurance policies.


Q and A
Rembrandt in Amsterdam
Q.
Do you know of tours that will include the big Rembrandt exhibition coming to Amsterdam? -- Hope Cobb, Princeton, N.J.
A.
The exhibition will be in Amsterdam from Dec. 4 to March 1 (drawings will be on show only to Jan. 19).
Before that it will be in Berlin from Sept. 12 to Nov. 10, and afterward it will be in London from March 26 to May 24, 1992, with a collection of drawings continuing to Aug. 4.
The Chicago office of the Netherlands Board of Tourism will sell tickets to the Amsterdam portion by telephone, (312) 819-0300, using credit card only.
Tickets, $15, will be sold for entry during a specified hour on a particular date.
The Rijksmuseum is open daily from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Here are some packages that include the show.
Rates are for one person, based on two people in a hotel room.
All include daily breakfast and often other


World Markets; The Postwar Winners and Losers
THOUGH the United States and its allies were victorious in the fighting that grew out of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the impact of Saddam Hussein lingers on in some of the world's financial markets a year after the invasion.
Of the 24 stock markets followed in the Financial Times world index, only 10 have returned to or surpassed their pre-invasion levels since reaching their lows before the actual fighting began in January.


Learning Disabled For a Day
THE TEACHER is an ogre, one of those dreaded, domineering types whose class offers a window into the Inquisition.
Within five minutes the students are bumbling, staring at the floor.
"Name a story with a cat in it, Kathy! Name a story with a cat in it!" the teacher demands, hovering over his prey.
"C'mon, Kathy, name a story with a cat in it."


Beethoven at Bat


N.C.A.A. on Course to Raise Standards
The vote next January on whether to raise academic standards for National Collegiate Athletic Association athletes has probably become the most predictable event in sports.
The N.C.A.A.
Council and the Presidents Commission, the most influential groups within the organization, both support almost every one of the measures.
And no proposal with the joint support of the council and the Presidents Commission has ever failed to sail through an N.C.A.A. convention.


These Heels Aren't Made For Stompin'
The private investigator V.I.
Warshawski has a pair of ruby slippers.
They are beaded, sexy, red high heels Dorothy would never have dreamed of.
And well beneath the movie's ho-hum plot, those shoes represent what "V. I. Warshawski" is all about.
After a hard day of hunting down the scum of Chicago, V. I. puts on the red shoes, sticks out her leg and accidentally-on-purpose trips a handsome man in a bar.
It's not magic, but it works.
In a wry and likable performance as the woman called Vic, Kathleen Turner's one miscalculation comes in this early scene.
She doesn't toss in quite enough irony, especially when she says the right shade of lipstick and great shoes can make "a gal" feel anything is possible.
Even so, it's clear that the tough but feminine V. I. has it both ways.
She gets to keep her shoes and her irony too, as the film blithely uses female stereotypes to unsettle stereotypes of women.


Civil War Computerized
A new computer system that will enable visitors to Civil War sites to find out if their ancestors fought in the war is being planned by the National Park Service.
At present that information, plus other historical details, can be obtained from the National Archives in Washington.
The new system is expected to be in place by the fall of 1994.


Horse Racing; In Excess Takes Whitney And Completes a Sweep
If there is a constant in the whirling world of racing, it is probably the 4-year-old colt In Excess, and he showed it again today when he won the Whitney Handicap by more than three lengths and completed a sweep of New York's three major handicap races.
It was the 10th victory in 18 starts for In Excess, and the 12th time he has run in the money.
But his biggest achievement this afternoon was to give his third commanding performance in a row in a Grade I stakes race.
He won the Metropolitan Mile at Belmont Park on May 27, broke the track record for the mile and a quarter in the Suburban on July 4 and dominated the 64th running of the Whitney today before a crowd of 26,008 at Saratoga Race Course.


'90210' Goes To the Head Of the Class
Were television executives ever teen-agers?
Or did they jump over a whole decade to arrive at that distant, parental view of adolescence that dominates network shows?
Doogie Howser is a teen-age doctor, "The Wonder Years" is bathed in nostalgia, and the hero of "Fresh Prince of Bel Air" once misbehaved -- I couldn't make this up -- by sneaking out to a rap concert with his grandmother.
These teen-agers learn valuable life lessons at the end of each show; Doogie even writes his in a computer-journal so no one misses the point.
And their parents couldn't be more proud.
For the average teen-ager these are trips to "Fantasy Island."
But now there is "Beverly Hills 90210," the Fox show that has parlayed shrewd programming and a tough, realistic look at fast-track 90's teens into surprisingly high ratings.
"Beverly Hills" is "Thirtysomething" for teen-agers, a show in which viewers see their own problems magnified, chewed over and worried to death by its characters.
But the whining and agonizing is a lot easier to take when the characters are students at West Beverly Hills High.
After all, teen-agers are
supposed
to obsess about every emotional curve; if they didn't, they wouldn't seem normal.


Small Screen, Large Impact
To the Editor:
Douglas Davis's article on the democratization of television in Eastern Europe  [ "The Screen as a Tool of Revolution," July 14 ]  may have been accurate for the Soviet Union, but it missed the more disturbing developments in Yugoslavia.
There, the nationalistic Governments of Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia, freely elected in 1990, have placed their TV networks under strict control and are waging propaganda warfare.


...Or Is It Really a Promising Partnership?
To the Editor:
Many critics of the Columbia Hospital Corporation imply that it is ethically suspect for physicans to refer patients to hospitals where the physician has an equity stake.
But all hospitals look for incentives to increase physician referrals: the proliferation of modern, subsidized physician office buildings is a common sight near most hospitals.


Former Premier of Slovakia Said to Face Theft Charges
The independent newspaper Lidove Noviny said today that Peter Colotka, the Communist former Prime Minister of Slovakia, had been charged with embezzlement, abuse of power and theft.
No official comment on the report was immediately available.


The Hottest Prospects in Boston Are a Couple of Guys from Norwalk
NORWALK has always been a good baseball town, producing a Little League World Series championship team in 1952 and several outstanding adult players who made it as far as the minor leagues.
But until this year the city had sent only one man to the big leagues.
And that was almost 70 years ago, when Arthur (Ole) Olsen, a Norwalk native, pitched 41 innings for the Detroit Tigers in 1922 and '23.
Now Norwalk has added two more names to the major league roster.
Within a week of each other, Maurice (Mo) Vaughn, a first baseman, and Kevin Morton, a left-handed pitcher, were called up by the Boston Red Sox from the team's farm club in Pawtucket, R.I.


Changing Classification Of Abortion
I read with interest the recent comment of Dr.
Burt Garfinkel, the current Long Island Officer for the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, in which he equated counseling on abortion as a means of providing "appropriate legal medical care"  [ July 7 ] .
The idea of connecting abortion to both family planning and appropriate medical care is apparently of recent vintage.
The spokespeople for the modern-day medical community seem to be in the vanguard of this effort, without making any attempt to reconcile their new ethic with earlier pronouncements by their predecessors.


Portland Journal; For $266, Verse Low and Lofty By Guthrie
In recent years, much has been made of the resurfacing of lost episodes from television shows, or songs from recording studios.
Now, a Federal bureaucracy is trumpeting a lost treasure of its own, and what it reveals is that long before there were spin doctors and image meisters, government agencies took a more direct approach to publicizing major initiatives.


Spending Your Dollars in Europe
THE dollar may have recovered 10 to 20 percent of its value against other major currencies in recent months, but there is hardly a squeak of gratitude to be heard from Americans in Europe this summer.
From London to Berlin, from Stockholm to Madrid, prices remain exorbitant and the dollar remains, well, once-mighty.
Yet if the dollar has bounced back from its near-record low levels late last year, surely European vacations are now slightly less expensive for Americans?
Yes, except there is always a snag.
In many countries, prices -- and the infamous Value Added Tax (V.A.T.) -- have also risen, so what you gain at the bureau de change may in fact disappear over dinner.
And there are surprises: major cities in once-cheap Spain are now as expensive as London or Paris.


Scot Johnston to Wed Janet C. Flanders
Frank M. Flanders and Carolyn B. Flanders, both of Swainsboro, Ga., have announced the engagement of their daughter Janet Carolyn Flanders to Scot Jameson Johnston, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robin R. Johnston of Bellevue, Wash.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Flanders, 27 years old, is a financial analyst with Avatar Associates, a New York investment management concern.
She graduated from the University of Georgia.
Her father owns farms and timberland in Emanuel County, Ga.


Spending Your Dollars in Europe: Belgium; Rates Are Up, but Relative Bargains Are Available
Like everybody else, Belgians grumble about rising prices.
However, largely because of the effects of the European Monetary System, inflation has been moderate for the last several years and stands currently at 3.6 percent.
As one example, commercial rents in Brussels are low enough in comparison with Paris that French ready-to-wear clothes are sold at lower prices than in the French capital.
But at close to 38 Belgian francs, the dollar is worth 10 percent more than a year ago, though the central banks are adamant that it will never be allowed to reach its peak of six years ago, when it was worth nearly twice what it is today.


New Yorkers, etc.
Friendship is often tested in major ways, among them when one of the parties is faced with financial adversity, prolonged illness, marital discord or scandal of one kind or another.
Still, like so many things in life, it can usually survive and surmount any number of these and similar serious crises.
The strains that threaten are generally caused by peccadilloes and not infrequently, by what might be irrational reactions but are nevertheless ones that are deeply felt.


Albert Bates Lord, 78, Scholar of Folk Tales
Albert Bates Lord, a scholar of oral folk tales who taught at Harvard University for 33 years, died on Monday at New England Baptist Hospital in Boston.
He was 78 years old.
Professor Lord died of pancreatic cancer, the university said.


The World; The Evil Men Do To Women In Kenya
LIKE few other incidents of violence in Kenya, the deaths of 19 girls and the rapes of 71 others by classmates at a rural boarding school late last month has touched a raw nerve.
In this country, where girls join boys in an educational system that provides more children with a better education than do those of most other African nations, the rampage is a cruel reminder that the place of women has not shifted with progress.
In part, the public discussion has been pushed by the uneasy feeling that the violence at the St.
Kizito school in the agricultural region of Meru, northeast of Nairobi, was not an isolated case.
It may have only been on a larger scale than similiar incidents at other schools.


Martha Y. Wright Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
James Clower Wright of Newport, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Martha Young Wright to Norman Hinman Chapman, a son of Mrs.
Thomas Rudolph Young Jr. of Spartanburg, S.C., and the late Joseph W. Chapman.
Miss Wright, 30 years old, is a senior designer with Tom Lee Ltd., an interior design firm in New York.
She graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College in Lynchburg, Va.
Her father is an engineer for the Raytheon Corporation in Middletown, R.I.


Him Alone
IT'S FRIDAY NIGHT ON THE MOVIE SET, AND John Hughes is on familiar ground: a high-school gymnasium.
With a characteristic mixture of self-deprecation and pride, Hughes still occasionally calls himself the "teen king." He won that title in the mid-1980's for writing and directing a raft of teen-age comedies like "Sixteen Candles" and "The Breakfast Club," most set inside high schools like the one he has appropriated for this new film, "Curly Sue."


Canarsie's Long-Held Racial Anxieties Resurface
Madgaline Michael's childhood was spent in Jefferson, S.C., in the days before the clamor for racial equality swept through the South.
As a black person of mature years, she is no neophyte to racism.
Nor, as a resident of New York City for 32 years, is she naive about crime.


Iraqi Kurds Waver as Talks On Autonomy Hit Impasse
Three months after Kurdish rebel leaders broke away from a broad alliance of Iraqi opposition groups and announced that they were seeking a separate peace with Saddam Hussein, the negotiations stand at an impasse as the Kurds debate whether to fight or talk some more.
A total collapse of the negotiations, which are still technically in session in Baghdad, could bring renewed violence and an even bigger flight of Kurdish refugees, according to Iraq specialists in the United States Government and Kurdish spokesmen here and in Europe.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Brookville 630,000
211 Brookville Road  5-bedroom, 4-bath, 33-year-old farm ranch; den, 3 fireplaces, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $6,800.
Commack 144,500
43 Spinner Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 28-year-old ranch; den, finished basement, patio; taxes $3,400.
East Williston 280,500
108 Weeks Road, 3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement; taxes $4,400.
Farmingdale 157,000
3 Tomes Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, basement; taxes $4,000.
Glen Head 185,000
13 McCouns Lane, 3-bedroom, 1-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, basement; taxes $2,000.
Syosset 164,500
58 Gary Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, family room, pool, 1-car garage; taxes $3,600.
OTHER AREAS Fairfield, Conn. 400,000
1492 Fairfield Beach Road  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 3-year-old contemporary; multiple decks, canal frontage, 50- by 250-foot lot; taxes $4,730.
Larchmont, N.Y. 428,000
20 Lansdowne Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 64-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, pantry, screened porch; taxes $7,817.
Ramsey, N.J. 171,500
420 North Central Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 31-year-old ranch; deck, w/b stove, underground sprinkler system; taxes $3,475.


Budapest Opera
To the Editor: I recently returned from a 10-day visit to Budapest for the sole purpose of attending as many opera performances as possible at the Magyar Allami Operahaz.
Opera in Budapest is very much alive; I was able to hear four operas in five performances at a ticket price usually less than $5 per performance.
The highlight of the visit was a performance of "Salome" on May 11 with Julia Kukely in the title role.


The World; Is B.C.C.I. Beyond the Reach Of American Justice?
ARMED with last week's indictment of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International for what he calls "the largest bank fraud in world financial history," Manhattan District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau must now set about chasing a motley, far-flung assortment of defendants: a 68-year-old invalid in Karachi, another Pakistani businessman ensconced in a $4,200-a-month poolside apartment in Abu Dhabi, and five related banking units in the tax-and-regulatory havens of Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands.
Criminal lawyers are divided about whether the indictment in Manhattan was mainly a whistle-blowing gesture or a genuine case that can be brought to trial.
But even those who believe Mr.
Morgenthau can mount a prosecution concede that pursuing the case will be lengthy and difficult.
It raises issues that range from the legal jurisdiction of a New York prosecutor going after a bank whose offices, misdeeds and swindled depositors were mostly beyond America's borders to the diplomatic sensitivity of trying to extradite foreigners who may have enormous influence in their home countries.


New Ways to Recognize Tribes Split Indians
The Mowa Band of Choctaw Indians in southern Alabama once enjoyed a good relationship with its neighbors, the Poarch Band of Creek Indians.
Now, a bitter rift divides them, created by the Mowa effort to obtain Federal recognition as a tribe, a status the Poarches won seven years ago.
For American Indians, few issues can be as significant as recognition by the Federal Government.
The benefits that recognition confers -- in medical care, education, housing or land rights -- can mean the difference between self-sufficiency and poverty.


Science Friction
Some in Congress think that efforts by Dr.
Bernadine P. Healy to reorganize fraud investigations at the National Institutes of Health have not exactly been objective.
After becoming director of N.I.H. three months ago, Dr.
Healy sharply criticized the institutes' Office of Scientific Integrity, intervened in several nearly complete inquiries and forced out the agency's chief investigator, Dr.
Suzanne Hadley.
Last week, John D. Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who heads the House Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, voiced fears that Dr.
Healy was attempting to dismantle O.S.I., which looks into charges of incompetence and fakery by research scientists.
He said at a hearing that Dr.
Healy had "derailed two critical investigations, demoralized and emasculated the O.S.I. and made a mockery of the O.S.I.'s independence." Dr.
Healy, saying the charges were "preposterous," scolded the panel for forcing her to defend "legitimate and responsible actions."


Loans on Studios
To the Editor:
Your article on July 21 headed "Banks Are Refusing Loans for Studios" states that "the studio is accepted as full fledged housing by many New Yorkers." This is true, but acceptance is not synonymous with first choice.
Most people who buy studio apartments would prefer one-bedrooms with windowed kitchens and a place to eat.
In other words, comfortable housing has no substitute.


Spreading The Network
THIS MONTH marks the 10th anniversary of the I.B.M.
PC, a tool that has profoundly affected modern education.
Many educators believe, however, that the next decade will bring a shift in emphasis away from personal computers and toward systems of networked computers.
The shift reflects the recognition that the real strength of personal computers lies in their role as communications devices, rather than as computational engines.
According to Quality Education Data Inc. of Denver, a market-research company that tracks technology purchases by elementary and secondary schools, nearly 38,400 schools in 3,120 school districts reported having some type of computer network in the 1990-91 academic year, roughly twice the numbers for 1988-89.
Even so, networks are in place in only 20 percent of all school districts with computers -- mostly larger, affluent suburban school districts, according to Jeanne Hayes, president of the firm.


His Very Own Ethnic Group
A CERTAIN FINKELMEYER
By Felix Roziner.
Translated by Michael Henry Heim. 362 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $19.95.


Sport Briefings; Australian Open Is Upping the Ante
The world's top five male tennis players, headed by Boris Becker of Germany, the defending champion, will be in a field competing for record prize money in the 1992 Australian Open in January.
The Grand Slam tournament will offer $4.8 million, an increase of 20 percent from this year's prize money.


Henry L. Shenier, 89, Patent Lawyer, Is Dead
Henry L. Shenier, who practiced patent law for 60 years, died on Friday at St.
John's Hospital in Elmhurst, Queens.
He was 89 years old and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.
Mr. Shenier's son, Richard, said he died of complications after a stroke.


Looking for Life in All the Wrong Places
Humanity was presented with a cosmic irony last week when astronomers in England reported the discovery of the first known planet beyond our own solar system.
After centuries of hopeful speculation about the existence of other worlds and other creatures on those worlds, Nature's joke is that the new planet, 30,000 light-years away, is almost certainly deader than a door nail.
Why?
Because the new planet orbits a neutron star, a stellar carcass that has exhausted its nourishing outpourings of light and heat, so essential to life as we know it.
We have finally found another house, far through the thickets of the galaxy, and no one is home.


In His Stravinsky and Bach, Tempo Fugit
As a cranky autodidact, William Malloch resembles the late Sol Babitz, who graduated from playing the violin in the Los Angeles Philharmonic to hectoring the American Musicological Society in the 1950's about "sewing-machine Bach." Mr.
Malloch is an academically unaffiliated musicologist based in Los Angeles, who has sometimes eccentric (not necessarily wrong, but eccentric) ideas about how music should be played.
Much of his theorizing is based on evidence left by various mechanical means of indicating tempos, from pendulums and metronomes to musical clocks and piano rolls.
Babitz was a herald of postmodernist flexibility and ornamentation, and so is Mr.
Malloch.
But Mr.
Malloch has had a hand in better, more convincing performances than Babitz ever did.


Campus Life: Illinois; 12 Are Cleared In Medical Tests After PCB Work
A dozen people, including seven graduate students and some employees of the University of Illinois, have been tested for exposure to a dangerous chemical after having worked for about five weeks with a fluid they originally believed to be silicon oil.
Some of the students have said preliminary test results showed no effects of the chemical, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's).


Suzanne Myers To Marry in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Roger T. Myers of West Nyack, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Suzanne Shatto Myers and Andrew Edward Tuck 4th, the son of Mrs.
David V. O'Brien of St.
Croix, V.I., and Mr.
Tuck 3d of New York.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Myers, 27 years old, is an administrator of philanthropic grants at Merrill Lynch in New York.
She is a summa cum laude graduate of Gettysburg College and a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is an advertising manager at Gannett Suburban Newspapers in Harrison, N.Y.
Her mother, Catherine B. Myers, is a nurse.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Hamden
HAMDEN is affectionately called the Land of the Sleeping Giant because of the huge reclining figure formed by a mountain in Sleeping Giant State Park, visible from most parts of town.
Until recently the term seemed appropriate to the quiet, contented community.
But in the last five years its population has been shifting from third- and fourth-generation working people to a suburban mix that includes more transients.


Sports of the Times; What Is Next Move For Patrick Ewing?
SOMETIME early this week, Dave Checketts, the president of the Knicks, expects to hear from his once and possibly future center, who appears over the last few weeks to have been as tightly gagged by his agent as a bank-robbery victim.
After Patrick Ewing lost his arbitration case, in which he sought to break free from his New York contract, he was unmuffled briefly last week to state only that he was sorely disappointed in the verdict.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HOMICIDE  A Year on the Killing Streets. By David Simon. Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.


The Nation; Price of Gas Can Fall, But Taxes Defy Gravity
MISSED about as much as a headache that has quietly slipped away, the pain has gone out of gasoline prices lately, and adjusted for inflation, pre-tax prices in recent years have hovered around post-World War II lows.
Almost unnoticed, however, something else has been creeping up: gasoline taxes.
The Federal Government raised its take a nickel a gallon last fall, and Arkansas, Idaho, Hawaii, Maine, New York and Rhode Island, among others, have followed suit.
Last week, the House Ways and Means Committee approved a proposal for yet another five-cent increase, but Democratic leaders withdrew the measure, at least for now, as Congressional support for it began to crumble.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have a persistent problem with algae on my porous sandstone patio.
It is surrounded by ground cover and slopes slightly so water drains off.
I know that algae can be removed with acid, but this would kill the ground cover as it drained off.
Last year I used an algaecide that I bought, but over the winter and since then the moss has come back worse than ever.
Annual scrubbing is growing into too much of a chore.
Can you suggest a solution?
A.
Moss and algae grow where there is moisture and a lack of sunlight.
Try to prune any trees or large shrubs shading that patio, and try to improve drainage.
Also, you might try using a clear sealer on the stone so it will not absorb and hold water the way it now does.
Test the sealer in one corner first, to see if it affects the color.
Otherwise periodic scrubbing with an algaecide may be your only answer.


Wall Street; Painful Choices for Holders of T.W.A. Preferred
THE terms of the proposed reorganization of Trans World Airlines last week were especially painful to the holders of T.W.A.'s preferred stock.
It was just three years ago, in August 1988, that Carl Icahn, the T.W.A. chairman, asked investors to give up their voting rights in exchange for a special dividend of 25 cents a share.
If they refused?
Well, T.W.A. would be forced to redeem a large portion of the preferred shares at $16.50 each -- a bit below their market price at the time of $16.625.


Sunday Outing; Just as Corny as Kansas in August
In August, the fields of sweet corn stretch almost as far as the eye can see along the banks of Esopus (pronounced ee-SOAP-us) Creek in Ulster County.
Most of the crop is shipped in trailer trucks along the East Coast, but some is sold directly to consumers.
Buying corn at a farm stand is the next best thing to picking your own.
Since that is impossible for nongardeners or nonfarmers, the alternative is to buy corn shortly after it's picked.


Article Points Out School-Community Bond
I would like to compliment the comprehensive July 7 article, "Helping Teen-Agers Be Health Advisers." This is a valuable program that demonstrates the positive and far-reaching cooperation that exists in Peekskill between the schools and the community.
More important, however, is the impact our "teen peer educators" will have within their age group regarding the value-laden areas of role, consequences and responsibility.
By way of accuracy, the 4.9 percent school dropout rate quoted reflects the school year 1986-87.
We have dramatically reduced this percentage rate to less than half that figure for the last few years.
This data is available in the latest New York State Comprehensive Assessment Report.


The Executive Computer; Novell Adding Weapons for the Contest With Microsoft
NOVELL INC. of Orem, Utah, makes the Netware operating system that is the most popular software for connecting networks of personal computers.
Last month it announced that it hoped to acquire Digital Research Inc., which makes the DR DOS 5.0 operating system.
Many people believe DR DOS 5.0 is technically superior to the MS-DOS 5.0 made by the Microsoft Corporation.
Assuming the deal is completed in October as planned, Novell hopes to be able to offer customers a tightly integrated operating system for desktop personal computers and the larger PC's that act as hubs, or servers, on a network.
The bottom line, Novell believes, is that a network operating system that embraces desktops as well as the wires that connect them would be significantly easier to set up, maintain and operate.


How 'Fat Kate's Wedding,' From 1688, Lives On
Audiences who attend the Amherst Early Music Festival and Institute will see what may be the first presentation since the 17th century of "Le Mariage de la Grosse Cathos" ("Fat Kate's Wedding"), a French comic ballet choreographed in 1688 by Jean Favier.
What makes this romp, which will be revived at Amherst College in Massachusetts on Aug. 16, extraordinary is the fact that it is the only complete ballet we possess from the 17th century -- the century that permanently enriched the French dramatic repertory with the plays of Moliere, Racine and Corneille.
"Fat Kate" survived because someone notated it.
The specific form of notation used was long considered incomprehensible until two scholars, Carol Marsh and Rebecca Harris-Warrick, recently deciphered it.
Ms.
Marsh has supervised the Amherst revival, with Ken Pierce as dance director and Dorothy Olsson as his assistant.


Horse's Star Quality Attracts Midtown Fans
Broadway's newest and friendliest act is the team of Barden and Miller, now playing to crowds in midtown Manhattan.
It stars an equestrian turned police officer and a thoroughbred horse turned ham actor.
Police Officer Barbara Barden and her horse Miller, members of the New York Police Department Mounted Unit, draw clusters of onlookers most mornings and afternoons while patrolling Times Square and the diamond district.


Editorial Notebook; How to Look for M.I.A.'s Travel Barriers Invite Scams
Even during the peak of America's influence in Vietnam two decades ago, many G.I.'s felt there was something otherworldly about the place.
Since then, Vietnam's mysteries have deepened.
Cumbersome Treasury regulations imposed after the war strongly discourage U.S. citizens from traveling to Vietnam and Cambodia.
Hanoi's own bureaucratic rules have multiplied the obstacles.
That double paper curtain has worked to the advantage of unscrupulous con artists who prey on the emotional vulnerability of families of servicemen missing in action.
In the absence of real information, it is all too easy to persuade M.I.A. families and friends that many middle-aged American slave laborers populate Indochina's jungles, villages and cities.


Stars Take a Backseat in Seniors
What the leaderboard at the Northville Classic lacked in marquee value, it made up for in quality.
There was no Trevino or Rodriguez in sight today, but there was a steady, if unspectacular, group of Senior PGA Tour contenders, including George Archer and Larry Laoretti.
Lee Trevino did tie the course record with a six-under-par 66, and Chi Chi Rodriguez did break par for the second straight day, but they were both too far back after the second round to be considered serious threats in this $450,000 tournament.


Ms. Boericke Has Wedding
Catherine Youngman Boericke and Michael Barden Prisant were married yesterday at the First Reformed Church in Schenectady, N.Y., by the Rev.
Vincent Fasano.
The bride, 28 years old, is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ralph Rensselaer-Boericke of Glenmont, N.Y.
The bridegroom, 30 and known as Barden, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Millard B. Prisant of Roslyn Harbor, L.I.


Save Bankers From Themselves by Regulation
To the Editor:
Thomas Ashley, once of the House Banking Committee, profiled in "From Yale Days to Bank Lobbyist" (Washington at Work, July 19), and Representative Charles Schumer, now of the House Banking Committee, in "The Best Way to Save Banks" (Op-Ed, July 19), both seek to set commercial banks free.


U.S. TAKING STEPS TO BAR NEW WAVE OF CUBAN EMIGRES
Concerned about a resurgence of migration from Cuba, the Administration is taking steps to curb the number of Cubans applying to come to the United States as tourists.
The Administration last week temporarily froze new applications for six-month tourist visas, which are running at a rate about triple that of last year.
Not only are more Cubans applying for tourist visas, but more than a third are illegally overstaying the visas.


Corporate Lessons In Campus Quality
JUDGING by the more than 75,000 students who pursue M.B.A.'s each year -- and the businesses that recruit them -- American executives have swallowed whole the idea that exposure to professorial research and classroom wit is essential to success.
Now, the tables are turning.
Universities, facing a demographically induced shrinkage in the pool of students and a recession-induced shrinkage in financial support, are discovering that neither their staff theoreticians nor their professors-cum-consultants have a magic pill that attracts and retains customers.


The Stray Cat Factor in Democracies; Solution Available
To the Editor:
Nowhere in "Syracuse's Feline Lobbyists Thwart Proposed Cat Limits" (front page, July 9) do you mention the solution to cat overpopulation.
"These cats are just multiplying all over the place," you quote Neil Driscoll, Syracuse's director of intergovernmental affairs.
That is the problem.
The solution is to stop this multiplication.


Dutch Art On Display
Forty Dutch art dealers will take part in the largest art and antique show in the Netherlands from Oct. 5 to 13.
The show, the Delft Fair, will be held in the city's Prinsenhof Museum and will be open from Monday to Friday from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M. and Saturday and Sunday from 11 to 5.


Another Aspect Of Fireworks Safety
Though too late for this year's Fourth of July celebration, an addition to the article "Fireworks: Safety Amid Fun" (June 30) is in order for those who visit other events or who might wish to file it for next year's Big Bang.
The impact of the noise following or with visual displays can be very dangerous to many people.
Professionals in the field of audiology have confirmed this through years of research.
Protection is simple:
*Use earplugs.
Avoid stuffing ears with cotton; the fibers may break and create trouble.


In Search of Romance, Twice
OVERINDULGED and bored, Alfred Von Wilmers (a playboy) and Josefine Weninger (is she not then a "playgirl"?) drop their high-class identities and go slumming -- he as a starving poet, she as a seamstress.
What they are looking for as they stroll separately along the boulevards of turn-of-the-century Vienna -- perhaps Alfred should be called a boulevardier and Josefine a boulevardiere -- is romance, real romance; that is, on a humble, which is to say human, scale.


The Benefits of Bank Mergers
To the Editor:
Henry B. Gonzalez ("Who Speaks for the Bank Customer?" Forum, July 21) cites the 70 branches that Chemical Bank said it would look to close.
He calls them "hints of service cuts." Yet any examination would probably reveal that all of the candidates for closure are one of a pair that are virtually side by side.
Didn't one principal in the merger say no branch closing would result in the bank leaving a community in which it was doing business?
In-market mergers between financial services companies heighten competition in three ways:


On the Street; Shifts and Sheaths Return in Full Force
Back to the future.
The sleeveless sheath of the 50's and the shift and sleeveless A-line dress of the 60's are with us again.
The simple, uncomplicated designs have a proven record of comfort for survival in midsummer.
The only drawback is that they make shapely arms important.
Center, the 50's solid-color linen sheath revived by Bill Blass and made in five different colors for Anna Wintour, the editor of Vogue.
Top left, the 60's loose shift, and below, a revival of Saint Laurent's '67 Mondrian color-block shift.
Above, the revival of Courreges's mid-60's, chalk-white A-line dress.
Far right, the mid-50's Lilly Pulitzer flower patterned sheath.
All this nostalgia adds up to the low-key uniform of summer '91.


A Woodstock for the Lost Generation
There's no contest: This summer's biggest tour is the aptly titled Lollapalooza, a mobile rock festival featuring a bill of premier alternative bands -- Siouxsie and the Banshees, Living Colour, Nine Inch Nails, Ice-T, Butthole Surfers and the Rollins Band -- headlined by the critically acclaimed Jane's Addiction.
The tour is currently crisscrossing North America, doing 26 shows in 21 cities, including two New York-area dates at Waterloo Village in Stanhope, N.J., on Aug. 11 and 14.
There may be other, bigger-grossing tours, but for fans disaffected with routine concerts, nothing can rival the sense of expectation and event that Lollapalooza has aroused.
The tour was the brainchild of Jane's Addiction's lead singer, Perry Farrell, its drummer, Stephen Perkins, and Marc Geiger and Don Muller from Triad Artists, the group's booking agency.
The idea was conceived after Jane's Addiction attended Britain's Reading Festival last year.
The band was booked to play at the festival, an annual three-day event featuring top alternative bands, but pulled out because of illness.
Instead, band members attended as spectators and, impressed by the atmosphere, soon began to wonder why there was nothing similar in the United States.
Mr.
Geiger and Mr.
Muller, who had previously organized alternative rock tours of the United States, decided that a mobile festival was feasible, if logistically daunting.


Speaking From Experience . . .
To the Editor:
The article by Anne Williamson, "Movies in Moscow Today Are a Capitalist Adventure"  [ July 7 ] , was disappointing on several counts.
In the first place, "Back in the U.S.S.R." was not the first recent American film to have been shot entirely in the Soviet Union; it was predated by the independent feature film "Banya," shot entirely in the Soviet Union during the summer of 1990.


'Here and Hereafter': Pleasures of Paradise in Islamic Art
Who can resist the paradise of Islamic art -- a glorious walled garden abundant with flowering trees, fruits, reflecting pools and peacocks, where believers rest on silken cushions contemplating God and the heavens.
And when the idyllic concept is seen in mostly familiar objects -- as is the case in "The Here and Hereafter: Images of Paradise in Islamic Art" at the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue at 70th Street through Sept. 8 -- viewers succumb swiftly to its charms.
Organized by the Hood Museum of Art at Dartmouth College, in Hanover, N.H., this traveling show spans the 9th to the 19th centuries and is displayed in an evocative setting of kiosks and arches designed by Charles Moore, the California architect.
By presenting a total of 54 religious artifacts and everyday objects, the exhibition and its catalogue ($29.95 clothbound, $19.95 paperback; published by the museum) demonstrate how deeply Islamic motifs of paradise are ingrained in Muslim life.
Depictions of the Koran's view of the pleasures that await in the afterlife -- hell is rarely portrayed -- appear in prayer rugs, ceramics, steel decorations, glass lamps, lacquerwork, calligraphy and illustrations from guides for pilgrims to Mecca.


Gary Taffet and Audrey Hemmat Wed
Audrey Houri Hemmat, a daughter of Nahid Hemmat of Mendham, N.J., was married last evening to Gary Arthur Taffet, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen S. Taffet of Jamaica Estates, Queens.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Great Neck, L.I.
Mrs.
Taffet, 30 years old, is a product manager of home diagnostic kits for Carter-Wallace in New York.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
Her father, the late Dr.
Naim Hemmat, was a research physicist for Allied-Signal in Morristown, N.J.
Her mother is a psychiatric social worker at Greystone Hospital in Morristown.


BEST SELLERS: August 4, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
6
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
2
2
21
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
5
13
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
4
3
11
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
5
6
6
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
6
4
6
BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Random House, $21.) The disappearance of a couple off Bermuda raises a question: is a creature from the deep responsible?
7
7
2
PASTIME, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) The private eye Spenser learns much about his own past while helping a young man track down his mother, who has disappeared.
8
17
2
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
9
10
71
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
10 *
8
13
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
11
14
2
SKY MASTERS, by Dale Brown. (Fine/Putnam, $21.95.) The United States Air Force comes to the aid of the Philippines in a war with China in 1994.
12
11
3
DARKNESS, by John Saul. (Bantam, $17.50.) A family moves back to a Florida town, where something evil awaits.
13 *
12
7
THE RUSTLERS OF WEST FORK, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $18.) A frontier novel featuring Hopalong Cassidy, first published in 1951. (LP)
14
1
MAXIMUM BOB, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $20.) A woman probation officer pursues the people trying to kill a redneck Florida judge. (LP)
15
1
FIRE SEA, by Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman. (Spectra/Bantam, $20.) The third volume in a fantasy series about people struggling to restore order to their shattered universe.
16 *
9
5
THE PIRANHAS, by Harold Robbins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) A young man discovers the ways of Hollywood, Wall Street and organized crime.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
7
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America.
2
2
7
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
3
3
37
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
4
9
2
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
5
5
5
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
6
4
12
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) The changing role of today's male.
7
6
4
BOSS OF BOSSES, by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) The downfall of the mobster Paul Castellano.
8
7
12
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How the President and his commanders have made military decisions.
9
8
5
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press, $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.
10
11
9
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
11
1
PETER LAWFORD, by James Spada. (Bantam, $22.50.) The life of the British-born actor, Hollywood man about town and Kennedy in-law.
12
14
6
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of humor columns.
13
10
9
SILENT COUP, by Len Colodny and Robert Gettlin. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) The events that led to the resignation of President Richard Nixon.
14 *
8
COUNSEL TO THE PRESIDENT, by Clark Clifford with Richard Holbrooke. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the Democratic adviser.
15 *
13
11
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are treated on campus.
16 *
6
REAL PONIES DON'T GO OINK! by Patrick F. McManus. (Holt, $16.95.) A humorist's essays.
17 *
15
4
UNDER THE INFLUENCE, by Peter Hernon and Terry Ganey. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized account of Anheuser-Busch.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
39
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) An illustrated book in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
2
2
6
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
3
3
82
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
4
5
119
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's advice about how to make a personal fortune.
5
4
26
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
GOETHE: THE POET AND THE AGE.
Volume One: The Poetry of Desire (1749-1790), by Nicholas Boyle. (Clarendon/Oxford University, $37.50.) This insightful study, unsurpassed in thoroughness, of the greatest German poet takes its subject up to the return to Weimar from his second trip to Italy.
THE IRONY TOWER: Soviet Artists in a Time of Glasnost, by Andrew Solomon. (Knopf, $25.) A timely, perceptive and entertaining account by a journalist of the overwhelming changes that have come to Soviet art and artists since 1985.
THE RITUALS OF DINNER: The Origins, Evolution, Eccentricities, and Meaning of Table Manners, by Margaret Visser. (Grove Weidenfeld, $22.95.) A learned romp through the rituals created to prevent cannibalism and other social ills.
SLEEPING BEAUTY: Memorial Photography in America, by Stanley B. Burns. (Twelvetrees, $40.) Astonishing post-mortem photographs, beautifully reproduced, of death as Americans knew it in the 19th and early 20th centuries.
LONE STAR RISING: Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1908-1960, by Robert Dallek. (Oxford University, $30.) Mr.
Dallek, a history professor, attributes to Johnson a "sense of unrelenting deprivation" that made him do anything to win the glittering prizes; once in office, he performed magnificently.
WILD PEOPLE: Travels With Borneo's Head-Hunters, by Andro Linklater. (Morgan Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A wacky account, by a British journalist, of a sojourn in Sarawak.
CHINA BOY, by Gus Lee. (Dutton, $19.95.) This hilarious and poignant coming-of-age novel filters the customs and mores of the American present through those of the Chinese past.


Close Collaborators


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ending July 20  MANHATTAN Chelsea 650,000
35 West 23d Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 3,500-sq.-ft. condo in a loft; elevator, dining area, fireplace, Jacuzzi, 11-ft. ceilings; common charge $200, taxes $2,400 (Broker: J.I. Sopher)  Kips Bay 200,000
229 East 24th Street  (Brookfield)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. postwar condo; dining area, elevator, 2 exposures; common charge $588, taxes $3,804 (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman Associates)  Greenwich Village 1.075 million
7 East 9th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. co-op in a Greek Revival brownstone; double parlor, high-ceilings, 3 fireplaces, two 600-sq.-ft. terraces, ionic columns, Jacuzzi; maintenance $1,732, 42% tax-deductible (Broker: Eychner Associates-William B. May)  Upper East Side 1.4 million
655 Park Avenue (66th St.)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevator, 2 maid's rooms, dining room, library, fireplace; maintenance $3,343, 33% tax-deductible (Broker: Key Ventures) Upper West Side 510,000
54 Riverside Drive (78th St.)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,650-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, remodeled, eat-in kitchen, 4 exposures, partial Hudson River view; maintenance $1,140, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Vandenberg Inc.)  BRONX  Eastchester 100,000
3687 Secor Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,100 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy and Associates)  Riverdale 120,000
610 Kappock Street  (Presidential)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,150-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; part-time doorman, dining area, terrace, garage parking; maintenance $768, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Stephen Eldridge Realty)  BROOKLYN  Kensington 215,000
233 East 5th Street  2-family, detached, frame house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath, dining room in each; 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Homes R' Beautiful, Inc.)  Park Slope 525,000
114 Prospect Park West  2-family, 4-story, townhouse; 4 bedrooms, 3 baths, dining room in owner's triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, study in other unit; 20- by 98-ft. lot; taxes $2,200 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Real Estate)  Prospect Park South 250,000
152 Stratford Road  7-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, single-family, frame house; center hall, double parlor, fireplace, private driveway, 48- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,979 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher)  QUEENS  Bayside 236,000
58-02 214th Street  4-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, brick, Cape Cod; dining room, eat-in kitchen, slate roof, 42- by 98-ft. lot; taxes $1,535 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Sunnyside 248,000
38-12 47th Avenue  2-family, attached, brick house; 2 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 19- 80-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Century 21/Metalios Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Annadale 215,000
169 Halpin Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, detached, stone and frame house; dining room, semi-finished basement, rear deck, 50- by 125-ft. lot; taxes $1,360 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  Westerleigh 188,500
121 Wheeler Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 60- by 123-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)


Leaking Water in Yaphank Dump Stalls Ash-for-Garbage Exchange
A CONTROVERSY over a proposed solid-waste agreement between the Towns of Brookhaven and Hempstead is being complicated by the discovery of excess water in the Brookhaven landfill.
The identification of the water, originally feared to be leaks in the liner of the Cell 4 land area, has led the State Environmental Conservation Department to postpone the agreement, which was to have taken effect on June 1.
Cell 4 is nicknamed Ski Bowl because of its high hill, inside of which is a carved-out area.


M.B.A.'s Head for Eastern Europe to Build Capitalism From the Ground Up
Wanted: Recent business school graduates willing to forgo high pay for a year or two and risk culture shock to help a small Eastern European company make the shift from Communism to capitalism.
Forty-two young people with M.B.A. degrees responded to just such a challenge, and in July they completed four weeks of training at the University of North Carolina to prepare for assignments as management employees with companies in Czechoslovakia, Poland and Hungary.
They are the first full class of the MBA Enterprise Corps, created by a group of 16 American business schools to help pave the way for Western businesses in newly democratized countries.


Disney Plan For Children
Disneyland, in Anaheim, Calif., is offering free admission for children this summer when their parents buy a hotel package through the Walt Disney Travel Company.
A child aged 3 to 10 gets two days' admission for each paying adult who purchases a hotel package of two to five days.


10 Stubborn Plants That Bedevil Americans
EVERYONE who grows plants confronts weeds at one time or another.
Some weeds are pretty to look at and some are just plain nuisances.
Usually when weeds appear in someone's garden, the plants are frowned upon and the garden is relegated to an unkempt category.
Besides, weeds compete with desirable plants for soil moisture and nutrients.
Other gardeners are tolerant of weeds, however, and consider them nothing more than plants out of place.
After all, they admit, for every weed or unwanted plant there is someone in the world who likes it and covets it.


Reality Testing Via Video
THE VIDEO screen shows a teen-ager named Arnie, an amiable nerd.
He is at a party, and Cynthia, the most beautiful girl in school, asks him to smoke marijuana with her in the basement.
"Downstairs?" he gulps, as the screen freezes.
Arnie must make a choice, and now, using a novel interactive video program called Modern Solutions, so do teen-agers watching his story unfold.


Insurers' Raters Are on the Spot For Inaccuracy
The giant insurers taken over by regulators this year -- Executive Life, First Capital and Mutual Benefit -- all received high marks from rating agencies not long before they were seized.
Now, ratings companies are scrambling to make their evaluations more accurate, while a growing number of consumers, insurance agents, regulators and lawmakers say drastic changes are needed.
"If the rating agencies were getting constant information from the insurance companies, then they have a lot to explain in terms of how they missed the boat on Mutual Benefit, Executive Life and First Capital," Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, said in a telephone interview this week.
"Their credibility has been severely tested."  Flaws Acknowledged
The leading ratings companies -- A. M. Best, Moody's Investors Service and Standard &amp; Poor's -- dismiss much of the criticism as mere hindsight.
But they have, in effect, acknowledged flaws in their methods: Best announced on Thursday that it would add investor confidence to the categories it analyzes, and Standard &amp; Poor's and Moody's said they would give greater weight to that criterion.


Ms. Seidenberg to Marry in November
November wedding plans for Hope Morrison Seidenberg and Aaron Jason Freiwald, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Freiwald of San Francisco and Haslemere, Surrey, England, have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore H. Seidenberg of Philadelpia.
Ms.
Seidenberg, 26 years old, is a law clerk for Judge Jan E. DuBois of Federal District Court in Philadelphia.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of the McLean Packaging Corporation in Philadelphia and president of the Jewish Federation of Greater Philadelphia.
Her mother, Hermine Seidenberg, is a vice president of the Federation.


Sleek Slippers for the Sidewalk Pavlova
Ballet slippers offer a sleek and subtle feminine finish to any silhouette.
There are slippers in neutral shades and numerous textures that work well with any number of outfits.
For travelers, these shoes are convenient to pack, and they also can stride straight into fall.
Under its own label, Saks Fifth Avenue sells simple flats in red, green or black cotton velvet, trimmed in matching grosgrain ribbon ($88).
A ballet flat by Joan and David is made dressy by a gold string bow.
Gold filigree is embroidered on red or black suede slip-ons by Beverly Feldman, $98, that are ready to skim along an imaginary Swan Lake.


County Considers Opening An Off-Track Betting Theater
"COME on, baby! You're all alone!" a gleeful supporter yelled at Mary in theMorning, a 3-year-old filly who had pulled out of the pack and was roaring down the backstretch on her way to winning the second race at Saratoga last week.
No matter that the man was a few hundred miles away in Connecticut, shouting at a giant video screen.
In his air-conditioned grandstand seat at the Teletrack in New Haven, he was part of it all.
The three-story-high screen simulcasts the latest odds and the race, while betting windows, snack bars and cocktail lounges are just a few steps away.


Elizabeth Murphy Engaged
October wedding plans for Elizabeth Howar Murphy and Mitchell Keith Higgins, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Kenneth E. Higgins of Fairfield, Conn., have been announced by the prospective bride's mother and stepfather, Mr. and Mrs.
George Preston O'Sullivan of New York.
Miss Murphy is also a daughter of Robert S. Murphy of Washington.
The couple, both 28 years old, graduated from Hamilton College.
She is a television producer and he is a private banking officer at Manufacturers Hanover Trust, both in New York.


Corrections
A report last Sunday about the engagement of Cynthia Hardwick to Peter Chiang referred erroneously to wedding plans.
No date has been set.


Top Dogs
The English are a nation of animal lovers, and the new edition of THE ENGLISH DOG AT HOME (Chatto &amp; Windus/Trafalgar Square/David and Charles, Paper, $11.95) focuses on all manner of dogs: dogs with pedigrees reaching back to Queen Victoria's dachshunds, corgis raised by Queen Elizabeth II and the Queen Mother, as well as mongrels of all shapes and sizes.
As the authors, the English dog lover Felicity Wigan and the London journalist Victoria Mather, point out, these dogs have a distinct advantage in that they belong to the landed gentry; they live in fine houses (some dating back hundreds of years) and some eat off fine china and sprawl on antique sofas.
They hunt in Scotland and on country estates, they attend charity events and they are greatly adored -- even to the point of excess.
Caroline Keith reports that her husband, David, was so besotted with their long-haired dachshund, Phoebe (a descendant of one of Queen Victoria's pets), that he could not bear to let the dog reproduce.
"He felt there was always a great danger in childbirth," Mrs.
Keith says.
"He wasn't worried about me having children, but Phoebe was quite different." Pat Menzies says that she and her husband, John, "agreed about how to bring up the children, but not the dogs." Geoffrey Shakerley's photographs are excellent, showing wonderful views of the countryside and interiors of magnificent Edwardian, Georgian and Jacobean houses and castles.
That these dogs live blessedly indulged lives is obvious.
Their owners are educated, intelligent and otherwise quite rational people -- but when it comes to a dog, well, who can explain love?


Anne Toubassi Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. Toubassi of Paradise Valley, Ariz., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Anne Elizabeth Toubassi and Dana Chase Troxell Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Troxell of Short Hills, N.J.
Miss Toubassi, 27 years old, is an investment manager at Equitable Capital Management in New York.
She graduated from Vassar College, he from the University of Virginia.
Both have M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University.
Mr.
Troxell, 29, is a vice president of Alta Limited Partners, a bank buyout and restructuring firm in New York.


No Autograph for Child? Say It Ain't So, L. T.
Wes Ramsey, a 9-year-old from Jonesboro, Ga., a suburb of Atlanta, wanted an autographed photo of his favorite football player, Lawrence Taylor.
So he had his grandmother write to the Giants linebacker and request one.
Wes Ramsey never got the photo.
What he got instead was bitter disappointment and an introduction to the often impersonal nature of the autograph business.


USAir Helps Grandchildren
USAir has modified its senior citizen coupon program so that children aged 2 to 11 may travel on these reduced-price tickets, too.
The intent, the airline says, is to allow grandparents to take grandchildren along.
The basic USAir Golden Opportunities program allows people aged 62 years and older to buy four one-way travel coupons for their own use for $473 or eight coupons for $790.
These permit travel between any two cities on the carrier's domestic routes, including Puerto Rico.
The coupons are valid for a year; tickets bought with a coupon are valid for a further year.


A Milieu Apart
AT TEMPLE University in Philadelphia, about 350 students pledged fraternities and sororities last year.
Staff members at the university's day care center estimate that they fielded inquiries from more than 1,000 students.
And the university's Adult Program, whose hottest workshops are "Assertiveness Training" and "Going to College as an Adult," heard from about twice that many.
At Temple, as at many American universities, to be 25 is to be more typical than noticeable.
But it is also to be an adult, with adult concerns and an unmistakable sense of purpose.
For mny students, college is no longer a stage of life but a place to do work.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
A Chief and 2 Nude Statues
IT is not the love or the romance in the "Love, Sex and Romance" exhibition at the Ruth Vered Gallery in East Hampton that has brought the Police Chief, the Village Administrator and a black cloth over a painting.
Sex in art can cause controversy, Ms.
Vered is finding.
First the East Hampton police received two complaints about two nude women in the gallery.
Police Chief Glen Stonemetz investigated.
"I just happened to be swinging by that way when the call came in," he said.
"I thought I could save another car from coming out."


Don't Kill (Just Kick) Messengers
Three ticket holders -- Metropolitan Opera faithful might have called them interlopers -- found "I Puritani" a hoot not long ago.
Riccardo waves his sword (giggles).
Elvira beats her brow in delusional frenzy (amazed glances).
Good news restores her to joyous sanity (suffocated laughter).
Possible deductions: 1.
Some people have bad manners. 2.
Opera is ridiculous.
Possible responses to possible deductions: 1.
Truth hurts; it may even insult. 2.
Opera has the right to be as ridiculous as it wants to be.


Hands of the Past Are Shaping Chicago's Future
Some cities are memorable for their settings -- Vancouver and Seattle come to mind, or Rio de Janeiro, or Hong Kong.
Others are impressive for the character of their public spaces -- the boulevards of Paris, for example, the parks of London, or the streets and avenues of New York.
But of the great cities, only Chicago derives its physical impact almost solely from the quality of its buildings.
For more than 100 years, this place has been the site of unparalleled architectural creativity and innovation, the home of such architectural giants as Daniel Burnham, Louis Sullivan, Frank Lloyd Wright and Mies van der Rohe.
So "New Chicago Architecture," an exhibition first displayed last summer at Union Station in Washington and in the first half of this year at the Chicago Athenaeum, was much more than merely a preview of new buildings -- it was a look at the future face of the city.


Tech Notes; A Way to Stretch Muscles Cramped or Spasmed by Use
THE intricate complex of foot and leg muscles that powers an athlete takes a pounding.
Muscles tighten, they cramp, they spasm.
They demand surcease.
Up to a point, an athlete can get relief by dangling the ankles off a curb or step.
Now a former hockey player has developed a way to go beyond that point.
In 1988, while in rehabilitation for a knee injury, Chris Smith, a service station owner, cobbled together a couple of car brake shoes into a device that allowed him to rotate his lower leg through a full range of stretches and strengthening exercises, speeding his recovery.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  Senate
1.
Female Pilots: Vote to kill a provision of a 1992 fiscal year military programs bill that would permit the services to allow women to fly combat missions.
Rejected 69 to 30, July 31.
2.
Stealth Bomber: Vote to reject an amendment to cancel $3.2 billion in funds for the B-2 bomber.
A "yes" vote is a vote to cancel the B-2.
Rejected 57 to 42, Aug. 1.
1
2
Connecticut
Dodd (D)
N
N
Lieberman (D)
N
New Jersey
Bradley (D)
N
Y
Lautenberg (D)
N
Y
New York
D'Amato (R)
N
N
Moynihan (D)
Y
Y
House
1.
Base Closings: Vote on a resolution to disapprove the recommendations of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission to close 34 military installations.
Rejected 364 to 60, July 30.
2.
Unemployment Benefits: Vote to extend unemployment benefits up to 20 additional weeks for people who have exhausted the standard 6 months of benefits.
Passed 375 to 45.
Aug. 2.
1
2
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D)
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D)
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D)
Y
Y
4. Shays (R)
N
Y
5. Franks (R)
N
Y
6. Johnson (R)
N
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D)
Y
Y
2. Hughes (D)
Y
Y
3. Pallone (D)
Y
Y
4. Smith (R)
N
Y
5. Roukema (R)
N
Y
6. Dwyer (D)
N
Y
7. Rinaldo (R)
N
Y
8. Roe (D)
N
Y
9. Torricelli (D)
N
Y
10. Payne (D)
N
Y
11. Gallo (R)
N
Y
12. Zimmer (R)
N
Y
13. Saxton (R)
N
Y
14. Guarini (D)
N
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner(D)
N
Y
2. Downey (D)
N
Y
3. Mrazek (D)
N
Y
4. Lent (R)
N
Y
5. McGrath (R)
N
Y
6. Flake (D)
N
Y
7. Ackerman (D)
N
Y
8. Scheuer (D)
N
Y
9. Manton (D)
N
Y
10. Schumer (D)
N
Y
11. Towns (D)
N
Y
12. Owens (D)
Y
Y
13. Solarz (D)
N
Y
14. Molinari (R)
N
Y
15. Green (R)
N
Y
16. Rangel (D)
N
Y
17. Weiss (D)
N
Y
18. Serrano (D)
N
Y
19. Engel (D)
N
Y
20. Lowey (D)
N
Y
21. Fish (R)
N
Y
22. Gilman (R)
N
Y
23. McNulty (D)
N
Y
24. Solomon (R)
N
Y
25. Boehlert (R)
N
Y
26. Martin (R)
N
Y
27. Walsh (R)
N
Y
28. McHugh (D)
N
Y
29. Horton (R)
N
Y
30. Slaughter (D)
N
Y
31. Paxon (R)
N
Y
32. LaFalce (D)
N
Y
33. Nowak (D)
N
Y
34. Houghton (R)
N
Y
KEY Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


In Land of Movies, Mass Transit to Use Fantasy to Lure Riders
It could not have been otherwise, in this land of movie make-believe, sun and glitter.
When this automobile-bound city finally gets its first subway line in a couple of years, riders will walk into caverns of color, fantasy and whimsy.
At the Hollywood and Vine station, fittingly enough, a ride downtown will start with a walk along a yellow brick road to the ticket booth.
The capitals atop the columns along the platform below will be shaped like palm fronds and the whole station will resemble the great movie palaces of old; screens mounted on either end of the station will show old movies as trains rumble through.
Stations to be 'Magnets'
Choked with traffic and smog, Los Angeles is hoping that enough people can be lured to mass transit to bring relief.
And art is a major part of the lure.


Good Story, Wrong Focus
To the Editor:
The solution to the high production cost of the movie "Cortes" is staring the producer Edward R. Pressman in the face  [ "Between Screenplay and Screen Stretches the Highway to Oblivion," July 21 ] .
Montezuma is the interesting player in this drama, not Cortes.
Montezuma was the man who one day would send gifts to the Spanish camp and the next day threats.
Montezuma was the man who lived in splendor in a great walled city, daily sacrificing young boys to the twin gods of war and hell as he awaited news of the approaching conquerors.
Montezuma was the man who welcomed Cortes into his palace and was later killed by his guests.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Bronxville, N.Y. 750,000
50 Hampshire Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 64-year-old Tudor; stone reception room, 2 fireplaces, stone sun room, breakfast room, library, bar; taxes $7,941.
Larchmont, N.Y. 428,000
20 Lansdowne Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 64-year-old colonial; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, pantry, screened porch; taxes $7,817.
Pound Ridge, N.Y. 228,000
261 White Birch Road  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old ranch; fireplace, eat-in kitchen, family room, den, 2.3 acres; taxes $4,754.
Bethel, Conn. 171,000
20 Westview Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; screened porch, brick fireplace, 0.50 acre; taxes $2,260.
Chester, Conn. 333,100
22 Railroad Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; office area, skylights, security system, 4.1 acres; taxes not available.
Fairfield, Conn. 400,000
1492 Fairfield Beach Road  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath 3-year-old contemporary; multiple decks, canal frontage, 50- by 250-foot lot; taxes $4,730.
OTHER AREAS East Williston, L.I. 280,500
108 Weeks Road, 3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 50-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, fireplace, finished basement; taxes $4,400.
Farmingdale, L.I. 157,000
3 Tomes Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, basement; taxes $4,000.
Howell, N.J. 135,000
6 Stockport Way  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1 1/2-year-old split level; family room, 1-car garage, porch; taxes $3,000.


Answering The Mail
Q.
I have a persistent problem with algae on my porous sandstone patio.
It is surrounded by ground cover and slopes slightly so water drains off.
I know that algae can be removed with acid, but this would kill the ground cover as it drained off.
Last year I used an algaecide that I bought, but over the winter and since then the moss has come back worse than ever.
Annual scrubbing is growing into too much of a chore.
Can you suggest a solution?
A.
Moss and algae grow where there is moisture and a lack of sunlight.
Try to prune any trees or large shrubs shading that patio, and try to improve drainage.
Also, you might try using a clear sealer on the stone so it will not absorb and hold water the way it now does.
Test the sealer in one corner first, to see if it affects the color.
Otherwise periodic scrubbing with an algaecide may be your only answer.


Yugoslav Fighting Teaches Children to Hate
Ljiljana Medzedoic, a 26-year-old factory worker from the Croatian town of Vukovar, wept as she recounted how quickly her 8-year-old son had learned to hate.
"I always taught him to love everyone," she said as tears spilled down her face.
"Their own grandmother is a Serb. I am half Serb, and we happen to live in Croatia. All these terrible things are going on around us, and we are seeing these terrible things on television, and suddenly I saw my 8-year-old son pick up a stick and pretend it was a machine gun."


Pixar Opens Horizons for Pluto, Dumbo et al.
THE creative magic of Hollywood and the technological wizardry of Silicon Valley are being fused here on John Lasseter's computer screen.
Mr.
Lasseter is an animator, trained at the Walt Disney Company in the traditional art of drawing characters painstakingly by hand and bringing them to life, frame by frame.
But at Pixar Inc., the technology company where he now works, Mr.
Lasseter has traded his pen for an intriguing new tool: highly sophisticated software that allows him to create animated films on a computer.


Spending Your Dollars in Europe: Austria; Vienna is Losing Its High-Priced Name, but Not Its Luster
Vienna's reputation as one of Europe's most expensive cities is slowly fading.
Granted, a good dinner can rarely be found for less than $15 and double rooms in the center for less than $100 are only slightly more available.
But compared with cities in Italy and Germany, Vienna -- and Austria in general -- is a reasonably priced vacation spot.
One reason Austria appears affordable is that its inflation is so low -- only about 3.5 percent last year.
Whereas in such Italian cities as Venice the price of a simple tomato and cheese pizza has more than doubled, and in some areas tripled, in the last six years, the price of a Viennese melange (coffee with milk) in Vienna has stuck at just about $2, and you can buy one coffee and sit until closing time.
A glass of draft beer at a sidewalk cafe is about $1.90.
For Americans, the low inflation in Austria helps make up a little bit for the steep fall in the dollar in the last six years.
In 1985 the dollar stood at 21 schillings while it now stands at about 12 schillings, a slight improvement over the rate at the same time last year, when it was down to nearly 10 schillings.
Egon Smeral, an economist at Vienna's Institute for Comparative Economic Studies, says that German unification has slightly lowered prices in Austria because of more competition, and Austrians are hoping that their entry into the European Community, which is not expected before 1993, will guarantee stable prices in the future.


Pamela Knapp Plans a Wedding
Dr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Knapp of Penn Valley, Pa., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Pamela Hay Knapp, and Douglas Norwood Burdett, a son of Antoinette Salley Burdett of Asheville, N.C., and the late Lieut.
Gen.
Allen M. Burdett Jr.
Dr.
Knapp, 33 years old, is a resident in radiology at New York Hospital- Cornell Medical Center.
She graduated cum laude from Yale University, received a master's degree in English from the University of California at Berkeley and an M.D. degree from the University of Rochester.
Her father is a psychiatrist at the Crozer Chester Medical Center in Chester, Pa., and is an assistant professor of psychiatry at the Hahnemann University Medical Center.
Her mother, who is retired, was a psychologist in Chester.


Fashion; Dream Merchants


Demand for Rentals Rises in Manhattan
FOR Matthew Auerbach, a comedy writer, freelance rock critic and Manhattan renter, the real estate slump could be worse.
Later this month, he will bid adieu to a quintessentially New York home, a fifth floor walk-up railroad flat on York Avenue in the 80's that he calls "the North Pole."
He is moving downtown and up scale, joining thousands of New Yorkers who have seized upon the depressed market to seek the best deals they can find in rental housing.


Allison B. Wohl, Student, Marries
Allison Brooke Wohl, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald G. Wohl of Roslyn Estates, L.I., was married last evening to Christopher Corey George, a son of Martha Hardy Baum of Manhasset, L.I. and Charles George Sr. of Palm Beach, Fla.
Rabbi Eugene Lipsey performed the ceremony at the Hotel Pierre.
Mrs.
George, 24 years old, and the bridegroom, 23, both 1989 graduates of the University of Michigan, are candidates for M.B.A. degrees, she at Pace University and he at New York University.


LES DELICES DID NOT DELIGHT
Alessandra Stanley's article "Les Delices Did Not Delight" (Food: July 14) brought back memories of my introduction to American food.
I emigrated from France in the 1950's, at the age of 10.
The variety of junk food in this country amazed me.
In France, we had vanilla bars with chocolate coating that were available only when the weather was warm.
Here, ice cream was available in many flavors, year round.
I remember my father digging into a bowl of ice cream while it was snowing outside and saying, "Ice cream in the winter, that's America."
There was no need to squeeze oranges; orange juice flowed from large cartons.
But the most surprising thing was cold milk, poured from a carton.
During the 1950's, in the land of Pasteur, milk was not pasteurized and had to be boiled.
DANIELLE R. BERNSTEIN
Metuchen, N.J.


Campus Life: Texas; 3 Men Sent to Jail And 3 Fraternities Fined for Hazing
Three former members of Sigma Nu fraternity at the University of Texas were sentenced to up to 30 days in jail by an Austin judge last month for hazing violations, in the first such convictions in the state.
At the same hearing, officers from the university chapters of Phi Gamma Delta, Pi Kappa Alpha and Beta Theta Pi fraternities pleaded no contest to unrelated charges of organizational hazing, a misdemeanor.
The groups were assessed $10,000 in fines, the maximum allowed by law.


Hairless in Glasgow
SOMETHING LEATHER
By Alasdair Gray. 256 pp. New York: Random House.


Data Update
MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE RICES
June 91
May 91
June 90
Nation
$ 101,900
$ 101,100
$ 98,900
Northeast
142,800
144,900
148,300
Midwest
78,200
77,500
75,900
South
90,800
88,900
89,400
West
146,400
152,100
138,700
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.71
9.77
10.22
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.29
7.30
8.48
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.55
9.62
10.05
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.19
7.21
8.21
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.61
9.66
10.10
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.14
7.11
8.40
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.83
9.92
10.39
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.66
7.68
8.62
Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
6.29
6.32
8.10
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.12
9.12
9.85
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


On Second Day, Shuttle Crew Measures Earth's Ozone Layer
On their second day in orbit today, the five astronauts aboard the space shuttle Atlantis took measurements of the Earth's ozone layer, conducted medical experiments and found time to beam down spectacular scenes of their planet.
The astronauts also reported that several test tubes containing biological samples were broken and leaking, apparently casualties of the shuttle's launching on Friday.


J. E. Peck Is Wed To Miss McKean
Abigale Hague McKean, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George E. McKean 2d of Grosse Pointe, Mich., was married yesterday at Grosse Pointe Farms to Jeffrey Ewing Peck, a son of Philip F. W. Peck of West Hartford, Conn., and the late Mary Bennett Peck.
The Rev.
Bryant W. Dennison Jr. performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
The bride, 28 years old, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is an account executive in the communications services division of the New England Mutual Life Insurance Company in Boston.
Her father was a partner in the Detroit law firm of Dickinson, Wright, Moon, van Dusen &amp; Freeman.
Her late grandfather, Robert E. McKean, was a founder of the firm.


Delicate Pike Quenelles, a Lyons Tradition
THE cuisine of Lyons has always had a mixed press.
For every critic who praises the rich, wholehearted cooking favored in the gastronomic center of France there is another who has a liver crisis at the thought of such Lyonnais specialties as chicken with truffles and sweetbreads, artichokes stuffed with goose liver pate, or tripe cooked in lard.
Waverley Root summed up this view in "The Food of France" when he characterized Lyonnais cooking as "hearty rather than graceful . . . apt to leave you with an overstuffed feeling." But even as the traveler may concede that some remembered meals fit that description, there intrudes a delicate, fragrant, delicious memory: the quenelles of Lyons.
Quenelles de brochet, so named because they are made with brochet (pike), are rich; the Lyonnais do not deny it but neither do they plan to change it.
Unsaturated fat instead of butter, skimmed milk instead of cream?
Local chefs would probably not believe their ears, and they would certainly leave the eating of such a dish to the misguided soul who asked for it.
Which is not to say that Lyonnais quenelles are not rich in variety as well as in ingredients: the dish is prepared in various ways and with various flavorings and sauces.
But the final product, despite falling off the top end of the cholesterol curve, should glide smoothly over the palate and sit lightly on the stomach.
Rich doesn't mean heavy.


Making a Difference; Survival of the Biggest
IN the midst of an industry roiled by change, William Fairfield is calmly taking pre-emptive action.
If all goes as expected tomorrow, shareholders of Valcom Inc., Mr.
Fairfield's nine-year-old, Omaha-based computer retailing company, will ratify the acquisition of Inacomp Computer Centers, a retailer based in Troy, Mich.
Mr.
Fairfield intends for the union's stronger offspring, the Inacom Corporation, to ride out the undulations of the industry as it goes through what one expert described as a "natural Darwinian evolution."


Police Try Beantown Comics
TEACHING children about the dangers of guns and drugs is never easy.
But the Boston police are trying something new -- a color comic book called "Welcome to Beantown."
Financed by a $15,000 grant from Ronald McDonald's Children's Charities, the comic book is part of a growing effort by urban police departments to develop school programs that will reach children before gangs or city violence do.
It was created by George Noonan, a Boston police detective, in collaboration with the artist Robert Neville.


Carise Skinner Weds R. H. D. Rowley
Carise Berntine Skinner, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David Bernt Skinner of New York, was married yesterday to Roger Henry Dare Rowley, a son of Drs.
Janet Davison Rowley and Donald Adams Rowley of Chicago.
The Rev.
Linda Loving performed the Presbyterian ceremony at Bond Chapel at the University of Chicago.
Ms.
Skinner, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a theatrical lighting designer in New York.
Her father is the president and chief executive of New York Hospital and a professor of surgery at Cornell Medical College.


Ms. Wray Weds Jon Baughman
Kathleen Malone Wray, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Cecil Wray Jr. of New York, was married yesterday in New York to Jon Steven Baughman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jon Alan Baughman of Fort Washington, Pa.
The Rev.
Frank Strasburger, the Episcopal chaplain at Princeton University, performed the ceremony at St.
James' Church.
Mrs.
Baughman, 22 years old and known as Katie, graduated summa cum laude from Princeton, where she was a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
She plans to begin a doctoral program in medieval history at Harvard University next month.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.
Her mother, Gilda Baughman, is the vice president for programs of the Charles Hayden Foundation in New York.


A Fan's Vote For Mackey
To the Sports Editor:
Another year and another five players are inducted into the Professional Football Hall of Fame.
How hollow an honor it must be when John Mackey, perhaps the best tight end in the history of the game, is still ignored.
BARRETT A. DAVIDSON Northport, L.I.


Incomplete Quotation
To the Editor:
Your reviewer of "The Science of Love" quotes the author's statement that "homosexuals are not looking for 'a man,' they are looking for a penis, which happens to be appended to a man."


The World; Where the Fires of Hatred Are Easily Stoked
SITTING in his kitchen in Transylvania, a Romanian farmer retold a story he had heard in the village, about a group of Hungarians who stopped a bus and pulled the Romanian passengers off one by one, beating them with sticks and, in one case, gouging out the eyes of an elderly woman.
No, he told a reporter one evening last fall, he did not know anyone who had witnessed this horror, which had curiously gone unnoticed by a usually vigilant press.
Nor could he imagine any of his ethnic Hungarian neighbors -- all good fellows, he hastened to add -- committing such a deed.
But that did not stop him from believing what he had heard and passing it on quite matter-of-factly as another chapter in one of Eastern Europe's longest-running ethnic conflicts.


Senate Backs $291 Billion Pentagon Budget Bill
Adapting only slightly to improved United States-Soviet relations, the Senate voted late Friday for a $291 billion military budget bill for the next fiscal year that continues to increase the nation's strategic weaponry.
Under the Senate bill, which passed by a voice vote, the Pentagon would heavily invest in radar-evading technology, buying more F-117 Stealth fighters and B-2 Stealth bombers.
The United States would also begin deploying for the first time a ground-base defense against limited nuclear missile attacks, which arms control advocates fear could jeopardize the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty of 1972, and reignite the nuclear arms race.


Bush and Advisers Lay Groundwork for '92 Race
President Bush gathered his core group of political advisers at Camp David today, telling them it was his intention to run for re-election in 1992 and laying the groundwork to begin raising money this fall for a campaign.
Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, and others who attended said Mr.
Bush did not make any specific decisions about a campaign organization at the meeting, which involved three hours of discussions and a lunch at the President's Maryland retreat.


Saratoga
To the Editor: The article about Saratoga (Travel, June 16) did not mention the Saratoga Raceway.
Not only is the raceway, a harness racing track, an important part of the summer season at Saratoga, it is an important part of the year-round activities of the city.
I can understand the emphasis on the August season and the flat track, but to ignore the raceway does not give a fair reading of Saratoga.
PETER F. LANGROCK Middlebury, Vt.


The Great Boardwalk Towns of Jersey
I AM not sure what dark psychological forces unleashed by the Industrial Revolution prompted that first Victorian entrepreneur to gaze over the undulating sand dunes and misty surf and decide that here would be just the place to put up a hotel and a Tilt a Whirl, and lay down wooden planks between the two to keep customers from getting sand in their shoes.
But a hundred years later, the legacy thrives in the Great Boardwalk Towns of New Jersey, those uniquely American celebrations of the excessive and the egalitarian.
Today, when much of the seashore is increasingly inhospitable to short-notice or short-term visitors, with "Keep Out -- Private Beach" signs sprouting like dune grass, the boardwalk towns are not a bad place to spend the occasional day or weekend at the beach.


Making a Difference; Out Front on Clean Air
FACING persistent summer smog, the states from Virginia to Maine are exploring joint remedial action: eight of them have already forced gasoline marketers to clean up their products, and all 12 are considering adopting the strict emission standards for cars and light trucks used by California.
Getting so many states to agree on anything is difficult, let alone something as complicated as air pollution.
After all, it took Congress four years to agree on the latest Clean Air Act.


Mandela's Group Names Moderates to New Posts
The African National Congress has positioned itself for future negotiations with the Pretoria Government by picking a relatively moderate 'shadow Cabinet' that excludes the congress's two most prominent militants.
The congress announced on Friday night that Winnie Mandela, the wife of the congress president, Nelson Mandela, had not been elected to the inner working committee of the leadership and so lost her right to remain as the organization's head of social welfare.
She was appointed last year by Mr.
Mandela's associate, Alfred Nzo, who lost his post as secretary general in the congress's elections at its conference last month.


STRIKEOUTS AND PSYCH-OUTS
I'm glad to see the Mets are moving in the right direction.
Troubled players, like the late Billy Martin with his dependency on alcohol, Ted Williams with his excruciating shyness, Pete Rose with his hyperaggressiveness, to name a few, are painful examples of extraordinary baseball players who could have benefited from the help of Dr.
Lans.
ARGEO T. QUINONES-DROZ
Rio Piedras, P.R.


Mutual Funds; A Youthful Superstar Named Vinik
ANALYSTS at Morningstar Inc., the mutual fund consulting firm in Chicago, are so dazzled by Jeff Vinik that they call him Amazin' Jeff.
At 32 years of age, Mr.
Vinik has a limited track record.
Yet his performance to date is undeniably stellar.
For the nearly two years that he managed Fidelity Investment's $657 million Contrafund, from the beginning of 1989 until Sept. 30, 1990, he produced an annualized return of 18.5 percent, nearly twice the 9.6 percent gain in Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index.
And since he took over the stewardship of Fidelity's $2.6 billion Growth-and-Income Fund on Oct. 1, 1990, the fund's net asset value has risen 33.3 percent, handily beating the S.&amp; P. 500's 24.5 percent rise over the same period, through the end of June.


A Band Out to Improve Its Luck
For all the best reasons, the Classical Band, New York's first large period-instrument ensemble, should have been an immediate hit.
Most of its 50 players were highly regarded for their work in other East Coast early-music groups.
Its first music director, the English harpsichordist and conductor Trevor Pinnock, was a bankable star whose involvement attracted a $150,000 start-up grant from Bristol-Myers and an 18-disk recording commitment from Deutsche Grammophon, all signed and sealed before a note was played.
But the two-year-old orchestra, which plays in the Mostly Mozart Festival at Avery Fisher Hall on Thursday, has had a difficult infancy, and for the last year, its players and its manager, Liviu Blumenthal, have been working feverishly to reorganize the group and outrun what they see as an almost unbroken streak of bad luck.


John McCormack as Film Star, Sort of
John McCormack, who lived from 1884 to 1945, is not quite the earliest great singer for whom we have a memento on film.
Fyodor Chaliapin (1873-1938) made a movie late in life, and I believe there is footage of Ernestine Schumann-Heink (1861-1936) singing in great old age.
But "Song o' My Heart," shot in 1929 and released the following year, must be the first sound film to record a great singer in his element, with extensive and representative musical selections.
As a film (written by Tom Barry and directed by Frank Borzage), it is very slight.
McCormack plays an Irish tenor named Sean (if there is a patronymic, I missed it) who has long since given up a promising career and is persuaded to return to it, pausing first to take under his wing the orphaned children of an old flame who had jilted him years ago.
The important point is that he also sings 14 songs, six of them in an (almost) uninterrupted recital sequence during Sean's triumphant return to New York.


Big Day for Giant Victory in the Hambletonian
Giant Victory, named in honor of the Giants winning the 1987 Super Bowl, captured the 66th edition of the Hambletonian, the most prestigious of all harness races, in a a county-fair atmosphere this afternoon at the Meadowlands.
Driven by Jack Moiseyev, Giant Victory pulled away with a sixteenth of a mile to go after racing mostly in the middle of the pack in the field of 10.
Capturing his third victory in seven starts this season, he covered the mile in 1:55 and paid $5.60 for $2 to win.


Sports of The Times; Cuba Proves a Winner; Therefore, Cuba Wins
THE father agreed that it was a happy coincidence that a man named Cuba should win the marathon, the first event of these Pan American Games.
When asked how long the family has had that name, he was glad to explain in Spanish:


Rebel With a Thousand Causes
FIEDLER ON THE ROOF
Essays on Literature and Jewish Identity By Leslie Fiedler. 184 pp.
Boston: David R. Godine. $19.95.


Environmental Additives
To the Editor:
Since when do corporations, let alone oil companies, request that the government tell them what they should produce? ("A Cleaner Fuel," Business Diary, July 14.) Who in the government do the executives of Arco expect to order them to produce the more expensive EC-X, "a new gasoline that cuts some pollutants by as much as a third" -- our "environment President?" Many people already spend upwards of 20 percent more for organic and/or pesticide-free foods and other products.
Why not allow the consumer to choose to pollute less by spending more?
Many people who would like to do something about air pollution may find this less painful than driving less.
If innovative products like this are never produced, how can we alter our behavior to factor in the cost of environmental degradation?
RAISSA S. LERNER  New York, July 21


Bridge
One of the minor advantages of being a bridge player is that it improves your chances of understanding the Monty Hall problem, which has caused a furor recently in this newspaper and elsewhere.
A rigid version of the game show, as you may recall, offers the contestant three doors, behind one of which is a million dollars.
He chooses Door No. 1, and the host, who knows where the money is, invariably shows him another door, behind which is nothing, and offers him a chance to switch his choice to the third door.
Should he take the offer? (It should be assumed that if Door No. 1 has the money, the host will open No. 2 or No. 3 randomly.)


Corrections
A report on June 23 about the marriage of Susan C. Flynn and Richard C. Carnes misstated the location of the ceremony.
The bride informed The Times on July 22 that it was the Roman Catholic Church of the Blessed Sacrament in Springfield Center, N.Y.


Jennie Arlin and Sam Braverman Wed
Jennifer Brewster Arlin, a daughter of the Rev. and Mrs.
Charles N. Arlin of Hillsdale, N.J., was married yesterday at Grace Episcopal Church in New York to Samuel Michael Braverman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Braverman of New York.
The Rev.
Brian A. Lathrop performed the ceremony.
The bride, who is 24 years and known as Jennie, is a law student at the College of William and Mary and a member of The Law Review.
She is keeping her name.
She graduated from Dartmouth College, as did her husband.
Her father is an Episcopal priest and a lieutenant colonel in the Army Reserve.
He is serving as a chaplain at Fort Lewis, Wash., until the end of the month.
The bride's mother is a teacher.


For a Baldwin Brother, Star Billing Is a Switch
IN the movie "Backdraft," William Baldwin plays Brian McCaffrey, who follows the lead of his older brother and becomes a Chicago firefighter.
It is a role to which Mr.
Baldwin can relate.
Like Brian, Mr.
Baldwin, who is 28 years old, pursued the same career as his older brother, the actor Alec Baldwin.
But while the McCaffrey brothers do not get along, Alec, 33, and William are close.


Results Plus
TENNIS Gilbert Upsets Edberg


The Real Issue In Seles Case
To the Sports Editor:
If Ira Berkow had any intention to do more than take potshots at Monica Seles ("Return of Seles, and Dog," The Times, July 19), he would have broached the real issue raised by the hubris: How much, if any, accountability do celebrities owe their public?
Does Seles really need to give any further explanation as to why she skipped Wimbledon?
She has no contract with the public to play for it and certainly no obligation to appease its curiosity as to her whereabouts.
J.
EDWARD KNIGHTS Newville, Pa.


The Great Alaska Debate
THE BEST-KEPT SECRET in the oil industry lies under a steel pipe, six inches in diameter, that pokes out of the tundra inside one of the world's last truly wild places.
Eight months of the year, the pipe is surrounded by the frozen chop of snow and blue ice that covers the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in northeast Alaska.
A desert, with less than 10 inches of annual precipitation, the flat land bordering the Beaufort Sea holds the imprint of a savage wind for most of the year: snowdrifts contorted and hardened, a landscape like paste from a blender.
In the summer, when the sun circles the horizon but never sets, the snow melts, wildflowers rise in the plain and great masses of caribou arrive to give birth to their young, seeking the coastal wind as refuge from swarms of mosquitoes.
Driven by biological imperative, the animal herds gorge themselves on grass and flowers, storing fuel for the long migration through the Brooks Range in mid-summer.


ONTO THE BOOKSHELF
These books can demonstrate to an anxious adolescent that he or she isn't "the only one," and, in classrooms where the word "faggot" is still used as an insult, they can show straight adolescents that homosexuality is an ordinary fact of life.
Characters in these novels contend with confusion, ignorance and prejudice.
In the context of a multicultural literature program, both straight and gay teen-agers can learn, over time, to appreciate difference in others.
NICK D'ALESSANDRO Brooklyn


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
GOLD MINERS' PICTURES  Fifty thousand gold miners in Brazil are depicted in a series of photographs by Sebastiao Salgado, on view through Sept. 14 at the Artists Market Gallery in Norwalk.
Working under harrowing conditions, the men dig the gold-laden clay out of deep pits, load it into sacks and carry it on their backs up crude ladders hundreds of feet to the top, where the clay is washed and the gold is extracted.
Each man makes around 60 trips a day.


Saratoga
To the Editor: I was disappointed that the article on Saratoga did not mention the Inn at Saratoga, which is directly across from the Holiday Inn.
It has an excellent dining room and the staff is most helpful.
The environment is restored Victorian and very comfortable.
KATHRYN COHEN Tonawanda, N.Y.


Save Bankers From Themselves by Regulation; Stop the Big Kill
To the Editor:
Your profile of President Bush's friend and policy adviser Thomas Ashley (July 19) began to develop a policy issue of profound significance to the future of our banking system and economy, but then you let Mr.
Ashley dismiss it with the words, "We aren't putting trusts back together, we're lifting 50-year-old restrictions that have strangled the industry."


Who Can Afford to Swap Income for Time?
To the Editor:
"Americans suffer from an overdose of work," writes Juliet B. Schor, associate professor of economics at Harvard, in "Americans Work Too Hard" (Op-Ed, July 25).
"Regardless of who they are or what they do, Americans spend more time at work than at any time since World War II."


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE SEARCH  By Naguib Mahfouz.
Edited by Magdi Wahba.
Translated by Mohamed Islam.
Doubleday, Cloth, $20; Paper, $8.


Speaking in Tongues
ENGLISH has become the international language for a number of industries, which comes as a great relief to many Americans, who as a group are notoriously monolingual.
But for those who still think it a good idea to learn foreign languages, several new personal-computer programs can help.
Somewhere in between flashcards and sophisticated language laboratories is Transparent Language ($95 plus $4 shipping from Transparent Language Inc., 9 Ash Street, P.O. Box 575, Hollis, N.H. 03049, telephone 800-752-1767).
The program works with standard I.B.M.
PC's equipped with at least 512 kilobytes of memory.
A hard disk, mouse and color monitor are not required, but they are recommended.
The Philosophy
Transparent Language's philosophy is that one can learn a language by reading the language, with simultaneous translation and explanation provided by computer.
The basic program comes with several examples of classic fiction, in French, German, Spanish and Latin.
Additional foreign language titles are available at extra charge.
Audio cassettes of the samples are also available to help a student with pronunciation.
One might load the text of a classic Spanish short story, "El Sombrero de Tres Picos" ("The Three-Cornered Hat"), by Pedro Antonio de Alarcon.
The story in Spanish appears in the screen's top half.
As the student moves the computer cursor across the text, an English translation of each word appears below.
If the word is part of a phrase or colloquialism, the entire phrase is translated in another window.
Another part of the screen provides grammatical descriptions of the word (for example, third-person predicate); others show the root word, connotations and notes.
Supplementary Transparent Language titles are $12.95 to $19.95.
Audio cassettes of readings are $7.95 to $9.95.
Schools get volume discounts.
For building pure vocabulary, another choice might be Vocabulearn CE, for Computer Enhanced ($59.95 for both I.B.M. PC and Apple Macintosh computers, from Penton Overseas Inc., 2091 Las Palmas Drive, Suite A, Carlsbad, Calif. 92009, telephone 800-748-5804).
It is essentially an automated flashcard system, but with a great deal more flexibility.
Titles include Spanish, French, Italian, German, Japanese, Hebrew and Russian, and there are three levels for each language.
Each package comes with audio cassettes that provide proper pronunciations of words and phrases.
We tried the Hypercard version for the Macintosh, which was simple to operate.
The program gives the user the option of selecting lists of words, including nouns, adjectives and adverbs, expressions, verbs or a mixture.
One can set the speed of the flashcards and whether the words are to be displayed first in English or the other language, or in a random mix.
Students can type answers and the computer will keep track of their progress.
Users can supplement the program's list with their own words.
Cameron Wong, a Penton spokesman, said the company was adding Windows versions of the languages, for $69.95 each, and that CD-ROM versions of Spanish and French would be added soon, for $99.
The CD-ROM products would include digitized voices instead of audio cassettes.


Shamir's 'Yes' Buoys Israelis, If Only Because It's a Change
Smadar Sananes, 25 years old and blessed with a smile that could cut through clouds, said she saw peace headed her way, even at the waterfront restaurant where she and a friend were eating sandwiches and enjoying the sultry Mediterranean breeze.
Her country's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, had announced that Israel would take part in a Middle East peace conference this fall, and although his was a conditional yes -- hinging on the thorny question of who would represent the Palestinians -- it was enough for Ms.
Sananes to decide that all was well with the world.


Slugger


Watching the Birdie
Eldrick (Tiger) Woods was learning to play out of sand traps when his contemporaries were playing in sandboxes.
Now 15 years old, Mr.
Woods last weekend became the youngest player ever to win the United States Junior Amateur golf championship.
The California high school sophomore, who is also the first black player ever to win the junior championship, may be the best adolescent golfer to come along since Bobby Jones won the Georgia State Amateur in 1944 at the age of 14.
Mr.
Woods began playing as a toddler, and shot a 48 over nine regulation holes at the age of 3.
He marks the progress of his career against that of Jack Nicklaus, whom he intends to supplant as the golf world's consensus all-time greatest.
He will get his shot at the reigning United States Amateur champion, 21-year-old Phil Mickelson, in a tournament beginning Aug. 20.
"I want to be the Michael Jordan of golf," said Mr.
Woods after his victory on Sunday.
"I'd like to be the best ever."


Kathryn Snyder Engaged to R. M. Lee
Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Snyder of Rochester have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kathryn Elisabeth Snyder, to Robert Matthew Lee, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Lee of Scarsdale, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Snyder, 29 years old, graduated from Nazareth College of Rochester.
She is a music therapist and the recreational director at Salem Hospital in Salem, Mass.
Her father, a composer, retired as a professor of music at the State University of New York at Brockport.
Her mother, Caroline Snyder, is a professor of English and literature at the Rochester Institute of Technology.


Incomplete Quotation
To the Editor:
According to your review of "The Science of Love" by Anthony Walsh (July 14), the author says: "Homosexuals are not looking for 'a man,' they are looking for a penis, which happens to be appended to a man." F. Gonzalez-Crussi quotes this with approval as an example of the book's "pithy aphoristic utterances." Surely The Times can find reviewers who are able to tell the difference between aphorism and invective.
JEREMIAH MCCARTHY  Brooklyn


Pio Yukwan Deng, Sudanese General, 43
Brig.
Gen.
Pio Yukwan Deng, a member of Sudan's ruling Revolutionary Command Council, died today, the official radio reported.
He was 43 years old.
The radio said he died of a heart attack at the military hospital in Khartoum.
It gave no other details.


Sunday Dinner; Salads With an Everything-But-the-Kitchen-Sink Touch
The definition of a salad has become so elastic in recent years that diners can never be sure what will arrive on the plate.
There are seafood salads, carpaccio salads, all variations on pasta salads, vegetable salads, game salads and more.
It's not even safe to assume that a salad will be cold.
Here are some restaurants that serve unusual and appetizing salads.
Gotham Bar and Grill
12 East 12th Street, (212) 620-4020 -- If stars were awarded for the food's altitude on the plate, Gotham Bar and Grill would have no serious rivals.
Alfred Portale, the I. M. Pei of contemporary American cooking, brings new meaning to the term haute cuisine with his skyscraper salads, towers of twirled pasta, high-rises of french fries and soaring desserts.


Commercial Property: Subleasing; Tenants Are Gaining Flexibility on Space
ONE-FIFTH of the available office space in Manhattan is not the landlords' to rent.
Instead, it is on the sublease market, offering an escape hatch for companies that are shrinking, some good deals for prospective tenants and a mixed blessing for owners, who may find themselves competing with deals in their own towers better than anything they can offer.
There are 12.15 million square feet being offered for sublease, according to the Edward S. Gordon Company.
Cushman &amp; Wakefield's figures show a sublease market of 12.85 million square feet.
The Julien J. Studley concern says there are 12.93 million square feet available to subtenants.


Dying Member of Panel on AIDS Wants Her Illness to Lift Stigma
Belinda Mason describes herself as a "hillbilly from Eastern Kentucky, a small-town journalist and reliable Tupperware party guest," and she has written President Bush a letter.
"In these days, which will be my last, my family has become my respite from the storm," wrote Ms.
Mason.
She is at home, so weak that she is "in my pajamas all the time," as she says.
She is dying of AIDS.


A la Carte: Tasty Taste
NOT all the innovative imaginative food being served in the Hamptons comes from restaurants.
Nor do all the path-blazing dishes served at parties originate in home kitchens.
Rather, an increasing number of tiny boutique takeouts and catering establishments are providing a good deal of the epicurean excitement.
Two of the newest, the Appetizing Store in Southampton and the Country Bazaar in Water Mill, are typical examples of the breed.


Dining in a New European-Style Hotel
THE newly opened Roslyn Claremont is a small, elegant, expensive European-style hotel with a dining room to match.
The Palm Room resembles a snug indoor garden with hanging plants, latticed walls, floral paintings and a palm-tree mural.
Despite the three-story atrium-style setting, the room is cozy and quiet conversation is possible.


Streetscapes: Washington Terrace; A Shadowy Owner On a Secret Street
IT'S a bit ragged, but Washington Terrace is still an enclave of serenity in the city.
But residents of the cluster of three-story houses on either side of this little private street off West 186th Street between Audubon and Amsterdam Avenues are angry.
They say that neighboring Yeshiva University is behind the shadowy owner of five properties on the terrace, which have been vacant eyesores for several years.
A Yeshiva spokesman says the university is not the owner, and the residents have been frustrated in identifying a responsible party -- so far.


FLASHCARD
ILLITERACY is declining, according to a Unesco study.
In 1990 the percentage of illiterates worldwide fell to 27 percent from 39 percent 20 years earlier and is projected to drop to 22 percent by the year 2000.
For the first time, the actual number of illiterates has also fallen, to 948 million from 950 million in 1985.


The N.A.A.C.P. Votes No
EVER since President Bush nominated Clarence Thomas on July 1 to replace Justice Thurgood Marshall on the Supreme Court, supporters and opponents of the appointment have been awaiting the reactions of the nation's civil rights groups.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and similar groups had been critical of Judge Thomas for nearly a decade.
The N.A.A.C.P. has been angered by his criticisms of race-based affirmative-action plans and by what it views as his failure to enforce civil rights laws while chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission during the Reagan and Bush presidencies.


10 Stubborn Plants That Bedevil Americans
EVERYONE who grows plants confronts weeds at one time or another.
Some weeds are pretty to look at and some are just plain nuisances.
Usually when weeds appear in someone's garden, the plants are frowned upon and the garden is relegated to an unkempt category.
Besides, weeds compete with desirable plants for soil moisture and nutrients.
Other gardeners are tolerant of weeds, however, and consider them nothing more than plants out of place.
After all, they admit, for every weed or unwanted plant there is someone in the world who likes it and covets it.


Replacing Broken Panes
REPLACE broken window glass promptly, even if it is only cracked.
Besides being dangerous, broken glass lets moisture penetrate window parts, fostering other problems.
And by letting air in, the broken glass constitutes a potential energy leak, which can mean higher utility bills.
The first step is to remove the broken pane.
Wear thick work gloves.
Place a cardboard box near the window.
Then wiggle the shards free and carefully put them in the box.
To avoid injury in case a piece of glass falls, work from the top of the window to the bottom.


Andrea D. McEvoy Is Wed
Andrea Dillon McEvoy, a daughter of Mrs.
Frank McEvoy of Essex, Conn., and the late Mr.
McEvoy, was married yesterday at St Cecilia's Roman Catholic Church in Stamford, Conn., to Edward Alexander Barosky Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barosky of Stamford.
The Revs.
Roger J. Watts and David W. Blanchfield officiated.
The bride, a graduate of Kenyon College, is studying for an M.B.A. at New York University.
The bridegroom is an assistant vice president at the Chemical Banking Corporation in New York.
He graduated from the University of Connecticut.


Sri Lankan Troops End Rebels' Jungle Siege
Government troops broke the rebel siege of a strategic army camp today, military officials said, completing a 25-day jungle offensive in which hundreds of soldiers and rebels were killed.
Almost immediately after the troops entered the Elephant Pass camp, helicopters landed to evacuate some of the 55 wounded soldiers, the officials said.
At least 18 were in serious condition.


Mutual Funds; Small Stocks Retain Room to Grow
SMALL-company stocks have rallied strongly so far this year.
While that is a hopeful sign, it is no indication that they are quite out of the woods yet.
In the 1960's and 1970's, small stocks beat their larger cousins, the general equity funds, by a margin of two or three percentage points each year.
But during the 80's, they fell way behind.
That reversed late last year and in the jubilant first quarter of 1991, small-stock funds gained 26 percent, compared with a 15 percent rise in all stock funds.
But in the second quarter's flat market, small stocks lost 1.5 percent compared with a 0.8 percent drop in all stock funds.


This Week: Tomatoes
If tomatoes have blossom-end rot (a brown, mushy area on the blossom end of the fruit), they haven't been getting enough water on a regular basis.
Adding a little phosphate to the soil may also help.
Mulch plants well and give the garden an inch of water a week.
Also pick off tomato hornworms, which have voracious appetites.
Thin fall crops.
Cabbage, broccoli and brussels sprouts need a good 18 inches to produce well.
Fertilize eggplants and tomato plants for continued harvest.
Fertilize chrysanthemums weekly until the buds show color.


Review/Dance; 'Epitasis,' 'Esa Mujer' and Eva Peron, by Eleo Pomare
Eleo Pomare made a quiet entrance in "Epitasis," presented on Thursday night by the Eleo Pomare Dance Company in the closing weekend of the Fiorello Festival at LaGuardia High School.
Dressed in a white hospital gown, Mr.
Pomare pushed a shopping cart heaped with rubbish across the stage, occasionally stopping his slow progress to beat the cart with a stick as if it were a horse.
In the group piece, set to music by John Adams, Mr.
Pomare wandered through a swirl of men and women who proceeded with their activities like isolated, hyperactive ants.
Just about every imaginable everyday type was represented here, and each was made believable by its portrayer.
But Mr.
Pomare stole the show in a telling portrait of a street person, a mad messiah intent on the particulars of his everyday life.


Songs, Stickers and Spanish: Libraries Reach Out to Children
FROM the look of local library walls and windows, children have been busy reading this summer.
Cutouts showing books read adorn many juvenile rooms in the county's libraries, and on even sunny days small heads can be seen hovering over colorful pages in well-stocked reading corners.
Families who have been trimming their own budgets have found solace in libraries this summer, said Judith Rovenger, the children's services consultant to the Westchester Library System.
"A lot of people are not going away or are doing less-expensive things," she said.
"We have record numbers of children who are reading. I guess it's an ill wind that blows some good."


The Manly Art Of Self-Delusion
WHEN I was small, Joe Louis was the Champ and Franklin D. Roosevelt was the President.
By the time I could read, they had both been hot-typed into media legend: The Brown Bomber was the role model for his race, humble, powerful and nonthreatening to whites, while F.D.R. was the bold aristocrat who used his power for the little people.
They both adored their wives.
We know better now.
Louis was psychologically disturbed, eventually institutionalized, perhaps because of the pressure of a double life.
He was an abuser of alcohol, drugs and women of all colors.
Roosevelt abused his power and cheated on his wife.
The false images were created for the supposed good of the country.
We needed historians to finally tell us the truth because journalists, mostly male and white, didn't want to jeopardize their access to the big league locker rooms.


Seeing 'Olympia' Afresh
Given the current highly charged climate about sexual imagery in the arts -- with critics on both right and left attacking art deemed dangerous to public morality -- it is probably inevitable that many viewers will be offended by Lee Friedlander's photographs of nudes, at the Museum of Modern Art through Oct. 8.
Some will criticize them as simply further entries in the long history of male artists depicting unclothed women, while others will object to the fact that a number of Mr.
Friedlander's photographs show the models' genitalia in explicit detail.
Mr.
Friedlander resolutely refuses to idealize the women he photographs.
On the contrary, he records their body hair, bruises, dirty feet and sagging flesh in sometimes excruciating detail.
To borrow a distinction made by the art historian Sir Kenneth Clark, Mr.
Friedlander's women are more naked than nude; the pictures show specific women's bodies, rather than some generalized ideal of womanhood.
Despite all this, these are challenging and ultimately thrilling pictures, tackling head-on a complex set of questions about what subjects should or should not be presented in photography, and about the role of formal innovation in the medium.


The World; 12 Years of Cold Peace on One of Israel's Borders
FOR three days last week, Foreign Minister David Levy of Israel moved through the labyrinthine streets of this ancient Middle Eastern capital, the Israeli flag fluttering from his limousine as he traveled between Egyptian ministries on a state visit.
But the sight stirred hardly a second glance.
Twelve years after Egypt and Israel signed their historic peace treaty, many Egyptians still share a cold, even hostile, indifference to Israel -- like neighbors who keep the blinds pulled because they find the family next door unpleasant and prefer to have nothing to do with them.


Pizza Taking On an International Flair
PIZZA has not been the same since California discovered goat cheese.
Not content to leave well enough alone, intrepid chefs are going ever further afield in the quest for novelty.
The latest wrinkle is pizza with international toppings.
Among the more bizarre selections are bratwurst and sauerkraut for German pizza and tuna melt for an American version.
Freed from the yoke of mozzarella and tomato, pizza has become a dumping ground for anything from sushi to kippered herring.
Pizza does lend itself to a wide variety of ingredients, but they should be chosen carefully.
Pesto, tapenade (a Provencal mixture of anchovies, garlic puree, capers and olives), grilled vegetables, sun-dried tomatoes, olive paste, prosciutto and cheeses like ricotta, fontina and Gorgonzola (in addition to the obvious mozzarella and goat cheese) are all good.
The rule is never to put anything on a pizza that takes longer than 15 minutes to cook.


Miss Sinon Wed To K. J. Cassidy
Jacqueline Mary Sinon and Kevin Joseph Cassidy were married yesterday at Our Lady of the Isle Roman Catholic Church in Shelter Island, L.I., by the Rev.
Christopher Cleary.
The bride, 28 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John W. Sinon of East Williston, L.I., and Shelter Island.
The bridegroom, 35, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph R. Cassidy of Chevy Chase, Md.


Campus Life: Middlebury; Dismissed Staff Given Options On Severance Pay
Following a heated re sponse on campus to the sudden dismissal of 17 Middlebury College employees in mid-May and the way it was carried out, the college has offered new options for severance compensation to more than a dozen staff members.
The dismissals, which the college said were for budgetary reasons, were planned by Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas, a Chicago-based outplacement firm hired by the college.


Drive Against Abortion Finds a Symbol: Wichita
Much like the tornadoes that Kansans curse but live with, a political windstorm has touched down on this prairie city and hurled it into the center of the bitter national feud over a woman's right to an abortion.
For nearly three weeks now, this city has become the most vivid symbol of an emboldened anti-abortion movement as members of Operation Rescue focus on the city's three abortion clinics, flinging themselves under cars, sitting by the hundreds at clinic doorways and blocking women from entering as they read them Scripture.


Ms. Boonjamalik Wed to David Lee
Jirakal Boonjamalik, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Vichai Boonjamalik of Yonkers, was married last evening to David Chul Kwon Lee, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Haeng Ung Lee of Little Rock, Ark.
Justice Ronald J. Aiello of State Supreme Court performed the ceremony at the New York Hilton.
Mrs.
Lee, 24 years old, graduated from Barnard College and is to enter the M.B.A. program at Columbia University next month.
Her father is an architect at Environetics International in New York.
Her mother, Paern Boonjamalik, owns the Cedars Rest Home in Selkirk, N.Y.


Campus Life: Wisconsin; African Professor Found Biased Against Blacks
A Federal agency has found that a visiting professor from Nigeria violated the civil rights of black University of Wisconsin undergraduates by holding them to higher academic standards than other students.
But it ruled that the many low grades he gave them should not be changed.
The Department of Education's Office of Civil Rights found that the professor, Umara Ahmed, had abused black students' rights in his African-language class.


24 Fugues Played Twice By One Pianist
In 1950, Dmitri Shostakovich, attending the Bicentennial Bach Competition in Leipzig, East Germany, heard a 26-year-old Soviet pianist perform Bach's 48 preludes and fugues, known as "The Well-Tempered Clavier." The pianist, Tatiana Nikolayeva, won first prize, got to know Shostakovich and shortly after the contest visited him frequently back in Moscow.
There, Shostakovich, obviously inspired by hearing the Bach, wrote a new prelude and fugue each day and would play it for her.
Finally, he gave her the manuscript from which to learn the pieces, and she played them for him.
Miss Nikolayeva recalled the circumstances in an interview in the British magazine Gramophone in March, saying: "When I played for him he said very little. . . . He would just say, 'the bass a bit longer, a little more pedal.' His coloristic understanding was great."


Survey Counts Rental Drivers
Seventeen percent of the population of the United States, or 32 million people, have rented a car in the last 12 months, according to a survey completed by the U.S.
Travel Data Center.
The center conducts a monthly survey in which 1,500 American adults are interviewed.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 4, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.95.) The ordeals of a female cop assigned to track down a Florida con man.
2
3
LADY BOSS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $5.95.) A woman schemes to get control of a movie studio.
3
6
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Guests from many parts of the world get together in a small Scottish town.
4
11
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
5
6
THE VOICE OF THE NIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.95.) A reprint of a 1980 novel about a shy boy and his evil best friend.
6
3
THE PRIZE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.50.) In 1066, a Saxon woman marries a Norman warrior.
7
5
DYING YOUNG, by Marti Leimbach. (Ivy, $5.95.) While devotedly caring for a man dying of leukemia, a woman has an affair with a stranger.
8
28
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) Chinese-American women and their mothers.
9
1
THE FIRST MAN IN ROME, by Colleen McCullough. (Avon, $6.95.) The rivalry of two men who want to become consul of the Roman Republic in 110 B.C.
10
2
TEXAS!
CHASE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.99.) The romance of a widower and an old friend who was involved in his wife's death.
11
1
THE ASSASSINI, by Thomas Gifford. (Bantam, $5.99.) A lawyer pursues the killer of his sister, a nun, and other critics of forces within the church.
12
7
DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $5.95.) Dirk Pitt tries to save America from an extremist.
13
42
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
14 *
1
SPY SINKER, by Len Deighton. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.95.) The adventures of a woman torn between her family and her duties as a spy.
15
3
ALWAYS AND FOREVER, by Cynthia Freeman. (Jove, $5.95.) When a woman's comfortable marriage turns sour, she flees it.
16 *
6
BREATH OF SCANDAL, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) The nightmare a woman suffered in a Southern town and how she gets even.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
11
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
6
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
3
3
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
4
89
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
5
404
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
6
4
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
7
20
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
8 *
10
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
9
44
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
10
50
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) The Arab-Israeli conflict over the past decade.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
33
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
2
53
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
1
THE FAT-BURNING WORKOUT, by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.95.) A program designed to trim the body and tone muscles.
4
10
RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1991 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
5
20
THE REVENGE OF THE BABY-SAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $7.95.) "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Football; On Giants, Outsiders Do Stand A Chance
When a pro football team wins the Super Bowl, as the Giants did in January, there are scarce opportunities for new players to win jobs the next season.
Despite that, when the Giants trim their roster to the 47-man limit three weeks from now, they will probably have 7 to 11 new players.
And some familiar faces will be gone.


Hotels Rent Out Cellular Phones
The concierge staff at the Ritz-Carlton, Washington and Ritz-Carlton, Pentagon City, Va., has a new service to offer: cellular phone rental.
Guests may rent the hand-held, 12-ounce phones for about $10 a day.
Local calls are about $1.50 a minute.
For long distance, standard A.T.&amp;T. charges apply.


Spending Your Dollars in Europe: Sweden; The Krona is Friendly, but Inflation and Taxes Aren't
While the dollar is stronger in Sweden than a year ago (worth 6.6 kronor vs. 5.9 last year), any gains are being wiped out by the 10.4 percent inflation rate and the new 25 percent value added tax on virtually all goods and services.
Business International, a business-research organization owned by The Economist magazine, reckons that Stockholm is the sixth most expensive city in the world. (Oslo and Helsinki are even closer to the top of the list, if that's any consolation.)
The Swedish tourism industry was dealt a severe blow with the introduction last year of the blanket V.A.T., which doubled the existing tax on hotels and restaurants and taxed transportation, including taxis, for the first time.
The psychological effect has been considerable.
One veteran Stockholm restaurateur says that even those who can afford it don't go out much anymore.
Eriks Fisk, a floating restaurant that was voted Sweden's best last year, was first to declare bankruptcy and go out of business, blaming the new tax and high interest rates.


Gregory Panno and Yvette Kalina Wed
Yvette Kalina, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Ivan Kalina of Port Jefferson, L.I., was married yesterday to Gregory John Panno, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Francis V. Panno of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
Deryk Moon performed the nondenominational ceremony at the United Methodist Church in St.
James, L.I.
Mrs.
Panno is a director of international sales service at Orion Pictures in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Boston University.
Her father is a pediatrician in Rocky Point, L.I., and an associate professor at the Stony Brook (L.I.) University Medical Hospital.
Her mother, Vera Kalina, is a real-estate broker at Century 21 in Stony Brook.


Fresh Air Fund Camping: Organized Chaos
It was eerily quiet at Camp Hidden Valley.
The grounds were empty and the humid air hung heavy.
Counselors savored the calm.
But it was not to last.
At 3:30 on this recent afternoon, a horn sounded, and suddenly 130 youngsters bounded out of their cabins from every direction.
Rest period was over.


One Day, Junior Got Too Big
TEN years ago this month, the International Business Machines Corporation introduced its first personal computer, changing the computer industry forever.
Almost overlooked at the time was the company chosen to provide key software for the machine, headed by a nerdy programmer young enough to be the son of many of the I.B.M. executives.
No one is overlooking the results of that decision today.
Seizing on that initial opportunity to provide the MS-DOS operating system for I.B.M. personal computers and the clones that followed, the Microsoft Corporation has grown into the world's largest software company, with revenues of $1.8 billion for the fiscal year ending in June.
Its reach expands into nearly every nook and cranny of the software business.


Noted With Pleasure
Passionate, Risky Writing
The craft of writing, as the novelist Frederick Busch reminds us, isn't a cool, cerebral enterprise but an exhausting, exhilarating pursuit.
His thoughts are in "Writers and Their Craft: Short Stories and Essays on the Narrative," edited by Nicholas Delbanco and Laurence Goldstein (Wayne State University, paper).


STRIKEOUTS AND PSYCH-OUTS
Understanding the links between thought and performance is a hot topic, and the field of sports psychology is rapidly expanding ("Strikeouts and Psych-Outs," by Loren Feldman, July 7).
Your article states that psychologists "focus on performance shortcomings"; however, the fact is that 50 percent of sports psychologists are clinically trained, and help athletes with such difficult problems as alcohol and drug abuse, eating disorders and career-transition issues.
The Mets' psychiatrist, Allan Lans, is quoted as saying, "The trouble with my business is there is no penicillin," giving the impression that performance problems like Mackey Sasser's inability to throw the ball back to the pitcher are extraordinarily difficult to treat.
In reality, performance problems are relatively straightforward.
Interventions based on techniques like goal-setting, relaxation training, visualization and self-talk are effective in helping about 80 percent of athletes.
SHANE MURPHY Sport Science and Medicine Division, United States Olympic Committee
Colorado Springs


For Summer's Heat, The Unusual Tang Of Unusual Fruit
I'd been drawn to Lee Reich's garden by visions of gooseberries, but it was red currants that stole my affections.
They hung from their long graceful branches like luminous red jewels, and when we ate them warm from the sun, they tasted somewhere between sweet cranberries and gin.
"This is just the common variety, Red Lake," said Dr.
Reich, a doctor of horticulture who makes his living as a garden writer and consultant.
"They're very easy to grow. You don't need to spray and the birds don't bother them."


Traffic Alert
53d Street will be closed between Eighth and 10th Avenues from 11 A.M to 7 P.M. today for the 53d Street Carnival.
Madison Avenue will be closed between 42d and 57th Streets from 11 A.M to 7 P.M. today for the Madison Avenue Street Fair.


Thailand
To the Editor: As Margo Kaufman points out (Travel, June 23), the Thais have invested considerable energy in the development of their tourism industry.
If Ms.
Kaufman was seeking a less structured holiday, however, she might have tried an expedition to Northeast Thailand.
A friend and I spent several days in January driving through Esarn, as the region is known in Thailand.
The people in this area are ethnically Lao and speak a language that is similar to but distinct from Thai.
Khonkaen, in the center of Esarn, is one of Thailand's largest cities, and although it is linked to Bangkok by daily air service and an adequate telephone system, an English speaker finds it difficult to communicate effectively.
The city serves as an excellent jumping-off point for further exploration of the Northeast; the Mekong River and the border with Laos are three hours to the north and the archeological site at Ban Chiang is nearby.
As guided tours are generally not available, such excursions require significant individual initiative; a rental car is quite useful.
We visited Phimai, an Angkor-period Khmer temple complex, and found not a tour bus in sight and only a marginally comprehensible English brochure to guide us through the nearly deserted runs.
JONATHAN T. McGRAIN New York, N.Y.


Opinion Split On Proposals For Chemical Cleanups
WHEN the State Department of Environmental Protection recently proposed regulations that would make the state the first in the nation to establish comprehensive standards for cleaning up chemically contaminated sites, the department asked for reactions from people and businesses concerned with environmental law.
The department sent out 900 queries and received 105 replies, many of them praising the request for their opinions, but some criticizing the proposal.


Political Memo; New Prize in Districting Tug-of-War
The battle over New York City's district lines is done, but the fighting it spawned continues.
The same players -- black and Hispanic politicians -- are maneuvering over the same issue: expanding their share of political power.
But now they have their eyes on the bigger prize of the 1993 mayoral election.
The complicated wrangling boils down to an effort by some Hispanic groups to squeeze greater political concessions from Mayor David N. Dinkins as the price of political peace, and countermoves by Mr.
Dinkins's allies to hold together the coalition that helped elect him.


Fearing Bad Harvest, Gorbachev Moves to Spur Imports of the Basics
Concerned about the dearth of consumer goods as another worrisome harvest approaches, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev issued an executive order tonight restricting luxury imports and easing customs duties to spur imports of food, medicine and other badly needed basics.
In effect, the Soviet leader was testing his improving relations with the republics by attempting a device -- the executive order -- that was widely ignored a year ago when the economy plummeted and he was deep in a power-sharing fight with the republics.


Cone Pounded As Chaos Grows
The window of opportunity had been opened a crack for two weeks and thrown wide open for days.
The Mets stood and stared at it, lacking the imagination, courage and tools to figure out a way in.
Yesterday, the Pirates won, the Mets lost, and the window banged shut with force and perhaps forever.


All Over Cuba, Beisbol Is the Tie That Binds
For all of the contrasting cultural and religious currents here, there is a simple connecting thread.
It is baseball.
"Baseball in Cuba is the passion," said Gilberto Dihigo, a columnist for a Havana newspaper.
"Baseball is the the love, the madness."


Open to Monitor Elements Closely
This has been one long, hot summer for everyone.
But it has been especially bad for tennis players, and the heat can be deadly in an intense cauldron of a tournament like the United States Open, which starts in three weeks.
So Dr.
IRVING GLICK , the tournament's head physician, will be using some new instruments this year -- but not for examining players.


Carnival Dishes Up Caribbean Food, Music and Festivities


It's Hot? So What? Archer Wins by 2
When the temperature rises, as it did today, George Archer's chances of winning a golf tournament melt.
He is a self-proclaimed cool-weather player, a contender in April and September and a pretender in July and August.
But perhaps Archer is growing more resilient with age.
Despite the heat and humidity he had to contend with all week at the $450,000 Northville Classic, the 51-year-old Archer won this duel in the sun for the second straight year, firing a three-under-par 69 today for a two-shot victory over Jim Colbert and Larry Laoretti.


Trade Pact Called Unlikely Soon
A continued stalemate between the United States and Western Europe over agricultural subsidies is making the completion of a new global trade agreement increasingly unlikely this year, Administration officials and private trade experts say.
Indeed, the inability of negotiators to agree on new cuts in trade barriers could make it hard for the Bush Administration to win Congressional approval for an agreement before next year's elections.


Over 500 Are Rescued as Greek Cruise Ship Sinks Off South African Coast
More than 500 passengers and crew members were saved today in a tense rescue operation when a Greek cruise ship sank in the storm-tossed Indian Ocean barely two miles off the rugged South African coast.
The Oceanos, a 7,554-ton cruise liner, was steaming on a weekend voyage from East London to Durban when the ship lost power late Saturday night and went adrift off the so-called Wild Coast, a desolate, treacherous stretch of windswept, ragged coastline that is part of the nominally independent tribal homeland of Transkei.


U.S. Finds Lax Regulation of Alaska Oil Pipeline
The Trans-Alaska Pipeline, the main artery for 25 percent of the nation's domestic oil supply, has been so poorly regulated that the oil companies in Alaska have essentially been allowed to police themselves, a new Government report has concluded.
Also, more than two years after the 11-million-gallon spill from the Exxon Valdez fouled 1,100 miles of Alaskan shoreline, the companies that control the oil operation have still not shown that they are prepared to clean up a major spill, said the report, by the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress.


Loan for Columbia Gas
The Manufacturers Hanover Corporation said Friday that it would lend $75 million to Columbia Gas Systems Inc. while additional interim fianancing was being arranged.
Manufacturers Hanover also said it would provide about $20 milliion for Columbia Gas's transmission operation.
Columbia Gas, one of the nation's largest suppliers of natural gas, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on Wednesday.
The $75 million loan is intended to provide for Columbia Gas's first six weeks' of operation under bankruptcy law.
The loan must be by approved the bankruptcy court and the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Julian H. Handler, Editor, 69
Julian H. Handler, an editor and publisher of food-industry newsletters and trade journals, died on Friday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 69 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr. Handler died of a stroke after heart surgery, a family friend, Morton Stark, said.


Con Ed Is Told To Shift Goal To Efficiency
For close to 20 years, the clean, cheap power generated by Canada's dams has been the solution whenever New York's utilities have looked for more electricity.
Now, pressure is mounting on the state and the Consolidated Edison Company to put their long-term investments into something even cleaner and possibly cheaper: conservation.
Mayor David N. Dinkins plans to ask New York State today to delay signing a new contract that would provide Con Ed with large amounts of hydroelectricity from Canada from 1995 to 2016.
His administration says that the $6.1 billion that the contract would cost Con Ed would be better spent on subsidies to businesses and homeowners to adopt a variety of energy-saving devices.
Investing in conservation and buying electricity from small independent generators, city officials say, would be cheaper and possibly more secure.


Hailstorm Injuries 43 in Tent At Outdoor Concert in Utah
A tent collapsed today during a hailstorm that sent a crowd of 1,500 fleeing from a concert in a tent, the authorities said.
Forty-three people were injured, none seriously.
The storm struck during a concert by a singing group, The Lettermen, and the Utah Symphony.
The tent began to sag under the weight of the hail, and officials stopped the concert about 35 minutes after it started and told the 1,500 spectators to leave, said Rusty Martin, a spokesman for Snowbird resort.
The 10,300-square-foot tent, which covers most of the outdoor plaza where the concert was being performed, collapsed moments after the evacuation was ordered, Mr.
Martin said.
Observers at nearby Alta ski resort measured 2 inches of hail brought by the storm, said Brenda Graham, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service in Salt Late City.


Anna Covici Wed To William Propp
Anna Covici, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Pascal Covici of Dallas, was married yesterday in La Jolla, Calif., to William Henry Propp, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Propp of New York.
Rabbi Ron Herstik performed the ceremony at the home of Portia Wadsworth, a friend of the couple.
The bride, 33 years old, is a librarian at the University of San Diego and a freelance systems engineer.
She graduated from Stanford University and received a master's degree in library and information science from the University of Texas at Austin.
Her father is the E. A. Lilly Professor of English at Southern Methodist University in Dallas.
Her mother, Joan Covici, is a public-school teacher in Dallas.


Doctor's Criticism in '84 Case Strains Hospitals' Bond
When he agreed to judge the medical care administered to a young woman who met an untimely death seven years ago, Dr.
Ira R. Hoffman says he felt he was simply fulfilling his medical duty.
After all, peer review of doctors has long been a fundamental check and balance in medicine.
Now, it seems, that bit of extracurricular service may have come back to haunt him.
For Dr.
Hoffman finds himself in the middle of what he and some of his colleagues see as a bizarre attempt at vengeance by the medical center where the patient was treated.


Out to the Ball Game And Back Into Prison
Michael Michell, a 40-year-old Montana excapee, was in Seattle last Wednesday night when he decided to take in a baseball game.
As he stood at a souvenir stand at the Kingdome, the home of the Seattle Mariners, an old acquaintance was right behind him: the warden of the Montana State Prison.
"Out of 27,000 people, you run into a guy that you know," the warden, Jack McCormick, later told The Montana Standard here.
"I was a smidgen surprised."
Mr.
McCormick, vacationing in Seattle, was at the game with his son and was browsing for souvenirs when he saw Mr.
Michell, a convicted killer who was three months from a parole hearing when he escaped from a pre-release center in Billings on Jan. 19.
"He was real surprised to see mee," the warden said.
"He knew who I was I said, 'Hi Mike, how are you doing?' "
On Mr.
McCormick's authority, police officers at the stadium arrested Mr.
Michell, who now faces 2 to 10 years for escape.


CRANSTON CENSURE URGED BY COUNSEL
Expressing frustration over the Senate Ethics Committee's delays in completing its inquiry on five Senators, a member of the panel today made public a special counsel's report that called for Senator Alan Cranston of California to be censured by the full Senate for "reprehensible" conduct.
The committee member, Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, said he released the confidential final report, delivered to panel members more than a month ago, in the hope of forcing the committee to act.
Unusual Breach by Helms
Although the committee issued its preliminary findings on the five Senators in February, the document released today carries far more detail about their conduct in intervening with Federal regulators to help a major contributor, Charles H. Keating Jr., who owned a troubled savings and loan institution based in Irvine, Calif.
And for the first time, the report lays out guidelines for lawmakers to follow in the future in doing favors for political supporters.


Caroline Sussman Weds
Caroline Ruth Sussman, daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Sussman of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday in South Salem, N.Y., to David Carl Turner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Turner of Weston, Mass.
Rabbi David Greenberg performed the ceremony at Le Chateau.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from Connecticut College and is studying for a master's degree in ecology at the University of Virginia, where she is a teaching assistant.
The bridegroom, 26, graduated from Connecticut College and received an M.B.A. degree from Boston University this spring.


Carolyn Joan Rich Is Wed
Carolyn Joan Rich, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Willis Rich of Kailua, Hawaii, was married yesterday in Little Compton, R.I., to Jeffrey Charles Weinstock, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren Weinstock of Jericho, L.I.
Judge Paul Suttel of Rhode Island Family Court in Providence performed the ceremony at the Stone House Inn.
The bride, 25 years old, is an assistant trust officer of the Security Trust Company in Washington.
She graduated from Boston University.
Mr.
Weinstock, 28, is an associate with the Washington law firm of McKenna &amp; Cuneo.
He graduated from Vassar College and received a law degree from Boston University.


Shari Joy Weitzen Is Wed
Shari Joy Weitzen, the daughter of Leonard Weitzen of East Windsor, N.J., and the late Shirley Weitzen, was married in West Orange, N.J., yesterday to Ron Wainshal, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Yael Wainshal of Miami.
Rabbi George Schlesigner performed the ceremony at Mayfair Farms. .
The bride, 27 years old, is a property underwriter at Prudential Reinsurance in Newark.
She is a graduate of Bates College.
The bridegroom, 27, is an associate at the Transportation Group, an investment bank in New York specializing in the aerospace industry.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Chicago.


Knights' Owner Has Grand Plans
The World League of American Football teams are no longer going to be a collection of National Football League wannabees.
Instead, promises BOB SILLERMAN , owner of the New York/New Jersey Knights, they will have a distinct N.F.L. flavor, populated with players from the established league.
"I think people thought of us as a developmental league, but the new plan is going to be to move players between the leagues," he said, adding that about a third of the players from the W.L.A.F. are attending N.F.L. training camps this summer.


Bridge
Teams led by Zia Mahmood of Manhattan and Clifford Russell of Miami Beach faced each other in the final of the Spingold Knockout Team Championship here today at the conclusion of the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals.
At stake is a prestigious title and the right to compete in playoffs to determine the 1992 United States team for the world championships.
At the midpoint of the 64-deal match, Zia led Russell by 25 imps.


Jersey City Just Loves Playing Ball
Don't look now, but the sports capital of America just may be Jersey City.
What's that, you say?
There hasn't been a team from that place across the Hudson River from Wall Street since the demise of the Jersey City Giants in the 1950's.


Dragons Take Over New York Harbor, but Only for a Day


Dean Burch, Presidential Adviser And F.C.C. Chairman, Dies at 63
Dean Burch, chairman of the Federal Communications Commission from 1969 to 1974 and of the Republican National Committee in 1964 and 1965, died yesterday at his home in Potomac, Md.
He was 63 years old.
Mr. Burch died of bladder cancer, said his son, Dean A. Burch.


CHRONICLE
PRINCE CHARLES's rating as a polo player has been lowered by the sport's ruling body.
In its annual review of players' ratings, the Hurlingham Polo Association in England made a unanimous decision to lower the Prince's handicap from four to three.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week: &lt;biAG Services, one million shares (650,000 by the company).
Jesup, Josephthal &amp; Co.


New Curb On Banks Expected
Restrictions on bank loans for real estate projects, which were removed in 1982, are likely to be reimposed, a number of senators and the head of the nation's bank insurance fund say.
The curbs would be added even as commercial real estate values continue to decline, more banks totter near insolvency and once-wealthy developers face bankruptcy.
Members of the Senate Banking Committee decided on Friday to give regulators nine more months to devise new restrictions on real estate lending, after which Congress is likely to be asked to put the rules into law.
The House had already passed similar legislation.


Stylish Home Magazines Fight Ragged Times
After more than a century of urging homeowners to freshen up the old look, House Beautiful magazine is taking its own advice to heart.
In a move aimed at choosy advertisers, the 105-year-old Hearst publication known for its traditional look is throwing open the windows, letting in the sunlight and going for a cooler, more contemporary appearance.


Henry L. Shenier, 89, Patent Lawyer, Is Dead
Henry L. Shenier, who practiced patent law for 60 years, died on Friday at St.
John's Hospital in Elmhurst, Queens.
He was 89 years old and lived in Forest Hills, Queens.
Mr. Shenier's son, Richard, said he died of complications after a stroke.


Black Woman Held in Attack Linked to Bias
A 24-year-old black woman has been arrested in Brooklyn in what the police said was a bias incident involving an assault on a 32-year-old white woman over their children's use of a sprinkler in a Canarsie park.
The incident, which was among 11 bias-related incidents in Canarsie in recent months, occurred at 1:30 P.M. on July 19 in a park at Remson Avenue and Glenwood Road as the two mothers were lining up at a sprinkler to cool off.


Bush's Domestic Record Is Assailed by Mitchell
The Senate Democratic leader challenged President Bush today on issues from civil rights to unemployment compensation to health care, and said Congress should pass bills it believed in even if Mr.
Bush vetoed them.
The leader, Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, said it was not true, as Mr.
Bush said at a news conference on Friday, that the Democrats in Congress were "frustratingly negative on everything."


Broadcasting Group Gets $1 Million Grant
The Educational Broadcasting Corporation will receive a $1 million grant from the National Endowment for the Arts, the largest single award in the third round of grants announced by the endowment this year.
More than 1,100 grants totaling $31.6 million were announced last week by John E. Frohnmayer, the chairman of the endowment, in Washington.
They range from $3,000 for subsidized chamber and jazz concerts to the $1 million awarded to the Educational Broadcasting Corporation for production of its "Great Performances" series for 1992-93.


Craig J. Davidson, 37, Gay-Rights Advocate
Craig J. Davidson, a community advocate and founding executive director of the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 37 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications from AIDS, said his companion, Michael Valentini.


Quotation of the Day
"We are ready to attend the peace conference. We say to President Bush: Yes, we regard this as an historical opportunity and we will do our best not to drop it because we want to establish real peace." -- Bassam Abu Sharif, a spokesman for the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, Yassir Arafat.  [ A1:6. ]


Conde Nast to Increase Circulation of Allure
Allure, the Conde Nast monthly that made its debut six months ago amid slumps in magazine advertising and circulation, will raise its circulation rate base in January by 75 percent, to 350,000 from 200,000.
Conde Nast's effort to introduce the women's beauty magazine during a recession was met with skepticism by many in the advertising and publishing industries.
But the company insisted that if Allure attracted readers, advertising would follow.


3d Sales-Tax Budget Is Voted in Hartford; Shutdown Is Averted
The General Assembly moved to end Connecticut's five-week-old fiscal crisis tonight by adopting, for the third time, a budget based on an expanded sales tax, ending yet another attempt by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. to win an income tax.
With a shutdown of state government threatened if a temporary spending measure expired at midnight without a budget in place, the House of Representatives gave final approval to the sales-tax plan in a 77-to-70 vote at 11:25 P.M.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  First for Faxon Brad Faxon ended seven years of struggle yesterday, defeating Chip Beck in a playoff at the Buick Open in Grand Blanc, Mich., for his first victory on the PGA Tour.
Faxon is the 10th first-time winner this year and the fifth straight.
Faxon, who turned 31 Thursday, and Beck, the defending champion, both finished at 17-under 271 after 72 holes at the Warwick Hills Golf and Country Club.
The playoff began on the 10th hole, a 401-yard par-4.
Beck's 8-iron approach landed on the far left side of the green, 60 feet from the pin.
His first putt stopped six feet from the cup and his attempt to save par slid two feet past the hole.
Faxon hit a 9-iron from the rough to the center of the green, 2-putted from about 25 feet, and thrust his arms to the sky in celebration.(AP) Richard Wins Playoff: Deb Richard rolled in a 15-foot birdie putt on the first playoff hole, from virtually the same spot she missed a potential winning putt moments before, to beat Jane Geddes and win the L.P.G.A.
Phar-Mor tournament in Vienna, Ohio.
Geddes and Richard both shot final rounds of four-under 68 to tie at 207.
Geddes just missed a 20-foot birdie putt on the playoff hole. (AP)


Penny M. Stern, Physician, Weds
Dr.
Penny M. Stern, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Stern of Flushing, Queens, was married yesterday to Dr.
Paul A. Zarowin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edwin Zarowin of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Ephraim Kanarfogel performed the ceremony at the Glen Island Casino in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Dr.
Stern, who is keeping her name, is the medical editor of "Family Practice Update," a weekly program on Lifetime Medical Television, a cable network in Astoria, Queens.
She graduated from Queens College of the City University of New York and received an M.D. degree from Yeshiva University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of the Edwill Woodworking Corporation in New York.


When Grandmother Is the Mother, Until Birth
In a small Midwestern city, a 42-year-old woman, a school librarian, is pregnant with her own grandchildren.
The woman, Arlette Schweitzer of Aberdeen, S.D., is carrying twins produced from her daughter's eggs, fertilized in a laboratory dish with sperm from her daughter's husband.
The embryos that resulted were implanted in


Washington Heights Journal; Dominican Club Offers Home in a Foreign Land
On the walls hang a Dominican flag and an American flag.
Merengue blasts through the room.
Children run wildly around wooden chairs and tables.
Mothers sit in semicircles, trading recipes and news of sales.
There is gossip and political argument and dominoes, all mixed in with talk of Spanish soap operas and homemade medicine.
On the dance floor, couples swing.
Above all there is baseball.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 5


Serbs Refuse to Negotiate in Croatia
A European Community peace mission to Yugoslavia foundered today when the Serbian republic refused to go along with a proposal for a Community-monitored cease-fire between rebel Serbs and military and police forces in the republic of Croatia.
The mission's failure portends an escalation of fighting in Croatia, where about 250 people have died since Croatia and Slovenia, the federation's wealthiest and most Western-leaning republics, declared their independence on June 25.


Residents Seek Inquiry Into Police Shooting
A sheriff's deputy fatally shot a teen-ager at a public housing project over the weekend, setting off a melee and demands by residents for an inquiry.
A spokesman for the sheriff's department said the incident began early Saturday in the Ramona Gardens project in Boyle Heights when someone tossed a bottle at a patrol car and the two deputies inside got out to investigate.
The spokesman, Depute Bill Linnemeyer, said that 19-year-old Arturo Jimenez grabbed one deputy's flashlights and knocked him unconscious with it and that the other deputy then shot and killed the teen-ager.
The deputies' names were withheld.
More than 300 residents stormed into the streets after the shooting, throwing bottles and rocks at the deputies, said Deputy Linnemeyer.
About 50 deputies and 25 city police officers were called in to control the crowd.
One deputy suffered a concussion and six people were arrested, he said.
Several witnesses said that the youth who was killed had argued with the deputies but had not struck anyone.
"Everybody was yelling to the cop: 'He doesn't have a gun! He doesn't have a gun! Don't shoot!' " said Angelica Gutierrez, 18.
"But he shot him anyway."
A bystander, Salvador Salas, recorded the shooting on videotape.
The tape was confiscated as evidence but was to be returned after a copy was made, Sgt.
Ronald Spears said today.
Some residents of the housing project said today that they wanted to meet with Sheriff Sherman Block of Los Angeles County to discuss the shooting.
"There is great anger on both sides," said the Rev.
Juan Santillan.


Orit Schwartz Is Bride Of Jan S. Wimpfheimer
Orit Schwartz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Moshe I. Schwartz of Willowbrook, S.I., was married yesterday to Jan S. Wimpfheimer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael C. Wimpfheimer of Riverdale, the Bronx.
Rabbi Mordechai Willig performed the ceremony at the Sheraton Meadowlands in East Rutherford, N.J.
The bride, 21 years old, graduated from Barnard College.
She is to begin studies at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine later this month.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Brooklyn.


2 Officers Are Shot; Suspect Is Wounded
Two New York City police officers were grazed by gunfire in a shootout last evening with a burglary suspect in Long Island City, Queens.
One of the officers then shot and seriously wounded the suspect, the police said.
The suspect, identified as Orlando Rodriguez, 22 years old, wrested a gun from one of the officers and shot both of them, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.
The officer whose gun was not taken then shot the suspect in the chest, the sergeant said.


If Bush Offers Good Target, Democrats' Aim Is Shaky
Congressional Democrats agree that President Bush could be vulnerable on domestic policy matters.
But they cannot agree on how to capitalize on that vulnerability or just how potent such an approach might be.
By the time Congress left town this weekend for its August recess, leaders in both the House and the Senate had spent weeks trying to muscle through bills on transportation, abortion rights, crime, civil rights and unemployment, all of which President Bush has threatened to veto.


INSIDE
Rallying Behind Seized Bank It is under indictment and its doors have been shut in nearly 70 countries, but a Muslim-owned bank has plenty of defenders in Pakistan.
Page D1 Yugoslavia Peace Bid Fails


Some U.S. Advisers Fault the Salvador Army
After taking part in Washington's decade-long effort to train and reform the Salvadoran Army, many American military advisers have left here angry over the Salvadorans' resistance to change, according to a number of the advisers, who say they feel manipulated and betrayed by the Salvadoran officers.
In various interviews and in one case sworn testimony, the advisers described Salvadoran officers as being mainly interested in amassing wealth and power, as willing to deprive troops of equipment to further the officers' own ends and as allowing the regular killing or mistreatment of prisoners.


Partygoer, 17, Killed in Bronx; 2 Are Wounded
To its Bronx neighbors, the house at 852 East 213th Street was trouble, the scene of rowdy outdoor parties every weekend where reggae music filled the air until dawn and drugs were sold openly.
Early yesterday, the trouble erupted in gunfire, leaving a 17-year-old youth dead and two brothers wounded.


Cheney Backs Gay Civilians As Employees of Pentagon
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney today defended the right of homosexuals to hold civilian jobs at the Pentagon, saying that as long as they fulfilled their professional responsibilities their private lives were their own business.
Homosexuality is grounds for dismissal from the uniformed military services.
Mr.
Cheney noted that he had inherited this policy, and he did not vigorously defend it.
He said he did not find the policy "fundamentally wrong" given the unique aspects of military life.


All Parties Are Said to Agree to Cyprus Talks
The Greek Government said today that all four parties to the 17-year-old dispute over the divided territory of Cyprus had accepted President Bush's invitation to take part in a conference in Washington next month aimed at resolving the deadlock.
The American initiative has drawn protests from left-wing opposition parties in Greece and Cyprus, which describe it as part of an effort by Washington to impose its will on Greece and Turkey and subsequently in the adjacent Balkan region.
The Greek Government today dismissed the criticism as "rhetoric" and said substantive progress has already been registered over most points dividing Greeks and Turks over Cyprus.


In Golf, Integration Is More Than 9-Iron Away
The sociological shock surrounding last year's P.G.A.
Championship at Shoal Creek carried more force than any off-course event in golf's history, but even that impact hasn't shaken the game from its inherently leisurely pace.
As golf has settled back into its own tempo, the true significance of the protests that forced the country club outside Birmingham, Ala., to accept a black member has become difficult to measure.
While the sanctuary of privilege that all-white private clubs long enjoyed has come under more critical scrutiny than ever before, minority groups, and particularly black people, are still far outside golf's mainstream.


Coslet's Game Tapes Hold A Macabre Performance
A good look at his defense was the main thing that Coach Bruce Coslet wanted to get Saturday night when the Jets opened their exhibition season with a game against the Philadelphia Eagles in Giants Stadium.
What he's going to get when he plays the game back on his video cassette recorder is "Nightmare on Paterson Plank Road."
With Philadelphia quarterback Randall Cunningham slashing and shreading the Jets' defense, the Eagles built leads of 7-3 and 17-3 after the first and second periods, respectively, then coasted to a 24-10 victory.


Spouse Visits For Inmates With HIV
In a major policy reversal intended to encourage thousands of prisoners to have themselves tested for AIDS, New York State will allow inmates who test positive for the AIDS virus, HIV, to participate in a program allowing them to have overnight visits with their spouses.
Under longstanding state rules that New York has successfully defended against a legal challenge, any prisoner who is known to be HIV-positive is automatically barred from the visits, which take place in private trailers on prison grounds and are officially known as the Family Reunion Program.


Well, the Way We See It, Mr. Mayor . . .
The doors of City Hall will be thrown open to the public at 9:30 A.M. today for Mayor David N. Dinkins's first "Meet the Mayor Day," but only about 70 people will get through to discuss their ideas for solving New York's problems with Mr.
Dinkins, administration officials said yesterday.
The Mayor invited residents to drop in -- with proposals for solving the city's fiscal troubles in hand -- during a televised address last Tuesday.
As of Friday afternoon, about 100 people had stopped by City Hall to inquire about seeing the Mayor, and 200 more had made telephone inquiries, said Anabel Franceschini, a spokeswoman for the Mayor.


Brazil Stuns U.S. Women in Basketball
The 42-game winning streak by the United States women's basketball team in major world competition came to an end today when Brazil stunned the Americans, 87-84, in the Pan American Games.
The United States led by 14-3 and 26-8 early, but the Brazilians worked themselves back into the game behind their legendary backcourt gunners, Hortencia Marcari and Maria Paula da Silva.


U.S. Sales May Not Push Up Rates
The Treasury's auctions this week of $38 billion of new notes and bonds are a reminder that a record deficit projected at $282 billion requires record borrowings.
But the fact that the Treasury is borrowing more than ever does not necessarily mean that it is putting such a strain on financial markets that interest rates must rise.
In fact, a closer look at the Government's finances shows that as fast as the Treasury pulls money from the financial system with one hand, the other hand is returning most of the money, almost as quickly.


Bus Driver Shoots Armed Hijacker in New Jersey
A gunman wearing a wig tried to hijack a Greyhound bus with 43 passengers bound from New York to Atlantic City yesterday, but was shot and critically wounded by the driver in a struggle after the two spilled from the moving bus onto a busy parkway in New Jersey.
As the struggle ended in gunfire and panic gripped riders aboard the unattended bus, a passenger leaped for the wheel and brought the vehicle safely to a halt on the Garden State Parkway just south of Union, N.J., 15 miles west of New York.


Books of The Times; Father Knows Best, But Not Always Enough
The Bookmaker's Daughter A Memory Unbound  By Shirley Abbott  290 pages.
Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.
The father bittersweetly recollected in Shirley Abbott's haunting memoir, "The Bookmaker's Daughter," is Alfred Bemont Abbott.
He was known as Hat from his days "as a boy on the make" in Hot Springs, Ark., where he had worked delivering headgear for a shop called the Hatterie.


The Yale Review Wins a Reprieve: a New Life
A year after Yale University said it would close The Yale Review, the school's venerable literary quarterly, the president of Yale announced today that money had been found to revive it.
He named J. D. McClatchy, a prize-winning poet, to be its new editor.
The statement from the university president, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., comes after a bitter and public struggle to save the quarterly by many literary figures and alumni, along with a more private debate over the direction the quarterly should take.


Amex Starting A Late Session
The American Stock Exchange will begin after-hours trading today.
The exchange said on Friday that the session will be from 4.15 to 5 P.M.
Orders to buy and sell stock will be executed based on the closing prices of the day's regular trading period.


Vintage Jerseys, Today's Prices
By going back to a time when helmets looked like tank commanders' gear, the National Football League anticipates an even brighter sales future for its endorsed products, like jackets, shirts and equipment.
The league's annual retail sales have boomed to $1.5 billion.
Remember the Duluth Eskimos or the Canton Bulldogs?
Their old jerseys are available now in something the league calls Throwbacks, the N.F.L.
Vintage Collection.
Want something more modern?
How about a Y. A. TITTLE -style jersey from the '61 Giants?
Or caps from the original American Football League teams?


Economic Calendar
Listed below are this week's scheduled release dates for major economic indicators.
Monday  Auto Sales . . .
July


P.L.O. SPOKESMAN SAYS PALESTINIANS ARE READY TO TALK
A spokesman for the Palestine Liberation Organization said today that the Palestinians were ready to attend the Middle East peace conference proposed by the United States and that no obstacle was "big enough" to prevent this.
"We are ready to attend the peace conference," Bassam Abu Sharif, a spokesman for the P.L.O.
Chairman, Yasir Arafat, told a group of American reporters.
"We say to President Bush: Yes, we regard this as a historic opportunity and we will do our best not to drop it because we want to establish real peace. And we will do all that we can, all our best, to help Mr. Baker and the President make the convocation of that peace conference."


World Economies


Military Has New Strategic Goal In Cleanup of Vast Toxic Waste
In one of the most important early dividends of the end of the cold war, the military industry has begun an environmental cleanup program that may well become one of the biggest engineering projects ever undertaken.
The program has evolved almost totally unknown to the American public, despite its monumental scope and anticipated cost.
Representing nothing less than a new strategic goal for the military, it is aimed at restoring the environment and reducing pollution at thousands of military and other Government military-industrial installations in the United States and abroad that have been contaminated with untold amounts of toxic substances.


A Hot Agency's Survivors Have Found a New Home
THE remaining top executive of a hot young advertising agency, who watched as her colleagues stunned Madison Avenue by abandoning marketing to write for the movies, is joining a New York communications firm.
Coincidentally, her new employer has ties to Hollywood.
Jane Cavalier, president of Buckley DeCerchio Cavalier, New York, will become president of advertising at Frankfurt Gips Balkind, taking her agency's employees and accounts with her.
She had been running Buckley DeCerchio since April, when Bryan Buckley and Tom DeCerchio, the co-chairmen, and Frank Todaro, executive vice president and creative director, unexpectedly announced that they were moving to California to become screenwriters.


CHRONICLE
PAMELA HARRIMAN wants to do her autobiography.
The idea is being put before New York publishers with the help of MORTON L. JANKLOW, her agent.
There is no outline yet, Mr.
Janklow said.
The book would be written by CHRISTOPHER OGDEN, a former London bureau chief for Time magazine who is now Time's diplomatic correspondent.


Stylish Home Magazines Fight Ragged Times
After more than a century of urging homeowners to freshen up the old look, House Beautiful magazine is taking its own advice to heart.
In a move aimed at choosy advertisers, the 105-year-old Hearst publication known for its traditional look is throwing open the windows, letting in the sunlight and going for a cooler, more contemporary appearance.


Topics of The Times; Careers at Risk
Trustees at the City University of New York have declared a financial emergency, paving the way for the dismantling of programs and the dismissal of faculty and staff at two colleges.
Their action was prompted by an unfortunate impasse between the state and the city over funding for two-year degree programs.
Albany has traditionally paid for a variety of two-year or associate degree programs at CUNY and the State University of New York.
But last year, the state passed on to the city operating costs for such programs at New York City Technical College and John Jay College.
The city reluctantly picked up the $23 million tab for one year.


Con Ed Is Told To Shift Goal To Efficiency
For close to 20 years, the clean, cheap power generated by Canada's dams has been the solution whenever New York's utilities have looked for more electricity.
Now, pressure is mounting on the state and the Consolidated Edison Company to put their long-term investments into something even cleaner and possibly cheaper: conservation.
Mayor David N. Dinkins plans to ask New York State today to delay signing a new contract that would provide Con Ed with large amounts of hydroelectricity from Canada from 1995 to 2016.
His administration says that the $6.1 billion that the contract would cost Con Ed would be better spent on subsidies to businesses and homeowners to adopt a variety of energy-saving devices.
Investing in conservation and buying electricity from small independent generators, city officials say, would be cheaper and possibly more secure.


Review/Dance; America: Love It, Leave It but Surely Perform to It
Put 10 experimental choreographers together on a single evening and call it "Megadance." That's the way things used to be at the Serious Fun festival at Lincoln Center, until Egodance became a more likely, if informal, title for a sampler program with a drastically uneven quality.
This year, the producers cut the "Megadance" bill to four companies.
On Friday night at Alice Tully Hall, Ann Carlson, Doug Elkins, Charles Moulton and Elizabeth Streb all presented premieres commissioned by the festival, which closed on Saturday night with the same program.
To say these choreographers are representative of American dance would hardly be true.
What they share is some form of unease about American culture.


Coach Robinson 50 Years On
In a few weeks, EDDIE ROBINSON will celebrate 50 years as football coach at Grambling, where he has tried to give his players a view of America larger than what might be expected at a college in rural Louisiana.
"When I started out, there wasn't but one field of study, elementary education," Robinson, who is 72 years old, said recently.
"Now, the three most popular majors are criminal justice, computer science and business administration."


A Load Lifted, D'Amato Campaigns With Friends
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said yesterday that the burden of a Senate ethics inquiry into his conduct was "like carrying a 200-pound backpack." Now, with the inquiry over, he lightened up for a day of emotional homecoming on Long Island and the unofficial start of his re-election campaign in Little Italy.
After a news conference in Little Italy in Manhattan yesterday, Mr.
D'Amato feasted on tortellini at a sidewalk restaurant table in a lunch "with my two strongest supporters, Ed Koch and mama." Reporters and photographers clustered around the former Mayor, Mr.
D'Amato and his mother, Antoinette, while passers-by squeezed in for autographs on notepads, a magazine cover and a matchbook.


Geraldine Daly and Steven Leder Wed
Geraldine Veronica Daly, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Daly of Aberdeen, N.J., was married in Columbia, Md., yesterday to Steven Ellis Leder, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Irwin Leder of Kensington, Md.
The Rev.
Joseph Barr, a Roman Catholic priest, and Cantor Judy Porecki officiated at Oakland Manor.
The bride, 35 years old, is a vice president and the director of marketing for the Legg Mason Wood Walker securities brokerage in Baltimore.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Richmond and received an M.B.A. degree from Loyola College.
Her father, who is retired, was a foreign exchange officer at the European-American Bank in New York.


John Field Dies at 69; English Ballet Director
John Field, a former artistic director of the Sadler's Wells Theater Ballet who was long associated with the Royal Ballet, died Saturday.
He was 69 years old.
The Times of London reported that he had had cancer.


Some Final Ideas From Martha Graham
An excerpt from a dance that Martha Graham was choreographing before her death on April 1 is to be presented Oct. 8 to 20 during the Martha Graham Dance Company season at City Center.
Miss Graham had begun the dance, called "The Eyes of the Goddess," under a commission from the Spain '92 Foundation for the celebration of the quincentenary of Columbus's first voyage to America.
The 14-minute excerpt is to be danced to music composed by Carlos Surinach, with sets by Marisol.
Miss Graham designed the costumes, working on color schemes and fabrics with Linda Hodes, who directs the company with Ron Protas.
Miss Graham often turned to costume design when experiencing difficulties creating dances.


Eight Is Enough, Cry Pirates As They Put an End to Skid
John Smiley pitched a five-hitter, and a throwing error by shortstop Ozzie Smith in the sixth inning allowed the winning run to score as Pittsburgh ended an eight-game losing streak with a 2-1 victory today over St.
Louis.
The losing streak was the longest since 1985 for Pittsburgh, whose National League East lead had shrunk to four and a half games over St.
Louis before today.
It also averted a four-game sweep by the Cardinals.


What City Council Did in Budget Negotiations
To the Editor:
In "City Council Failed Miserably to Make a Difference on Budget" (letter, July 26), Gene Russianoff and Christopher Meyer of the New York Public Interest Research Group offer an incorrect and distorted view of New York City's budget negotiations and undermine their organization's credibility.


Engineer Says Stanford Officials Sought to Inflate Quake Damage
A Congressional subcommittee is investigating a claim by an engineer at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center that he was dismissed for refusing to increase his estimate of earthquake damage, The San Jose Mercury News reported today.
The engineer, Tim Axe, 33 years old, claims that some of his supervisors saw the Oct. 17, 1989, earthquake, which caused substantial damage in the San Francisco and San Jose area, as an opportunity to get money from the Department of Energy for repairs or remodeling that otherwise would not get done, the newspaper said.


Japan's New Finance Official Plots an Independent Course
When Tadao Chino won a scholarship to study economics at Stanford University during Japan's dark postwar years, he leapt at the chance.
"The United States was the model of success that Japan had to learn from," he recalled.
Now Mr.
Chino, who is 57 years old, takes a far different view of the country he once idolized.
He is the newly appointed Vice Minister of Finance for international affairs, which makes him the top financial policy maker for the world's largest creditor nation, and he promises to chart a course that is defiantly independent from the United States.


Review/Television; Putting the 'Wild' in 'Wild West'
In these multi-cultural times, it may not come as unadulterated praise to credit someone with defining America's vision of the Old West, but "Frederic Remington: The Truth of Other Days" illuminates the artist's achievement without subjecting it to a test for political correctness.
Setting Remington's paintings and sculptures against his own words, crisply delivered by Ned Beatty, the hourlong "American Masters" documentary, tonight at 9 on Channel 13, shows and tells how the Easterner helped create a Western myth that has not yet lost its power.
Although Gregory Peck's narration seems on the point of expiring with every slow breath, the dramatic depictions of cowboys and Indians, cavalrymen and horses make a spirited hour.
Hundreds of them appeared in magazines that were just beginning to find a mass audience in the second half of the 19th century, a success that may have led some critics to shrug off Remington as a mere illustrator.
No attempt is made in the program to establish his place in American art; the emphasis is on the message of his work, which is presented as a kind of rudimentary Darwinism.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Aug. 4, 1991:  MONDAY Baxter Black Hills  General Mtrs Jefferson Pilot Lockheed Corp Source Cap Inc


Question Box
All-Star Game Homer
Q.
Aside from pitchers, among all the other major league players who have hit home runs in an All-Star Game, which player hit the fewest during the regular season that same year?
A.
For the record, no pitcher has belted any of the 130 homers hit in All-Star Games.
For the record, no player can ever top catcher Mickey Owen's achievement of hitting his only home run for an entire season in an All-Star Game.
It happened at the Polo Grounds in New York in 1942, not far from the Brooklyn site of Owen's infamous passed ball on an apparent game-ending strikeout in the World Series the year before, a gaffe that led to disaster for the Dodgers.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-7
Palestinians will attend the meeting aimed at peace in the Middle East, a spokesman for the Palestinian Liberation Organization said.
He added that no obstacle was "big enough" to prevent their attendance.
Page A1
The Cabinet in Israel gave approval to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's conditional agreement to attend the peace conference.
Sixteen ministers backed the decision and three voted against Mr.
Shamir.
A7
Russian literature is being ignored six years after glasnost let loose a torrent of suppressed books and forbidden themes.
The thirst for the taboo has slaked, and once-popular literary journals are flagging.
A1
The dearth of Soviet consumer goods spurred President Gorbachev to issue an executive order restricting luxury imports and easing customs duties to encourage imports of food and other basics.
A6
A peace mission to Yugoslavia failed when Serbia refused to go along with a plan for a European Community-monitored cease-fire between rebel Serbs and the military and police in Croatia.
A6
A Greek cruise ship sank off Africa.
More than 500 people were saved in the tense rescue operation after the luxury liner Oceanos went adrift barely two miles off the rugged South African coast.
A3
Acharnai Journal: Tempest- tossed go home to Greece A4
Cameroon has virtually shut down because of a general strike that began in June.
The strike was called by opposition leaders, who sense vulnerability in the Government and hope to bring about change.
A3
Eighty children and seven adults die in Zimbabwe bus wreck A2
The Salvadoran Army has frustrated American military advisers taking part in a decade-long training and reform program.
The advisers are angry over the Salvadorans' resistance to change.
A4 NATIONAL A8-11
A huge environmental cleanup plan has been initiated by the military industry.
But some say the program, which represents nothing less than a new strategic goal, could result in a costly failure.
A1 A member of the Senate ethics panel, expressing frustration over the group's delay into the inquiry on five Senators, made public a special counsel's report that called for Senator Alan Cranston to be censured.
A1
A rough-edged Democratic Senator, Tom Harkin of Iowa, is testing the waters for a Presidential campaign.
He says Democrats should be proud again and that they do not need to start sounding like Republicans.
A1
Democrats' attack on President Bush should focus on his vulnerabilities on domestic issues, party leaders agree.
But they cannot agree on how to capitalize on that vulnerability or how potent the approach might be.
A9 Mitchell assails Bush for poor domestic performance A9
A woman who will give birth to twins is the first person in the United States to be pregnant with her own grandchildren.
The woman, a South Dakota librarian, will be a surrogate mother to her daughter's babies.
A1
Ranchers who pay to use public lands for grazing their cattle are being criticized because the cost is much less than on private land.
Critics say that the policy is a subsidy that costs taxpayers millions a year.
A8
The major oil pipeline in Alaska, which carries 25 percent of the nation's domestic oil supply, has been so poorly regulated that oil companies have essentially been allowed to police themselves, a report found.
A8
Engineer says Stanford official sought to inflate quake damage A11 REGIONAL B1-5
Connecticut's Senate passed a budget based on an expanded sales tax after finally determining that there were not enough votes to support a budget with an income tax.
Aides to Governor Weicker criticized the plan.
A1
The battle over the redistricting plan in New York City is over, but the same players -- black and Hispanic politicians -- are fighting over the same issues, with an eye on a bigger prize: the 1993 mayoral election.
B3
Well, the way we see it, Mr. Mayor B3
A program to conserve electricity would serve New York City better than continuing to buy cheap power produced by Canada's dams, the Dinkins administration has decided.
B1
Prisoners with the AIDS virus in New York will be allowed, for the first time, to participate in the program allowing overnight visits from spouses.
The policy change is aimed at encouraging AIDS testing.
B1
A gunman who tried to hijack a bus with 43 passengers bound from New York to Atlantic City was shot by the driver in a struggle after the two spilled from the moving bus onto a busy parkway in New Jersey.
B1 A shootout at a house in the Bronx left a 17-year-old youth dead and two brothers wounded, one of them critically.
To neighbors, the house was trouble, a place with loud parties where drugs were sold openly.
B3
An arrest in a Canarsie bias attack was made.
A 24-year-old black woman was held on charges involving an assault on 32-year-old white woman over their children's use of a sprinkler in a park.
B4
A doctor who aided in an inquiry into the medical care of a young woman who died seven years ago believes he is in the middle of a bizarre attempt at vengeance from the medical center where she was treated.
B1
Senator D'Amato said the inquiry by the Senate ethics panel was "like carrying a 200-pound backpack." With the inquiry over, the Long Island Democrat staged the unofficial start of his re-election campaign.
B2
Washington Heights Journal: Dominican club feels like home B3
Consumer chief fights 50% rate rise for Blue Cross B4
A school camp owned by students B5 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Sports C1-8
Baseball: Mets drop 5th straight; Cone is pounded C5
Yanks lose again to Tigers C5
Pirates snap eight-game slide C4
Column: Araton on Harrelson C5
Features: Sidelines C2
Question Box C7
Football: Giants set for first exam C1
Jet defense has a nightmarish game C2
Golf: Integration more than 9-iron away C1
One black member who isn't in honorary status C6
Archer wins 2d straight on Long Island C6
Horse Racing: Cordero thrives again at Saratoga C6
Outdoors: Salmon fishing in Quebec C5
Pan American Games: Baseball a unifying force for Cuba C3
Castro salutes U.S. flag and kayaker C3
Shocking loss for U.S. women's basketball team C3
Tennis: Capriati knocks Seles from No. 1 spot C3 Obituaries B8
Dean Burch, presidential adviser and F.C.C. chairman rts/Entertainment
Part of a Martha Graham work, the dance she was choreographing before her death on April 1, is to be presented in October during the Martha Graham Dance company season at City Center in Manhattan.
C9
"101 Dalmations" is a surprise hit C9
The Yale Review to be revived C9
Music: Tributes to Mozart at Tanglewood C9
Dance: Serious Fun festival C10
Word and Image:"The Bookmaker's Daughter," by Shirley Abbott C12
Frederic Remington's work C12 Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A12
Report cards from the Mayor
America's fighting women
Retreat on timely notice
Topics: Surrounding the Slorc


Stylish Home Magazines Fight Ragged Times
After more than a century of urging homeowners to freshen up the old look, House Beautiful magazine is taking its own advice to heart.
In a move aimed at choosy advertisers, the 105-year-old Hearst publication known for its traditional look is throwing open the windows, letting in the sunlight and going for a cooler, more contemporary appearance.


Metro Matters; Political Interests Racial and Ethnic, Then and Now
William Kapelman and Donald J. Sullivan of the Bronx served in the State Legislature and later became judges.
Then both loyal veterans of the regular Democratic organization went to their final rewards: They were nominated to the State Supreme Court.
But what were customarily lifetime jobs abruptly ended in 1983 at a judicial nominating convention controlled by Stanley M. Friedman, the Bronx Democratic leader.
The two jurists -- one Jewish, the other of Irish heritage -- were dumped in favor of a black city employee and a Hispanic state official.


Abroad at Home; Defining The Issue
Arthur Jones, 50 years old, has been a janitor at the local electronics plant for the last 15 years.
When the plant closes, he applies for a janitor's job at a tool company.
He has good references, praising his honesty and hard work, but he doesn't get the job.
The company requires a high school diploma, and he didn't finish school.
That is the kind of job qualification that President Bush insists businesses must be allowed to impose under a new civil rights bill.
He objects to a bill by Senator John C. Danforth, Republican of Missouri, that opens to challenge qualifications unnecessary to perform a particular job.


Con Ed Is Told To Shift Goal To Efficiency
For close to 20 years, the clean, cheap power generated by Canada's dams has been the solution whenever New York's utilities have looked for more electricity.
Now, pressure is mounting on the state and the Consolidated Edison Company to put their long-term investments into something even cleaner and possibly cheaper: conservation.
Mayor David N. Dinkins plans to ask New York State today to delay signing a new contract that would provide Con Ed with large amounts of hydroelectricity from Canada from 1995 to 2016.
His administration says that the $6.1 billion that the contract would cost Con Ed would be better spent on subsidies to businesses and homeowners to adopt a variety of energy-saving devices.
Investing in conservation and buying electricity from small independent generators, city officials say, would be cheaper and possibly more secure.


The Mayor Offers a Report Card
The most melodramatic part of Mayor David Dinkins's new program to cope with the city's fiscal crisis will play out today, when he sits down "face to face, one on one" with aggrieved New Yorkers.
But the most promising part of his program is his pledge of personal accountability.
He says he'll make monthly reports about his progress.
Good.
That gives the public a solid way to judge City Hall, and the Mayor a way to judge himself.
The Mayor's first chance to deliver on his promise is a month away.
He cannot flesh out his whole agenda by then.
But he can at least fill in some of the blanks.


Ms. Price Weds Steven I. Frenkel
Lynne Maris Price, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Arnold N. Price of Jamaica, Queens, was married yesterday in Great Neck, L.I., to Steven Ira Frenkel, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Frenkel of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi Leonard Small and Cantor Paul Zim performed the ceremony at the Great Neck Synagogue.
The bride, 22 years old, graduated summa cum laude from Queens College of the City University of New York, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree from the Bank Street College of Education this spring.
She is to start work as an elementary teacher at the Long Ridge School in Stamford, Conn., in September.
Her father is a judge of New York City Civil Court in Kew Gardens, Queens.


Adam Beren Wed To Miss Ginsburg
Ellen Ilene Ginsburg, a daughter of Mrs.
Jerome J. Ginsburg of Kings Point, L.I., and the late Mr.
Ginsburg, was married last evening at Temple Emanuel in Great Neck, L.I., to Adam E. Beren, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Beren of Wichita, Kan.
Rabbis Robert S. Widom and Abraham Mann officiated.
Mrs.
Beren, 26 years old, was until recently an analyst at Alan Patricof Associates, a venture capital concern in New York.
She is to begin studies for a master's degree in management at Northwestern University in the fall.
She is a graduate of Bryn Mawr College.
Her mother, Barbara Ginsburg, is the executive vice president of QTV Communications in Garden City, L.I.
Her father was the president and chief executive of Gemco National, a holding company in West Chester, Pa., for makers of head wear and gloves.


Selling Information Services Is Hard Test for 'Baby Bells'
The regional Bell telephone companies, armed with a court decision allowing them to provide information services, are poised to get their biggest taste of freedom since the breakup of A.T.&amp; T. seven years ago.
But will they be able to put that freedom to good use?
Analysts are skeptical, noting that the telephone companies still behave like regulated utilities and have shown little marketing shrewdness or entrepreneurial creativity.
In the short term, some analysts contend, the telephone companies may well experience a drag on earnings as they learn the way.


Ms. Zeltser Weds Leonard Berman  Lori Zeltser, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Melvin Zeltser of Silver Spring, Md., was married yesterday in Washington to Leonard Berman, a son of Dr. and Mrs. Lawrence Berman of Wyckoff, N.J. Rabbi Jacob Bieler officiated at the Grand Hyatt.   Ms. Zeltser, 23 years old, is keeping her name. She is a doctoral student in biology at Rockefeller University. She graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University. Her father is a manager of aviation systems development at the Mitre Corporation in McLean, Va. Her mother, Helene Zeltser, is a social worker at the Grand Park Dialysis Center in Washington.


Saved by Camp, Ex-Camper Saves It
Cornell Manning, the head counselor of the Lawrenceville School Camp, sees a lot of himself in the campers here, children from Harlem like Brother Nature and the Kelly twins.
They remind him that the camp took him out of a poor city neighborhood, not just for summers in the country but for an education in the elite prep school that runs the camp.
And they remind him why he worked so hard to bring the camp back to life after it closed five years ago.


Let's Have Some Truth On Lottery Revenues
To the Editor:
In "Use Lottery Revenues for Local Schools of the Ticket Buyers" (letter, July 19), Paul Feiner, a Westchester County Legislator, asks New York State lawmakers "to give local school districts a certain percentage from lottery tickets purchased at stores in their districts."


Gloria L. Korman Weds J. B. Tener in Princeton
Gloria Lerner Korman and Jeffrey Booth Tener, labor relations specialists in New Jersey, were married yesterday at their home in Princeton.
Judge John J. Harper of New Jersey Superior Court performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Korman, 53 years old, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Vassar College, she is a mediator for the New Jersey Public Employment Relations Commission in Trenton.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Lerner.


Pakistan Rallies Behind B.C.C.I.
Badr-ud-din Khan, the No. 2 executive of the scandal-ravaged Bank of Credit and Commerce International in Pakistan, gently twists the silver ring on his left hand, contemplating what has become of his career.
The band is stamped with the stylized letters "B.A." "I was proud of working at Bank of America," said Mr.
Khan, 52 years old, who left the big American bank in 1989, after 20 years in its Pakistan division, to join a very different sort of financial institution, B.C.C.I.
"Of course my wife now wonders why I made the move."


Senate AIDS Vote Was Political, Not Medical; Let Us Both Be Tested
To the Editor:
As a practicing clinical anesthesiologist for the last 30 years, and despite the utmost care and precaution, I have been exposed in my daily work to every secretion that exists in the human body.
I have been spattered with blood.
I have been inadvertently punctured by needles that have previously entered a patient's body.
I have had my bare hands down the throats of individuals whose histories I knew nothing about when living or dying was a matter of seconds.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes; Little Rock newspaper War May Be Heading for a Truce
WHEN the Gannett Company bought The Arkansas Gazette in Little Rock for $60 million in 1986, the popular wisdom within the industry was that Gannett would make short work of the rival Arkansas Democrat, which was smaller and locally owned.
But it has not turned out that way.


America's Fighting Women
For years now, Americans have become accustomed to seeing women in more and more new roles.
That surely explains why the 35,000 American women serving in the Persian Gulf war attracted so much attention without causing any big surprise.
If there's one thing to be learned from female astronauts, police officers and firefighters, it's that guts and competence have no gender.
Senator William Roth of Delaware had it exactly right, then, when he said last week, "We are here to talk not about whether we are to have women pilots flying combat missions, but whether we want the best pilots flying combat missions." Mr.
Roth was a principal sponsor of an amendment to the military budget bill overturning a 43-year-old law prohibiting women from flying warplanes in combat.
The amendment won the day, as did similar legislation in the House last month.


Sure, It Won't Count But a Lot Is at Stake
The Giants finished preparations today for their exhibition season opener Monday night against the Buffalo Bills, the team they beat by a point in January in Super Bowl XXV.
Now comes question time.


Cordero Commands Spotlight at Saratoga
In a town that becomes a home of the performing arts every summer, with Liza Minnelli and the Philadelphia Orchestra leading the parade of stars, no performer is having a better run on the Saratoga stage this summer than "Poppy," the senior jockey in town, Angel Cordero Jr.
He is now 48 years old; he has been riding for 31 of those years, and sometime this year he will win a race for the 7,000th time.


Offer by Chiquita Is Rejected
Chiquita Brands International Inc., the Cincinnati-based producer of fresh and prepared foods, said last week that the Doskocil Companies, a meat producer based in Hutchinson, Kan., had rejected Chiquita's third acquisition proposal.
Chiquita said it planned no further talks.
Terms of Chiquita's latest offer have not been disclosed.


Market Place; Scanning the Sky Over Mexico's Parade
In struggling to see the future of the stock market in Mexico, investors abroad have faced an unusual quandry: not only has the market's trajectory been steadily upward, its pace has quickened.
For those who turn to the closed-end funds that invest in Mexican stocks, their steady ascent raises questions about how long the dizzying growth can be sustained.
So far, there are few signs of a pause.
After grabbing attention with its generally strong performances in 1988, 1989 and 1990, for example, the 10-year-old Mexico Fund, managed by a Mexico City investment firm, has jumped an additional 78 percent so far this year.
And after sputtering debuts in the second half of last year, two New York-based funds that invest in Mexican stocks have hit stride.


A Range War of Words On Grazing in the West
Tired and sore from tending the cattle, hauling water and mending fences, Arthur Lyman, a fifth-generation cowman, bristles at the signs and stickers placed along the road that declare: "Welfare rancher."
"It really burns my hide," said Mr.
Lyman, a 40-year-old rancher in the Escalante River Valley, who works a second job.
"I work like a danged fool from sunrise to dark. And I'm still pretty much in a poverty situation."


Japan May Delay Buying U.S. Military Planes
In what may be the start of a new dispute between Tokyo and Washington over military technology, Japanese officials say they may be forced to delay or cancel plans to buy a fleet of American-made surveillance aircraft.
The purchase of the Airborne Early Warning and Control System, or Awacs, planes has drawn considerable political attention on Capitol Hill -- for reasons of trade as much as national security.
Earlier this year, 70 Representatives and Senators pressed the Bush Administration to get Japan to buy a large fleet of the aircraft, which would cost billions of dollars.


'Reader's Catalog' Sees Revolution Pass It By
When Jason Epstein, the editorial director of Random House, set up his own company to publish "The Reader's Catalog" almost two years ago, he said the publication would "revolutionize the book business."
But while the catalogue has survived, it has made scant impact, and the revolution in book-selling appears to be taking place elsewhere.


Sampras Returns to Form 3 Weeks Before the Open
In three weeks, the nonstop madness of the United States Open will begin its two-week run.
Today, a long way from Flushing Meadows, Pete Sampras showed he is apparently ready for it.
Sampras, the 19-year-old defending Open champion, gave every indication he is peaking at the perfect moment, defeating Brad Gilbert, 6-2, 6-7, 6-3, to win the Volvo of Los Angeles tennis tournament at U.C.L.A.
It was Sampras's first title since he captured the Open last year.


Crooked Stick's Black Member Isn't in Honorary Role
Although there has been no furor this summer, Crooked Stick Golf Club, site of the P.G.A.
Championship that starts Thursday, and Shoal Creek Country Club, site of the P.G.A. last year, have one important thing in common: each club knew it had to recruit its first black member before the tournament could go on.
In the case of Shoal Creek, outside of Birmingham, Ala., the choice was 67-year-old Louis Willie, president of Booker T. Washington Insurance Company.
He had also been the first black in the Birmingham Kiwanis Club, as well as in two dining groups, the Downtown Club and the Club.


Clare Tully Weds Richard Podolsky
Clare Tully, a lawyer in New York, and Dr.
Richard Podolsky, an ornithologist and visiting scientist at the Charles Darwin Research Station in the Galapagos Islands, were married yesterday at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Rabbis Meyer Leifer and Yidel Stein performed the ceremony.
The bride, 32 years old, is a lawyer in the business affairs department of NBC.
She graduated from Brandeis University and received a law degree from the University of Michigan.
She is keeping her name.
Ms.
Tully is the daughter of Evelyn Rota of Davis, Calif., a writer, and Frank Tully of Salt Lake City, a retired automotive engineer.


Consumer Chief Fights Big Rate Rise for Blue Cross
New York City's Consumer Affairs Commissioner urged the State Insurance Department yesterday to reject a proposed 50 percent rate increase for the state's largest health insurer.
The Commissioner, Mark Green, asserted that the increase for policyholders at Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield was "overreaching and unjustified" and that it would force many policyholders in the metropolitan area to go without coverage.
The increase affects 400,000 policyholders, though the Commissioner and the company differ over how many of them would be hit by the full 50 percent rate rise.


Untimely Retreat on Timely Notice
Congress has dangerously weakened its own supervision of covert action.
Secret efforts to subvert or supply foreign governments are best controlled when Congress is notified of such operations before they are carried out.
Prior notice assures prior scrutiny not only by the House and Senate Intelligence Oversight Committees but also by busy executive-branch officials.
But bowing to White House pressure, House and Senate conferees have left a loophole in new rules they accepted last week.
The rules allow the President in exceptional circumstances to notify Congress "within a few days"
after
the start of a covert operation.
Past administrations have found insidious ways of making such exceptions the rule.
That weakens the two pillars of representative government -- executive accountability and Congressional responsibility.


Monica Levy Is Married To Joshua Seth Freeman
Monica Levy, daughter of Lise Liepmann and Matthys P. Levy, both of New York, was married yesterday in New York to Joshua Seth Freeman, a son of Arlene Freeman-Botter of New York and the late Alex Freeman.
Rabbi Miriam Shapiro performed the ceremony at 202 East 77th Street.
Ms.
Levy, 34 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a choreographer whose works have been performed by modern dance groups.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Purchase.
Mr.
Freeman, 30, is a conductor and composer.
He graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in conducting from Carnegie Mellon University.


Topics of The Times; Surrounding the Slorc -- Slowly
Cynics, hear this.
The world's governments have not forgotten the nightmare still going on in Myanmar, formerly called Burma.
Last week, the European Community urged a worldwide arms embargo against the ruling State Law and Order Restoration Council, known as Slorc.
Just days earlier, the Bush Administration at last responded to the urgings of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan and others and began implementing economic sanctions authorized by Congress in 1990.


Without Strictures of the Past Soviet Literature Languishes
After breaking free at last from the choke-hold of Communism, Russian literature finds itself gagging on a surfeit of oxygen.
Stacks of Solzhenitsyn sit unsold in streetside kiosks.
The thick literary journals so recently devoured by millions founder for lack of paper and new themes.
Writers who shaped their art struggling against the old order, or serving it, find themselves without an anchor.


Money Talks, but It's Often a Tongue-Twister
Once upon a time, there were sporting events whose names defined a season: the Bing Crosby Pro-Am or the Orange Bowl, for instance.
Then money got tight.
Hello, A.T.&amp; T. Pebble Beach National Pro-Am, and the Federal Express Orange Bowl.


Bulletproof Barrier Not Foolproof
A 16-year-old clerk was wounded yesterday morning when a gunman managed to reach over a bulletproof barrier in a Harlem grocery and fire three shots in a failed robbery attempt, the police said.
Two men, one carrying a pistol, entered the N.T.M.
Grocery and Tobacco Shop at 279 Lenox Avenue, at 124th Street, and demanded money at 5:25 A.M., the police said.
Ahmad Saleh, a recent immigrant from Yemen, evidently confident that the thermoplastic barrier extending to the ceiling would protect him, picked up the phone to call the police, said a spokesman, Sgt.
Peter Sweeney.


30-Year-Old Film Is a Surprise Hit In Its 4th Re-Release
She may not match the form-changing cyborg of "Terminator 2: Judgment Day" for pure evil, but Cruella DeVil, the villain of Disney's 30-year-old "101 Dalmatians," is proving to be an astonishingly strong box-office draw this summer.
"101 Dalmatians" is, in fact, the biggest surprise hit of the season for Hollywood.
Executives at the Walt Disney Company had expected it to do well in this, its fourth re-release since its original run in 1961.
But no one in the industry expected it to gross $41.8 million at the box office in its first 24 days, through this weekend.


Stay Calm and Don't Fight the Current
To the Editor:
Your July 24 article on the rip current off Long Island's Jones Beach brings back memories of my home in Hawaii, where riptides are not uncommon.
You fail to offer any suggestions for those unfortunately caught in a riptide.
One should avoid the flagged areas to begin with.
But we all know human nature: too often we do what we ought not to do because of ignorance or arrogance.


Violence Interrupts Wedding And Guest Dies at Reception
A woman fired a gun at two former classmates on Saturday as they exchanged wedding vows and then killed herself with a shot to the head, the authorities said.
The woman, Sherry Ann Korando, 25 years old, knew the couple only slightly, but a yearbook photograph of the groom was found in her wallet, the police said.
"The way the groom described it, it was a crush," said Maj.
William Jones.
The wedding later resumed, but at the reception the bride's grandmother suffered a fatal heart attack, the authorities said.


Cabinet Backs Shamir on Peace Talks
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's Cabinet gave resounding approval today to his conditional agreement to attend a Middle East peace conference under American and Soviet auspices.
Sixteen Cabinet ministers backed the the agreement that the Prime Minister reached on Thursday with Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, but three ministers led by Housing Minister Ariel Sharon voted against Mr.
Shamir.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
City of Toronto $100 million (Canadian) of 10.375 percent 10-year bonds, priced at 99.40 to yield 10.473 percent, through Wood Gundy Corporation.
Ratings *
New York State Housing Finance Agency's $47.4 million of service contract obligation revenue bonds, 1991, have been rated BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
St.
Louis Regional Convention and Sports Complex Authority's $113.7 million of state convention and sports facility project bonds, 1991, have been rated A+ by S.&amp; P.


World Bank Formula Has Done Third World Very Little Good
To the Editor:
The World Bank's World Development reports (front page, July 8) send the same message every year: that liberalizing markets and reducing state economic intervention will accelerate the output growth of developing countries.
The 1991 version oversimplifies other views on these matters; for policy purposes, its reading is well off the mark:


Man Sought in California Slaying Is Arrested
The police here have arrested a man wanted in California on murder, conspiracy and insurance fraud charges.
The man, John Barrett Hawkins, is wanted in the 1988 slaying of Ellis Henry Greene, who the authorities said was murdered in a $1.5 million insurance swindle in which the dead man was deliberately misidentified.
Mr.
Hawkins was arrested Friday night after he docked his 15-foot catamaran at a resort on the northwestern Sardinian coast, said a spokesman for the police, Maresciallo Mele Albertino.
Mr.
Albertino said today that Mr.
Hawkins, imprisoned in this Sardinian city, was identified by military police officials from the nearby American submarine base at Maddalena.
The Italian newspaper La Stampa said Mr.
Hawkins first gave the arresting officers a false passport and that investigators found about a dozen others aboard the vessel.
Each passport had Mr.
Hawkins's picture with hair of a different length and color.
California prosecutors allege that Mr.
Hawkins and his former business partner, Melvin E. Hanson, conspired with Dr.
Richard Boggs of Glendale, Calif., to kill Mr.
Greene, identify the body as that of Mr.
Hanson and collect $1.5 million in insurance benefits.
A Los Angeles Superior Court jury convicted Dr.
Boggs in July 1990 of murder, grand theft, assault and insurance fraud.
Jurors recommended that he serve life in prison without possibility of parole.
Mr.
Hanson, who had plastic surgery on his face, fled to Mexico but was captured when he returned to Dallas in January 1989.
He is awaiting trial.


500 Rescued as Cruise Ship Sinks Off South Africa


Review/Music; Playing Mozart's Game By Contemporary Rules
One of the "small follies" of the Festival of Contemporary Music at Tanglewood this weekend was, as its director, Oliver Knussen, noted, a "very small and offbeat tribute to the celebrated bicentenarian of the year": Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.
And perhaps the most offbeat tribute among the three offered at this morning's concert was ascribed to Mozart himself: "A Musical Dice Game."


Review/Opera; 'Cav' and 'Pag' Move From Italy to Little Italy
Either because opera requires such an enormous suspension of disbelief or because directors rarely offer insights that cut through the form's logical shortcomings, it is not often enough that one walks out of an opera house with the tense feeling of having seen a real tragedy unfold.
But the lethal finale of the New York City Opera's new production of Leoncavallo's "Pagliacci" was staged and acted with such a chilling balance of desperation, rage and terror on Saturday evening that the impact lingered long after the curtain fell.
Jonathan Eaton, the director of the City Opera's new "Pagliacci" and its fraternal twin, Mascagni's "Cavalleria Rusticana," has moved both works from their native Italian villages to turn-of-the-century Little Italy in Manhattan.
Paul Shortt's realistic sets -- tenements, a weathered church and dark alleys -- are the same for both works, with an elevated train added for Pagliacci.


Farr Hangs a Curve, Yanks Hang Heads
Steve Farr wished he had thrown one more fastball to Tony Phillips in the ninth inning.
Just one more.
Another heater up and in might have made Phillips a strikeout victim and might have given the Yankees a valuable and needed victory over the Tigers today.
Instead, Farr threw a curveball he wanted to bounce in front of home plate, but the pitch hung and Phillips ripped it into the second deck of the right-field seats to tie the game.
The Tigers then nicked Farr for the winning run in the 10th on Lloyd Moseby's single with the bases loaded to claim a wild 8-7 victory at Tiger Stadium.


U.S. Gets Castro Salute With a Gold in Kayaking
President Fidel Castro presented a gold medal to a United States kayaker at the Pan American Games today and then saluted the American flag during the playing of "The Star-Spangled Banner."
Castro, a keen sports fan, made a surprise visit to the scenic La Coronela reservoir outside Havana, where Cuban paddlers on Saturday shattered traditional United States dominance of the canoeing and kayaking and won five of the first seven events over 500 meters.


Medical Experiment in Space


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Bank loans for real estate projects are likely to be restricted again, a number of senators and the head of the nation's bank insurance fund say.
The curbs, which were lifted in 1982, would be added even as real estate values continue to decline, more banks totter near insolvency and developers face bankruptcy.  [ Page D1. ]


Acharnai Journal; An Odyssey Ends With a Homecoming to Greece
The sun is roasting the rugged slopes of Mount Parnes, driving families into the strips of shade next to their hot, new cement homes.
From the sandy road, this looks like another fresh urban explosion north of Athens.
But telltale crates covered with Cyrillic writing sit in almost every yard.
Ask the people who arrived with the crates where they traveled from and they give names of far-off Soviet cities in the Ukraine, Georgia and even Kazakhstan.
Many have spent days riding by train from Central Asia or aboard freighters crossing the Black Sea.
Yet no one is complaining.
For the tens of thousands of newcomers, what matters most is that they have come home.


Several Issues in This Week's Auctions
The Treasury will be active this week, with three-year notes scheduled for auction tomorrow, a 10-year note issue to be sold on Wednesday and a 30-year bond on Thursday.
This is in addition to the regular weekly auction today of three- and six-month bills.
In Government agency financing, the Federal National Mortgage Association will offer tomorrow debentures totaling $1.1 billion, with $450 million of five-year maturities and $650 million in seven-year.


BASEBALL: Sports of The Times; Mistakes at the Top Taking Toll on Mets
ONE afternoon in 1969, when Buddy Harrelson was playing shortstop for the Mets, Gil Hodges bounded out of the dugout and headed for the mound to talk to his pitcher in the second game of a doubleheader after his team had been soundly beaten in the opener.
At least that's what Harrelson thought, until Hodges veered toward him, with great purpose in his stride.
Harrelson had no idea who or what the manager wanted.


U.S. Investigating School Milk Bidding in 16 States
The Justice Department says it is investigating bid rigging on milk contracts for schools in at least 16 states.
"It has become clear that incidents of collusion have been epidemic in the dairy industry," Judy Whalley, Deputy Assistant Attorney General for the Justice Department's antitrust division, said Thursday.
"I suspect that as we go across the United States, we'll find hundreds of millions of dollars involved."


Strike Aims to Bleed Cameroon's Economy to Force President's Fall
The shuttered boutiques along Douala's broad boulevards and the empty berths of its port seem poised for a long holiday.
There are no taxis and few cars in the streets.
Except for small clusters of people trudging along the roadside in the blistering sun, little stirs.


Distraught Man Held In Attack on Priest
A distraught man, wielding a 14-inch piece of sharp plastic and trying to break into the rectory of the Holy Cross Roman Catholic Church near Times Square, slashed a priest in the hand early yesterday, the Port Authority police said.
The priest, the Rev.
Anthony Eremito, 51 years old, was in the rectory, at 42d Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues, when he heard someone knocking on the door at 7:15 A.M., Sgt.
Christopher Trucillo said.
Father Eremito opened the door, and the intruder, who was wearing a black T-shirt, lunged at him, nicking his hand with the plastic shard.


Promotional Games Gain Status With Advertisers
More and more of the nation's most prestigious marketers are playing games with consumers.
And consumers do not seem to mind.
In fact, they are playing right along.
Games, contests and sweepstakes, once considered by many marketers as an undignified way to sell their wares, are now proliferating about as fast as state lottery lines grow when a jackpot hits $50 million.
Among the advertisers now using these promotions are A.T.&amp; T., American Express, British Airways, Colgate-Palmolive, Exxon, Home Box Office, Pepsico, RCA and Warner-Lambert.


Senate AIDS Vote Was Political, Not Medical
To the Editor:
Re "Senate Adopts Tough Measures on Health Workers With AIDS: Backs Prison and Fine for Failure to Tell Patients": The precipitous action of the Senate in overwhelmingly passing this legislation represents just one more politicized and unfortunate reaction to the situation.
Certainly, the guidelines suggested by the Centers for Disease Control would handle current needs.


As Many Democrats Seek a Shift, One Hopeful Clings to Liberalism
They have watched the Republicans turn "liberal" into an insult.
They have been told, again and again, that their national party is out of touch, enfeebled, doomed to fail unless it changes.
They are heading into a Presidential campaign that is widely expected to be their fourth straight defeat.
It is not surprising then that many of the Democratic faithful are ripe for Senator Tom Harkin, the rough-edged, true-believing Iowan testing the waters for a Presidential campaign.


Senate AIDS Vote Was Political, Not Medical; Burden on the Patient
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen states in "No Bright Lines" (column, July 6) that in her ideological world the correct thing to do when you learn your pediatrician has AIDS is not to find another, but "to make sure that the doctor is meticulously careful, uses double gloves and fresh instruments and washes hands assiduously." And if he doesn't, go elsewhere.


Victim Isn't the Felon
To the Editor:
Your June 24 report on campus reaction to the St.
John's rape case verdict quotes an undergraduate: "Who in their right mind would have gone to a house where eight guys lived?" Clearly he faults the woman for not expecting her classmates to commit a felony.
The law does not fault the rape victim for failing to recognize potential rapists any more than it faults the mugging victim for failing to recognize potential thieves.


Miss Cullaty Wed To Scott Gordon
Susan Marie Cullaty, a daughter of Mrs.
D.
Elliot Cullaty of Weston, Mass., and the late Mr.
Cullaty, was married in Wellesley, Mass., yesterday to Scott Andrew Gordon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Gordon of New York.
The Rev.
Judith L. Hoehler, a Unitarian minister, and Rabbi Charles J. Davidson performed the ceremony at Beveridge Hall at the Dana Hall School.
Mrs.
Gordon, 26 years old, graduated from Colby College and will begin graduate studies in graphic design at Boston University in September.
Her father was the president of the J. F. Bingham Company, a metal fabricator in Lawrence, Mass.


Linda S. Hoffman Is Wed
Linda Sue Hoffman, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerry A. Hoffman of Islip, L.I., was married yesterday in Manhasset, L.I., to Brian Richard Sterling, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold G. Sterling of South Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Barry Friedman performed the ceremony at Temple Judea.
The bride, 31 years old, is the director of marketing for Angel Records in New York.
She graduated from Duke University, from which she received an M.B.A. degree.
The bridegroom, 31, is a vice president of Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, investment bankers in New York.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Yale University.


Lithuanians Honor Slain Officers With Candles, Flowers and Prayers


Time Warner Offer Expires
Time Warner Inc.'s $2.75 billion rights offering expired yesterday, the last day any Time Warner rights holder could buy a share of newly issued stock for $80.
On the New York Stock Exchange, the company's previously existing shares closed unchanged at $85.
Time Warner had already raised the entire $2.75 billion in the offering because the deal's investment bankers had guaranteed that amount.
The risk for the underwriters has been that some of the stock would not be subscribed to, leaving the bankers to buy it.


3 Men Arrested in Slaying Of a Bronx Teen-Ager
Three men were arrested early yesterday in the shooting death of a teen-ager and the wounding of two others at a large outdoor party early Sunday in the Bronx, the police said.
The gunfire arose from a longstanding dispute between two rival gangs, but it was unclear yesterday whether any of the victims were gang members, said Lieut.
Anthony J. Vitaliano, commander of the 47th Precinct Detective Squad.


Careers; Flaws Seen In Campus Recruiting
MAURY A. HANIGAN sees serious flaws in the campus recruiting practices of companies and has made it her business to try to do something about it.
For one thing, says Ms.
Hanigan, president of Hanigan Consulting Group, companies have little data on how long new recruits stay with a company and why they leave.
In addition, she says, hiring of new graduates is down, and companies often come to campuses with no intention of offering any jobs, stirring resentment among students.


U.S. Weapons Makers Intensify Lobbying Efforts as Budgets Fall
At a Washington hotel in May, the Northrop Corporation summoned the top executives of 100 companies that supply parts and services to the B-2 Stealth bomber for an extraordinary war council.
Congress was again threatening to cancel the bat-winged plane and its $865-million-a-copy price tag, and Northrop and its suppliers needed to fight back or face financial ruin.
Senior Air Force officials wheeled out charts showing that eight radar-evading F-117's were able to accomplish the same mission in the Persian Gulf war that it took 60 conventional warplanes to do.
Even better, no F-117's were hit by Iraqi fire.
Now imagine two larger, stealthier B-2's, the officials said, that could do the job of eight F-117's.


Gunmen Kill Leader of Serbian Militia
Unidentified gunmen on Sunday night shot to death the No. 2 man in a paramilitary group begun last month by the most formidable anti-Communist political party in the Serbian republic.
Two gunmen with automatic weapons gunned down the 40-year-old victim, Branislav Matic, near the door of his Belgrade home in view of his wife, children and neighbors about 9:20 P.M.
Sunday, said a statement by the party, the Serbian Renewal Movement.


To Drive Away Wasps, Caterpillars Recruit A Phalanx of Ants
MAYBE it was inevitable that singing caterpillars would be discovered by someone whose heroes are Charles Darwin and Charlie Parker.
The music made by the butterfly larvae would never pass for Parker-style bebop.
But Dr.
Philip J. DeVries, former jazz guitarist and present-day lepidopterist extraordinaire, has found that they do make rhythmic calls to rally their bodyguards: ants that protect the caterpillars from wasps that would otherwise kill and literally butcher them.


Ms. Philips Weds Lawrence Zeides
Janet Morris Philips, the daughter of Kaye V. Philips of Albany and the late Irving Philips, was married Sunday at her mother's home to Lawrence Seth Zeides, the son of Rabbi and Mrs.
Solomon Zeides of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
The bridegroom's father performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Philips, 30 years old, graduated from the College of William and Mary and received a master's in education from the State University at Albany.
She teaches French at Queensbury (N.Y.) High School.
Her first marriage ended in divorce.
Her late father was a lawyer for the New York State Department of Law.
Her mother, who is retired, directed the Albany regional office of the late Senator Jacob K. Javits.


Shortage Of Judges Slows Cases
Federal District Court in Manhattan, one of the busiest and most important district courts in the nation, is struggling with one of the nation's worst shortages of judges.
Seven of the court's 28 seats are vacant, and three have been unfilled for 18 months or more.
Only eight other judgeships in the nation's 94 district courts have been left vacant as long.


Macy Posts Sales Gain For Quarter
After three straight quarters of declining sales, R. H. Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that sales in stores at least a year old had increased two-tenths of 1 percent for the latest quarter, to $1.633 billion, from $1.629 billion a year earlier.
Sales for the year ended Aug. 3, however, fell 7 percent, to $6.76 billion, from $7.27 billion in 1990.


Seduced by Siren Song of Science
"GONE to the rainforest" is the sign often posted on Dr.
Philip J. DeVries's door at the University of Texas at Austin.
For six months of the year he is out studying butterflies and their related ecological webs, often in Costa Rica, where he lives like a nomad, sleeping in tents, pensions, biological stations, national parks, wherever he can.
It is a style of living shared by a small clan of biologists who disappear into tropical forests for weeks or months at a time.
Dr.
DeVries is "a wild and crazy guy," says Dr.
Naomi Pierce, the curator of lepidoptery at Harvard University.
"He's a one-of-a-kind person who has a special niche to fill." He is also, she said, an "impeccable" scholar, and she described a 1987 book by Dr.
DeVries as "fantastic."


PATTERNS
Hot Shorts
This was the season shorts really happened. On the job, that is.
Designers have been showing them on the runway for the past few years, as a variation on the skirted suit.
Women, initially skeptical, seem to have widely adopted the style this year, fashion executives said.


Let Unemployment Benefits Run Out
If the Democrats had their way, the nation would have a new system of increased benefits for unemployed workers.
Though President Bush is expected to kill the Emergency Unemployment Compensation Act that Congress approved last week, the Democratic leadership has already promised to push similar legislation when Congress returns in September.
The debate, in short, is just beginning, but almost no one, least of all elected officials, is willing to be identified with the strong case against these benefit increases.
The U.S. has a basic unemployment system in which qualified workers receive 26 weeks of benefits averaging about $160 a week.
If unemployment in a state is very high -- between 9 and 12 percent -- then workers in that state who use up their benefits can qualify for an additional 13 weeks.
In 1975 and 1982, the two most recent recessions, Congress added another tier of temporary benefits, which generally extend the payments for a year or longer.


A Plan for Saving the Biltmore
It was where the Age of Aquarius dawned.
It was where Ruth Sherwood's sister, Eileen, found a basement apartment.
And it was where Paul Bratter returned after he had walked through the park barefoot.
Melodrama did not customarily play at the Biltmore Theater until the landmark house at 261 West 47th Street went dark four years ago.
Since then, it has been plagued by fire, vandalism, decay and three failed sales attempts.


Can't Count on Numbers; The Elaborate Effort to Adjust the Census By Using Statistics Adds Up to Ambiguity
Most experts agree that the 1990 census failed to ferret out about four million to five million Americans, a disproportionate number of them probably black, Hispanic or Asian.
Most also agree that the Census Bureau's statistical fix would better reflect the nation's total population.
But they are deeply divided on the critical question of whether the adjustment would provide more accurate -- and fairer -- counts for individual cities and Congressional districts.


Sanderson Survives The Tough Tigers' Den
The Yankees needed innings from Scott Sanderson at Tiger Stadium tonight.
Their relievers were weary, their starters were having trouble getting past the fourth inning and they needed their stopper to stop the Tigers.
He did, barely, and with a lot of help from Mel Hall.
Sanderson had a Jekyll-and-Hyde-type night as he struck out a career-high 12 batters in six innings but also allowed three homers and almost let the game slip away.


Cullen Opts Out
Concerns over insurance coverage have cost Team Canada another player.
Hartford Whalers center JOHN CULLEN changed his mind over the weekend and said he would not report to training camp.


On Shuttle, Wristmacs Help Out
As the space shuttle Atlantis passes overhead this week, several of the astronauts are wearing Wristmac watches that can display data taken from an Apple Macintosh Portable computer that is on board.
When it is time to snap photographs of a particular feature on Earth or in the cosmos, a Wristmac will sound an alarm and display a two-line individual chore reminder.
If schedules must be changed, National Aeronautics and Space Administration officials at the Johnson Space Center in Houston can transfer updated files to the orbiting Mac Portable from Earth-based Macintoshes via fax modem, said Debra Muratore, a NASA engineer.
Ms.
Muratore is manager of a project looking for the best ways to use computers on a space station.


Booming Orlando Becomes a Magnet for Prosperity and the Ills It Conceals
It may be just an illusion, but there are times when this city, the adopted hometown of Mickey Mouse and Shamu the whale, seems to be enchanted.
Take Orlando's Naval Training Center, a big base of 17,000 people that until the end of June was on a list to be closed.
At the last minute, when things looked bleakest, a Federal panel stepped in and spared the base.
Then, while other big airlines were going bankrupt, United Airlines announced it would nearly triple the number of its flights to Orlando's fast-growing international airport and perhaps build a $1 billion jet maintenance center there.


Stars Without Twinkle
Using ground telescopes and technology from the military's "Star Wars" research, astronomers may soon see stars unblurred by Earth's atmosphere.
To correct the images, they will project an artificial laser star into space and measure light's distortion on the return trip.
Science Times, page C1.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
First Chicago Corp. has filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $1.5 billion in debt securities, including medium-term notes and warrants.
The notes, with maturities from nine months to 15 years, will be offered on either a fixed- or floating-rate basis.


Chase to Sell Most of Its Leasing Operation
The Chase Manhattan Corporation announced plans yesterday to sell most of its leasing businesses in the United States and Canada to four finance companies, including subsidiaries of the General Electric Company and the Ford Motor Company.
The sales will reduce Chase Manhattan's asset size by about $2.2 billion and help strengthen the company's financial condition.


Business and Health; Allocating Funds For New Therapy
HEALTH insurers say they badly need clearer guidelines for allocating the billions of dollars that pay for expensive new medical technology.
No one knows exactly how much is at stake, but Government economists estimate that new procedures are adding at least $12 billion annually to national medical spending.
"There is a glut of new technology, and our ability to assess it and determine the appropriate uses has not kept pace with our ability to produce it," said John L. Cova, director of medical technology assessment with the Health Insurance Association of America, an insurers' trade group in Washington.
"We are attempting to play catch-up ball."


Storage to Buy XL/Datacomp
The Storage Technology Corporation, a producer of disk drives and other data storage devices for large computers based in Louisville, Colo., said it had agreed to acquire XL/Datacomp Inc., a computer distribution company based in Hinsdale, Ill., in a stock swap valued at $150 million.


Protecting Employee Privacy Too Far
Employer intrusions into employees' private lives have provoked wide, healthy reaction.
Now it's the reaction that risks going too far.
Some states, most recently New Jersey, have outlawed company rules against smoking at home, without disturbing a smoke-free workplace or anyone's right to charge higher health insurance rates for extra health risks.
Other states have moved to protect personal life style choices that don't affect job performance.


Printer Is Said to Discuss Reviving Daily Sports Paper
A former printer of the defunct National Sports Daily is discussing buying the tabloid's name and equipment in hopes of reviving the paper on a limited scale this fall, a person close to the discussions said yesterday.
The person, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, confirmed a report in the trade publication Advertising Age that identified the prospective buyer as Sports Eye Inc., a printer and publisher based in Port Washington, L.I.
He said the deal could be completed later this week.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.62
5.72
7.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.51
5.48
7.30
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.58
5.55
7.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.86
7.88
8.51
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.22
8.24
8.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.15
9.20
9.82
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.07
7.07
7.45
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Trade Cutoff Will Hurt Pro-American Chinese; The Prisoner's Opinion
To the Editor:
We strongly object to the reference to the Chinese dissident Chen Ziming in "Renew China's Trade Status" by Lu Mai and Li Xianglu (Op-Ed, July 23).
According to them, Chen Ziming, serving a 13-year sentence for his role in the Tiananmen Square protests, called off a planned hunger strike, "lest United States critics of China use his protest as a reason to revoke most-favored-nation status."


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on July 5 about Stanford University's billing of the Federal Government for indirect costs related to Government research described past overcharges incorrectly.
The figure $200 million was not a determination by auditors; it was an estimate by a representative of the Office of Naval Research.
This correction was delayed through an editing error.
Because of other editing errors, the article also misidentified the university's dean of research and referred incorrectly to a yacht for which expenses were in question.
The dean is Robert Byer.
The yacht was not a "personal extravagance" of Stanford's president, Donald Kennedy; it had been donated to the Stanford sailing club.


Jazz Reach Agreement With Friars' Murdock
ERIC MURDOCK, the first-round draft pick of the Utah Jazz, signed a contract with the National Basketball Association team yesterday.
The 6-foot-2-inch point guard from Providence College will join the Jazz Oct. 4 when Coach JERRY SLOAN opens training camp.


BAGHHAD REVEALS IT HAD PLUTONIUM OF WEAPONS GRADE
Iraq has disclosed that its scientists were secretly able to extract a small amount of plutonium, suitable for making an atomic bomb, from spent fuel at a nuclear installation whose operations came under international safeguards, United Nations officials said today.
Officials said the disclosure was troubling new evidence that Iraq's efforts to produce a nuclear weapon were significantly more extensive than previously known, even given Baghdad's piecemeal acknowledgements to United Nations monitors since the Persian Gulf war.


Lotus-I.B.M. Deal
The Lotus Development Corporation will develop a version of its 1-2-3 spreadsheet software for I.B.M.'s work station line, the two companies said.
The International Business Machines Corporation, based in Armonk, N.Y., will provide equipment and support for Lotus to develop a version of 1-2-3, the world's best-selling personal computer software, for I.B.M.'s RS-6000 work stations.
The expected availability date for the software and its price were not disclosed.
Lotus, based in Cambridge, Mass., has made versions of 1-2-3 for many types of computers in developing markets for its flagship product.


People
*
Young &amp; Rubicam, New York, appointed three executive vice presidents: Nancy Smith, director of print and media relations; Gerri Donini, director of the national television purchasing group, and Elizabeth Rockwood, director of media planning. *
Mary Ann Quick has been named executive vice president at the Leo Burnett Company, Chicago.
She retains the title of group creative director.


Eek! A Citizen!
Everyone should meet their mayor, even or especially -- in New York City.
It just might save our cities from bankruptcies, terminal boredom or a premature death inflicted by the modern drone of pollsters, consultants and "experts."
I have spent 20 years in politics and learned that nothing is as deadly as meetings full of developers, land-use lawyers and bureaucrats.
By contrast, as I'm sure Mayor David Dinkins will find out in his sessions with New Yorkers that began yesterday nothing is as refreshing and enjoyable as a single "meet the mayor" session.


U.S. Gains a 6-1 Victory in Baseball
The only loud noises at Latin American Stadium today came from the obligatory late-afternoon thunderstorms.
After Cuba's booming display of seven home runs on Sunday, the United States hit no home runs in its debut in this year's Pan American Games, but achieved a 6-1 victory over the Dominican Republic.


Baker, After 23 Days on the Road, Is Encouraged but Still Cautious
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d tonight concluded a marathon 23-day trip that took him from the Near to the Far East, much of the journey in search of the stubbornly elusive Middle East peace.
The last stop was Algeria, where Mr.
Baker sought the support of President Chadli Benjedid, as he did on the previous two days with the heads of the neighboring North African nations of Tunisia and Morocco.


Tumbling Mets Continue To Turn Summer Into Fall
The Pirates, forgive the yawn, arrive at Shea Stadium tonight.
The Mets, forgive the laughter, still believe it's an event worth being excited about.
"There's a lot at stake," said Rick Cerone.


From Light to Power
Engineers at the University of Missouri have received a grant of nearly $1 million from the Department of Energy to develop a generator in which nuclear energy is converted into intense light and thence into electrical power.
According to Dr.
Mark Prelas, the leader of the project, the process would generate electricity 72 percent more efficiently than existing systems, in which heat converts water into steam, which drives turbines powering electric generators.
The heart of the Missouri system would be a photovoltaic cell made of diamond or aluminum nitride rather than silicon or the other semiconducting materials used in existing solar collectors.
In operation, the nuclear reactor would radiate streams of charged particles that would strike atoms of a suitable vapor or gas which would consequently emit intense light or ultraviolet radiation.
This light would impinge on a photoelectric cell manufactured from synthetic diamond or a similar material, which would produce electric current.


Interim Finance Chief Appointed by Ultimate
The Ultimate Corporation, a marketer of computer software, said yesterday that its chief financial officer, James J. Matthews 3d, had resigned.
Alexander W. Giles Jr., an outside director, will replace him on an interim basis.
The company said Mr.
Matthews, who was named chief financial officer less than a year ago, had left to pursue other career options.
Neither Mr.
Matthew nor Mr.
Giles could be reached for comment.


Will South Africans Attend?
A month after the International Olympic Committee decided to readmit South Africa to Olympic competition, it is still unclear whether that nation's sports authorities plan to send teams to compete in two world championships this summer.
The I.O.C.'s decision to invite South Africa to compete in the 1992 Summer Games in Barcelona, Spain, effectively ended 32 years of isolation, during which other countries refused to compete with South Africans because of the government's policy of racial segregation.


INSIDE
India Sets Out on New Path
India's new Prime Minister, P.V.
Narasimha Rao, has energetically set out to transform his country, junking old economic verities - mainly the virtues of socialism.
Page A6.


If It's Action You Want, CBS Says You'll Have It
Pat Summerall and Frank Chirkinian won't be watching the P.G.A.
Championship on ABC this weekend.
They will be at Crooked Stick Golf Club to work as CBS broadcasts the tournament for the first time since 1964, when ABC assumed the rights.
"We lost it when we bid $400,000 for three years and they bid $600,000," said Chirkinian, the producer/director whose first golf assignment for CBS was the P.G.A.
Championship in 1958, won by Dow Finsterwald.


Ethics Panel's Officials Seek Inquiry Into Report's Release
The chairman and vice chairman of the Senate Ethics Committee announced today that they had asked for an investigation into Senator Jesse Helms's release of a confidential document recommending that the Senate censure Senator Alan Cranston.
On Sunday Mr.
Helms, a North Carolina Republican, took the unusual step of making public the report, drafted by the panel's special counsel, Robert S. Bennett, that calls Mr.
Cranston's conduct "reprehensible."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9


Booming Orlando Becomes a Magnet for Prosperity and the Ills It Conceals
It may be just an illusion, but there are times when this city, the adopted hometown of Mickey Mouse and Shamu the whale, seems to be enchanted.
Take Orlando's Naval Training Center, a big base of 17,000 people that until the end of June was on a list to be closed.
At the last minute, when things looked bleakest, a Federal panel stepped in and spared the base.
Then, while other big airlines were going bankrupt, United Airlines announced it would nearly triple the number of its flights to Orlando's fast-growing international airport and perhaps build a $1 billion jet maintenance center there.


Dominican Journal; Filthy Rich With a New York Cocaine Connection
Almost as if embarrassed by the conspicuous prosperity, an army lieutenant smiles as he speaks of the riches of this city, where sumptuous villas with satellite dishes appear suddenly amid open plains of verdant farmland in a country where per capita income is less than $900 a year.
"San Francisco is the richest place in the republic, not just now, but always," the officer said.
"We produce the most rice, the most coffee and the most cocoa. Just ask anyone here and they'll boast about how often they travel to New York -- not to stay there, but just to visit."


Boy Who Shot A Man to Death Is Not Indicted
A Manhattan grand jury has refused to return a murder indictment against a 14-year-old boy who said he shot a 35-year-old man seven times in a Manhattan hotel last month after the man tried to molest him, a law enforcement official said yesterday.
The police said the boy, Luis Montalvo, had admitted firing the fatal shots after the victim, Luis V. Cabrera, tried to assault him sexually on July 21 in the Sherman Hotel on West 47th Street at Eighth Avenue.


Sick Jokes
It's no surprise that raw jokes are sweeping the country in the wake of the grisly Dahmer multiple-murder case in Milwaukee and the Pee-wee Herman morals case in Sarasota.
Sick jokes, however tasteless, have become a staple defense against shocking news, especially since the Challenger space shuttle exploded, on live television, in 1986.
Neither is it any surprise that the Dahmer and Herman jokes travel so fast.
Wisecracks that used to filter one at a time from Wall Street and Madison Avenue now flash instantly, NEXT PAGE after NEXT PAGE, on E-Mail.
Some have even made it into print and onto the air, then to surge through the young boy network.


Braves Score 5 Runs in Third To Help Smoltz Defeat Giants
John Smoltz pitched a six-hitter for his fifth victory in six starts and Tommy Gregg hit a two-run homer to cap a five-run third inning tonight as the Atlanta Braves beat the San Francisco Giants, 5-2.
The Braves have won six of eight games and trail the Dodgers by two and one-half games.
The Giants have dropped two games in a row and three of four since winning 11 consecutive games.


No Killer Hurricanes Seen in 1991
THE East Coast of the United States and the Caribbean area are in little or no danger of being struck by a major hurricane this year, according to a new forecast.
But the next two decades should see the return of a pattern of more frequent killer storms that prevailed from the late 1940's through the 1960's, the forecasters warned.
The forecast, based on a number of climactic and meteorological factors identified by Dr.
William M. Gray of Colorado State University, an expert in tropical cyclones, says that in 1991 there will be no Atlantic hurricanes in categories 3 through 5 of the Saffir-Simpson scale of hurricane intensity.
The vast majority of damage caused by hurricanes results from a relatively few highly destructive storms in those categories.


Note Rate Raised to 8.80% By Ford's Associates Unit
The Associates Corporation of North America, a Dallas-based unit of the Ford Motor Company, increased the interest rate on its $300 million seven-year note issue yesterday to 8.80 percent from 8.75 percent, according to Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the lead underwriter.
Based on the pricing last week, the yield has been increased to 8.829 percent.
The move came because Moody's Investors Service recently placed the debt of Associates under review because of the company's aggressive acquisition policy.
Recently Associates said it was purchasing $900 million in assets from the Chase Manhattan Leasing Company.


Hewlett Planning Several Products
The Hewlett-Packard Company introduced several products including a printer and a scanner for personal computers, both of which are capable of using color, and a telecommunications minicomputer.
They are scheduled to be available in the fourth quarter of this year.


Rangers Acquire Sabol
The Rangers acquired defenseman SHAUN SABOL from the Philadelphia Flyers yesterday in exchange for future considerations.
Sabol, 6 feet 3 inches and 230 pounds, spent last season with Hershey of the American Hockey League, scoring 6 goals and making 13 assists in 59 games.


It Wasn't THE Game, but Giants Do It Again
In their first game since January, when they eked out a 20-19 victory over the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXV, the Giants beat the Bills again tonight.
But their 23-17 victory came in a preseason game that at times was little more than a controlled scrimmage.
The Giants looked good on offense.
But in the first half, their basic defense looked sluggish against the Bills' basic offense.


Astronauts Test Eye Drops and Relay Images of Hurricane
The Atlantis astronauts logged their fourth day in orbit today by testing futuristic spaceship technology and conducting an experiment involving use of eye drops in space.
Col.
James C. Adamson squirted eye drops into his right eye, then his left.
A camera on mid deck zoomed in on each wet eye.


'Figaro' in the Desert


Play-or-Pay for Health?
Some people in Washington are starting to get serious about the explosively expensive health care system, and they raise a new rallying cry: "Play-or-pay," they say, is the answer.
The bipartisan Pepper commission and Democratic leaders in both houses have now adopted the concept.
The idea is to create universal health coverage by requiring employers to play, by providing insurance for workers, or else to pay a payroll tax toward insuring their workers in a public plan.


INQUIRY IS ORDERED ON 1980 CAMPAIGN
Congressional Democratic leaders today ordered a formal investigation into whether Ronald Reagan's Presidential campaign made a deal with Iran in 1980 to delay the release of American hostages until after the election.
Thomas S. Foley, the House Speaker, and George J. Mitchell, the Senate Democratic leader, said they had designated the House Foreign Affairs Committee and the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to supervise separate but coordinated inquiries.


JWP Gains Control Of Businessland
JWP Inc. said today that it had gained control of Businessland Inc. through its tender offer, clearing the way for the creation of a giant new force in personal computer retailing.
JWP, a technical services company based in Purchase, N.Y., said it would combine its computer systems division with Businessland to form a new entity called JWP Businessland Inc., which will have sales of about $1.8 billion worldwide, mainly in the United States.


Q&amp;A
Night Terrors
Q.
What are night terrors? How are they different from nightmares?


By Design; Brightness in Black
Color in all its glory is a story for fall.
But as the recent Paris couture collections made clear, black refuses to lie down and die.
Being dressed in black from top to toe is the height of chic.
But even better is just a shot of shiny black.
Patent leather, vinyl and plastic have become the newest materials for buttons, banding and piping.
And high-gloss black shoes, boots, bags, belts and even gloves or hats are the accessories that give snap to a fall costume.


Signs of a June 'Winter' 65 Million Years Ago
A GEOLOGIST studying plant fossils in Wyoming has found evidence of a "winter" in June 65 million years ago.
The discovery provides further support for the theory that an extraterrestrial object crashed into Earth, kicking up enough debris to block out sunlight and creating a global darkness that set off mass extinctions of life.
By examining fossilized leaves, Dr.
Jack A. Wolfe of the United States Geological Survey in Denver said he had determined that land and aquatic plants died at about the same time.
Their cell structure indicated that they died suddenly by freezing, and the stage of their arrested development showed that the freezing took place in early June.


CHRONICLE
JOAN RIVERS scheduled an hourlong program with SAM KINISON, the high-decibel comedian, as the only guest.
But he never showed up, saying that he had eaten something that disagreed with him.
So Ms.
Rivers taped the show without him, interviewing instead her staff members who had waited at the Plaza Hotel for several hours to pick up Mr.
Kinison.
Ms.
Rivers then took a camera crew from the studio to the hotel, where BILL KINISON, the comedian's brother and manager, told her that his brother would not appear.


Egypt Takes Control of B.C.C.I.'s Affiliate
Egyptian banking officials have dissolved the board of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International's affiliate in Cairo and appointed a Government administrator to take over the bank's operations, banking officials here said today.
Abdel-Ghani Gameh, a Cairo banker named to oversee the bank's operations, said the Cairo affiliate, which is known as the Bank of Credit and Commerce Misr, was still solvent and continued to trade.
But deposit withdrawals have been limited to avoid another run on the bank.
A run occurred last month after B.C.C.I. was seized.


India's New Premier Challenges the System, and the Reaction Is Predictable
In less than two months in office, Prime Minister P.V.
Narasimha Rao has set out with great energy to transform this vast country economically and politically.
Taking steps surprising for a cautious longtime political servant of the Gandhi family dynasty, the 71-year-old Mr.
Rao has junked old economic verities -- mainly the virtues of state socialism -- with barely a nod to the hallowed traditions on which the country was founded.
His political opponents on the left are enraged; those on the right are taken aback by his wholesale theft of their policies; and even some members of his own Congress Party are dismayed by his newfound independence.


Pan Am Bids Defended
Thomas G. Plaskett, the chief executive of Pan American World Airways told Transportation Secretary Samuel K. Skinner in a letter last week that despite complaints from some disgruntled suitors who would have liked to buy some or all of Pan Am, Delta Air Lines had no unfair advantage in the bidding.
Besides Delta, expressions of interest have come from United Airlines and American Airlines, the industry giants, as well as from Northwest Airlines, Trans World Airlines and the investors Jay Pritzker and Kirk Kerkorian.


Dow Off 17.22, to 2,989.04; Trading Is Light
Stock prices fell yesterday as many investors stayed on the sidelines awaiting the outcome of this week's record Government quarterly refunding.
Under pressure from the opening bell, the Dow Jones industrial average closed below 3,000 for the first time in four sessions, losing 17.22 points, to finish at 2,989.04.
Blue-chip issues stayed within a narrow range most of the day.


D'Amato Opens Land-Air Drive To Woo Voters
Three days after a Senate ethics panel found no proof of influence-peddling allegations against him, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato began a seven-city tour of the state yesterday.
And today his campaign committee will begin telecasting a 30-second commercial in which he says that "it's not easy to be under constant attack by one's political enemies."
"The last two years have been very rough," Mr.
D'Amato says in the commercial, which he taped on Friday in Washington.
"But you stood by me. I can't tell you how much that means to me. Finally it's over."


No Charges for Bus Driver in Shooting
The Greyhound bus driver who wrested a gun from a hijacker on Sunday and then shot him after a struggle on the Garden State Parkway will not be charged in the shooting, the Union County Prosecutor said today.
The prosecutor, Andrew K. Ruotolo Jr., called the driver "a hero, an intervener, a victim and not a vigilante."


Founder Is Rejoining Celestial Seasonings
Morris J. Siegel, the creator of Celestial Seasonings herbal teas, is once again meshing his entrepreneurial spirit with his concern for the environment.
The tea company he founded in 1970 is acquiring another of his creations, Earth Wise Inc., which manufactures biodegradable household detergents and cleaners, as well as garbage bags made from recycled plastic.


New Line's Advance
The New Line Cinema Corporation is to receive a $40 million advance under a home video marketing and distribution agreement that it announced last March.
In return, New Line will repay the advance in part by giving its partner, RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Video, at least $10 million in revenues from home video sales of its popular film, "Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II: The Secret of the Ooze."
As part of the overall agreement, New Line and the RCA/Columbia unit have agreed to contribute annually up to $10 million each to a fund that will be used to buy theatrical, nontheatrical and videogram rights to motion pictures and to pay certain expenses.


Corrections
An entry in the Financial Briefs listing of Business Day on Friday referred incorrectly to the New York State Medical Care Facilities Finance Agency.
It is a public benefit corporation that issues tax-exempt bonds to support construction and rehabilitation of nonprofit medical and mental health facilities throughout New York State.
The article also misidentified the underwriter and misstated the yield of the agency's series C revenue bonds, which are for construction and rehabilitation of mental health facilities.
The underwriter is Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, and the bonds were priced to yield 7.394 percent.


North Adams Journal; Delaying a Dream for an Art Museum
When it comes to culturally significant sites, North Adams is not the kind of town that has ever given the Michelin guide much to work with.
Its historic legacy is made up mostly of shuttered factories and rickety boarding houses.
Its biggest attraction is the K Mart off Main Street.
Yet, for more than five years now, people in North Adams have been dreaming of becoming home to the largest museum of contemporary art in the world.
The state's former Governor, Michael S. Dukakis, a Democrat, helped sustain this rather extraordinary dream by spending almost $2 million on planning the museum and, just before he left office last year, pledging $688,000 more to keep the plans alive.


Review/Fashion; Warm-Weather Wear for Whenever or Wherever
The colors are light and lively, the shapes gently seductive.
Some clothes hang on a rack in the showroom.
A model emerges from the fitting room in one of the styles and walks without flourishes before a group of store buyers making notes on order pads.
There has been no show-biz aura as the newest collections have made their debuts on Seventh Avenue in recent days.
These are the clothes women will find in the stores from November through January labeled resort and early spring.
They cover a lot of fashion ground, from short ballerina-like full skirts to sultry long dresses, from casual daytime to fancy party garb.
They are designed to be viable through next summer.


Sports of The Times; For Mets, A Shake-Up Is in Order
BASEBALL'S ultimate series come October could be the World Series of Underachievers, but the Mets are treating their role too seriously to be in position to play the Toronto Blue Jays.
In fact, if the Blue Jays reach the World Series, the Mets, by default, would be baseball's outright underachieving champions.
The Mets, beginning tonight, could shed that stigma, but nothing in the way they have played since the All-Star Game break indicates that they are prepared to use their three-game series with first-place Pittsburgh or subsequent games with the Pirates or anyone else to charge to the top of the National League East.
So if the Mets can't join Toronto as a division champion, let them copy the Blue Jays.


Parrying Foes, Bush Repeats Support for Thomas
Hoping to sustain what the White House sees as its edge in the struggle over the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, President Bush met with Mr.
Thomas's strategists today and issued a statement proclaiming that the campaign was going "very well."
Without singling out any of the groups that have expressed opposition to Mr.
Thomas's nomination, the President said his nominee was "much closer to the mainstream of America" than were his critics.


CUNY Professor Criticizes Jews
In a lecture last month that was subsidized by three New York State agencies, a controversial City College professor accused Jews of squelching the progress of blacks in the United States.
The professor, Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., cited "a conspiracy, planned and plotted and programmed out of Hollywood," by "people called Greenberg and Weisberg and Trigliani," according to a videotape of the speech provided by WNBC-TV.


Trade Cutoff Will Hurt Pro-American Chinese; Mao's Purged Heir
To the Editor:
"In Death, Mao's Purged Heir Wins Redemption in a Movie" (front page, July 23) reports that Marshal Lin Biao, once Mao Zedong's designated successor, who died and was vilified after he allegedly conspired to assassinate Mao in 1971, is finding a new place in Chinese history.


Booming Orlando Becomes a Magnet for Prosperity and the Ills It Conceals
It may be just an illusion, but there are times when this city, the adopted hometown of Mickey Mouse and Shamu the whale, seems to be enchanted.
Take Orlando's Naval Training Center, a big base of 17,000 people that until the end of June was on a list to be closed.
At the last minute, when things looked bleakest, a Federal panel stepped in and spared the base.
Then, while other big airlines were going bankrupt, United Airlines announced it would nearly triple the number of its flights to Orlando's fast-growing international airport and perhaps build a $1 billion jet maintenance center there.


Miscellany
*
The Leadership Network, New York, a group of seven magazines, has announced the reorganization of its advertising sales efforts after The New Republic and The National Review formed their own sales venture.
The network has appointed Salesconcepts Associates, New York, as its representative firm. *
Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., New York, is opening agencies in Dresden, Germany, and Warsaw, joining its offices in Budapest and Prague and its joint venture in Moscow.


Bubka! Bubka! Bubka!
It has reached the point in his remarkable career as a pole vaulter that Sergei Bubka of the Soviet Union seems only to be toying with his event, breaking world records so often as to render the next crowning moment barely more special than the last.
His evening's work in Malmo, Sweden, last night produced the latest in a string of 28 such accomplishments, as he became the first vaulter to clear 20 feet outdoors with a winning height of 20 feet 1/4 inch in the iDag Galan Grand Prix meet.


All in the Family
The medical technology that has made it possible for Arlette Schweitzer to bear her own grandchildren is very new.
But the reason she used that technology is very old.
She is doing for her daughter what her daughter cannot do for herself.
The 1978 birth of Louise Brown, the first child ever conceived in a Petri dish, was curiously akin to the opening of Pandora's box.
What that birth loosed upon the world, however, were not human ills but some painfully human predicaments.
Surrogate parenthood, once touted as a solution to the problem of female infertility, has a terrible potential for causing pain.


Accounts
*
Skytel Corp., Washington, a subsidiary of Mobile Telecommunication Technologies, to Ogilvy &amp; Mather, Houston, for a $5 million to $6 million national advertising account for paging and voice messaging services.
The account had previously been handled by Earle Palmer Brown Advertising, Bethesda, Md. *
Johnson &amp; Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J., to Lintas New York for its baby powder, baby oil and baby lotion accounts, which exceed $14 million in billings.
Young &amp; Rubicam, New York, the incumbent, will continue to handle other Johnson &amp; Johnson products.
The move consolidates all of J.&amp; J.'s baby products at Lintas, which already handles $10 million in billings for baby shampoo and swabs.


After Rough Ailment, Frase Is Back on Line
Paul Frase hadn't played in a football game in more than a year before rotating at defensive end and nose tackle for two quarters against Philadelphia in the Jets' preseason opener on Saturday.
No one knew what to expect, least of all Frase, who missed all of last year with hyperthyroidism.
"It felt great to be back out there," he said.
"I felt like I was in a different world in the first quarter."


SAUDIS SHUFFLING CABINET SLIGHTLY
After months of speculation in Saudi Arabia about major political changes, the Government has announced a Cabinet shuffle that has startled Saudis and diplomats in its limited scope and caution.
The changes were announced in a statement on Thursday by the official Saudi News Agency without comment by King Fahd, who repeatedly promised to make important reforms after the Persian Gulf war.


Bridge
After an exciting match that was up for grabs with two deals remaining, the Spingold Knockout Team title was won here by the team led by Zia Mahmood of Manhattan.
With Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan, Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., Eric Rodwell of West Lafayette, Ind., and Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., he won by a margin of 21 imps.
After 62 deals of a scheduled 64, his lead was only 8, but a penalty of 800 in his favor decided the issue.
The losers were Cliff Russell of Miami, Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, Alan Sontag of Manhattan, Bob Levin of Orlando, Fla., Peter Weichsel of Encinitas, Calif., and Eddie Kantar of Santa Monica, Calif.


Lebanese Police Crack Down On Supporters of Gen. Aoun
The police have cracked down on supporters of Gen.
Michel Aoun, who was ousted in October by Syrian forces after a long rebellion against the Government of President Elias Hrawi.
Security officials said dozens of people were arrested over the weekend for "jeopardizing state security" as they were hanging banners in support of the general, who is in the French Embassy here awaiting permission to leave for France, which has granted him asylum.
The Lebanese Government has been blocking his departure, demanding that he stand trial on charges of embezzlement and treason.


Chess
Joel Benjamin and Gata Kamsky, two Brooklyn grandmasters, begin their four-game match for the United States Invitational Championship this afternoon at the LAX Marriott Hotel in Los Angeles.
They are the two survivors of a 16-player field that began contesting two-game elimination matches July 28.
Kamsky, a 17-year-old emigre from the Soviet Union, got to the final by defeating Ilya Gurevich, a Worcester, Mass., international master, in the preliminary round, Alexander Ivanov, a Brookline, Mass., international master, in the quarterfinal and John Fedorowicz, a New York grandmaster, in the semifinal.


Insurers Move Heavily Into Real Estate
To the Editor:
"Insurance Woes Are No Disaster" (editorial, July 17) touches some key points but begs for elaboration.


Much Is Riding on the P.G.A. Championship
The P.G.A.
Championship is the last, and generally considered the least, of golf's four majors, but this year the tournament promises to make much clearer what to this point has been a fragmented season.
The championship, which begins Thursday at the Crooked Stick Golf Club in Carmel, Ind., could undo the tangle of players who are vying to be considered golf's player of the year.
It will definitely sort out the furious two-year race to make the United States Ryder Cup team.


All 571 Aboard Cruise Ship Are Saved
All 571 people aboard the Greek cruise liner that sank off the South African coast on Sunday have been found safe, officials said today, but controversy lingered over the seaworthiness of the 7,554-ton ship and the behavior of its captain and crew.
"The search has been called off at last light tonight," said Commandant Andre Botes of the air force, a search coordinator at the Maritime Search and Rescue Coordination Center near Cape Town.


Tyson Incident Leaves King in Rare State: Quiet
When a deal was finally put together last month for an Evander Holyfield-Mike Tyson heavyweight title match, Tyson's promoter, Don King, sought to put the right spin on his role in the negotiations.
Amid rumors that the fear of losing Tyson to another boxing man, Harold Smith, had accelerated his willingness to make a deal, King began phoning newsmen to shoot down that notion.


At Lincoln Center, A New Tune: Jazz
Amid the blaring of a New Orleans brass band led by the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis, Lincoln Center announced the initial season of its jazz program yesterday.
"Second lining at Lincoln Center," said Lincoln Center's president, Nathan Leventhal, referring to the style of music.
"Who would have believed it?"
The season, announced by the jazz program's director, Rob Gibson, is to open tonight and run through May 15.
It is to include 18 concerts, 6 lectures, 2 children's educational programs and an evening of jazz film.
Admission will range from free to $35, and the sites are to include Lincoln Center, the Lehman Center for the Performing Arts in the Bedford Park section of the Bronx, the Prospect Park Band Shell in Brooklyn and the Snug Harbor Cultural Center in Livingston, S.I.


The Tumult at the Garden Reaches to the Top as Evans Leaves
In the latest episode of turmoil at Madison Square Garden, Richard H. Evans resigned under pressure yesterday as president and chief executive officer of the Garden, the company that includes the Knicks and Rangers.
Although Paramount Communications, which owns Madison Square Garden, said in a prepared statement that Evans's departure was of his own choice, his leaving was expected and longed rumored by Garden executives.


Jeri Southern, Pianist And Pop Singer, 64
Miss Southern's recordings include "You Better Go Now," "When I Fall in Love," "An Occasional Man" and "Fire Down Below," which she sang in the Rita Hayworth film of the same name in 1957.
That song made it to the top-10 spot on the pop-music charts.
Miss Southern, whose name was originally Genevieve Hering, was born in Royal, Neb.
She began playing the piano as a child, and she trained as a classical pianist.
She moved to Chicago in the mid-1940's.
To support herself, she worked as a cocktail pianist, and built a reputation as a pop singer.
She was signed by Decca Records, which released her first single in 1951.


Corrections
An article yesterday about energy conservation policies of New York State's utility companies misidentified the New York City Commissioner of Telecommunications and Energy.
He is William F. Squadron.


Judge Threatens Wichita Abortion Protesters
A Federal judge said today that he would use any means necessary, even ordering the Governor arrested and filling jails across the state, to end the three-week-old blockades at two women's clinics by abortion opponents.
"This court has now taken charge," said Judge Patrick F. Kelly of Federal District Court.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The Student Loan Marketing Association yesterday announced an offering of $650 million of short-term floating-rate notes that mature Feb. 13, 1992.
The Sallie Mae notes have been priced at par to yield a variable rate of 17.5 basis points above the bond-equivalent yield of the three-month Treasury bill auction rate.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Great Day at the Track for Cubans
In front of President Fidel Castro at the Pan American Games today, Cuba's track and field team experienced one of its greatest days ever.
At the same time, the United States team had one of its worst.
The host Cubans won six gold medals today, matching their entire total in 43 events at the 1987 games at Indianapolis.


Commercial Fisheries Showed Gains in 1990
To the Editor:
"Fishing and Pollution Imperil Coastal Fish" (Science Times, July 16), on the decline in certain fish stocks, overlooks the essential fact that the United States 1990 commercial fisheries catch was a record 9.7 billion pounds, a 15 percent jump over 1989.
This suggests that predictions of doom and gloom are exaggerated.


For Israel, Navigator Of Finance
The Israeli economy is at a crossroads, and the man chosen to lead it out of the socialist wilderness is a well-connected economist who favors hard money, open trade and free markets.
After about 20 years in the United States, Jacob Frenkel, 48 years old, is returning to Israel on Aug. 15 to become head of Israel's central bank and the Government's top economic adviser -- the "compass and conscience," as one former governor of the Bank of Israel put it, of the country's economic policy.


Aline Weiss, 95, Dies; Child Welfare Leader
Aline (Honi) Pollitzer Weiss, active for more than half a century with organizations concerned with the welfare of children, died on Sunday at her summer home in Stephentown, N.Y.
She was 95 years old and lived in Medford, N.J.
She died in her sleep, her son-in-law, Judge Louis Pollak of Philadelphia, said.


Planner of Drug Policy For Colombia Resigns
Justice Minister Jaime Giraldo Angel, the architect of Colombia's plan for dealing with drug traffickers, resigned today.
Mr.
Giraldo is said to have designed President Cesar Gaviria's anti-drug policy of granting lenient treatment to cocaine traffickers in exchange for surrender.
Since the policy was announced in September, 17 traffickers, including the Medellin cartel leader, Pablo Escobar, have surrendered.


Trade Cutoff Will Hurt Pro-American Chinese
To the Editor:
Senators who yesterday voted to restrict trade with China but are likely to fail because of a Presidential veto (front page, July 24) should not be despondent about gaining or losing the sympathy of the Chinese people.
As a punishment measure for the Communists' human rights abuses, the revoking of China's most-favored-nation status would only have the opposite effect, as you amply explain in a July 21 news analysis, which argues that trade penalties may well aid Beijing's hard-liners.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Placed Scott Kamieniecki, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to Aug. 3.
Recalled Dave Eiland, pitcher, from Columbus of the International League.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association
UTAH JAZZ -- Signed Eric Murdock, guard. HOCKEY National Hockey League
MONTREAL CANADIENS -- Signed Frederic Chabot, goalie, to a one-year contract with an option year.
PHILADELPHIA FLYERS -- Traded Shaun Sabol, defenseman, to the New York Rangers for future considerations.
COLLEGE
CS NORTHRIDGE -- Named Kim Chandler women's assistant basketball coach.
DUQUESNE -- Promoted Dan McCarthy from assistant sports information director to assistant to the athletic director.
GROVE CITY -- Named Joe Klimchak sports information director.
Promoted Bob Smith from sports information director to director of alumni relations and placement director.


Polygram Is Buying Stake In Lloyd Webber Company
Andrew Lloyd Webber, who created musical extravaganzas like "Cats," "Phantom of the Opera" and "Starlight Express," is selling a stake in his company to Polygram N.V., the European record company that has sold more than 10 million albums from his hit shows.
Polygram said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire a 30 percent interest in Mr.
Lloyd Webber's company, Really Useful Holdings, for $:68 million, or about $117 million, plus a payment in 1994 of $:10 million, or $17 million.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Canny, Bowen Inc., New York, an executive search company, named William K. Sur a partner and director. *
Checkpoint Systems Inc., Thorofare, N.J., a security systems manufacturer, said its president and chief operating officer, Gerald W. Klein, had left the company over differences in management philosophy.
His duties will be assumed by the chairman and chief executive, A. E. Wolf.


Greek Captain Criticized For Leaving Ship Early
Like Lord Jim, Joseph Conrad's wandering seaman whose honor is questioned for abandoning a sinking ship, the captain of the Oceanos is the focus of wide attention and criticism for his behavior during the rescue of people aboard the sinking ocean liner.
Although accounts differ as to when the captain, Yiannis Avranas, abandoned the Greek liner, several passengers have criticized him and his crew for jumping into lifeboats or climbing onto helicopters before everyone on board had been rescued.


Record Profit For Air-India
Air- India, the Government's international carrier, said today that it had a profit in the 1990- 91 fiscal year of $42.7 million, the highest in its history.
The company's acting chairman, Subhash Gupte, said the profit was 14.6 percent higher than in the previous year and that the margin would have been higher had the airline included profits from the sale of a damaged aircraft.


King World's TV Expansion
King World Productions Inc., the producer of "Jeopardy" and other television shows, wants to buy another TV production group but has no interest in buying television stations or movie companies.
"If we can't find an acquisition at the right time, we could buy back our shares," said Jeffrey Epstein, the company's chief financial officer.
"We are in no hurry."


Freight Train Jumps Tracks In South Bronx


D.M.B.&amp;B. Presentation To Coke Is Confirmed
An advertising executive confirmed yesterday that D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, recently made a presentation for the advertising account of the Coca-Cola Company's fountain business.
An article in this week's issue of the trade publication Adweek reported that Coca-Cola had invited D.M.B.&amp; B. and Ogilvy &amp; Mather, New York, to make a presentation for the account.
While Ogilvy turned down the offer because it handles Pepsi-Cola overseas, Adweek reported, D.M.B.&amp; B. accepted.


Queens Couple Is Missing After Attending a Long Island Party
They were an attractive young couple who liked to go bluefishing when not working as supervisors for a large appliance store chain.
One night three weeks ago, they went to an engagement party for colleagues in West Islip, L.I., where friends remembered their laughter and joie de vivre as they drank and fell into the swimming pool fully clothed.
Then they disappeared.


Two Appointed To Times Posts
Russell T. Lewis and John M. O'Brien, senior vice presidents of The New York Times, have been named deputy general managers of the newspaper.
Their appointments were announced yesterday by Lance R. Primis, president and general manager.
Mr.
Lewis, who directs The Times's production department, is 44 years old and joined the paper in 1966.
He has previously worked as a lawyer for The Times and as its circulation director.
He will now be responsible for production, information systems and facilities development.


Review/Art; Robert Rauschenberg, At Home and Abroad
There has never been any doubt that Robert Rauschenberg, one of the paragons of postwar American art, is an extremely prolific artist.
Ever since he burst upon the New York art scene in the late 1950's -- helping to set the stage for Pop, Minimalism and a few other art movements -- he has been relentlessly, at times frantically productive.
Forget the artist's often-quoted desire to "operate in the gap between art and life." It has sometimes seemed that Mr.
Rauschenberg might actually close that gap, simply by filling it with the prints, drawings, paintings, sculpture, photographs and dance sets of his own making.
Ready evidence of Mr.
Rauschenberg's nonstop creativity is available here in two full-scale exhibitions of his work.
At the Corcoran Gallery of Art is a moving, frequently revelatory show of 100 works that the artist made in the early 1950's, before fame and fortune struck.
It has been organized by Walter Hopps under the auspices of the Menil Collection in Houston, and many of its paintings, collages, assemblage sculptures and photographs have only recently been rediscovered.
They confirm the artist's early inventiveness and prescience, shedding further light on, among other things, the fascinating subject of his influence on Jasper Johns.


Observer; Mean, Dark Aisles
News item: A well-known children's entertainer (male) was arrested in Sarasota, Fla., last week after allegedly engaging in a solosexual encounter inside a pornographic movie house.
The arresting officer was one of three policemen the sheriff had on moviehouse duty to enforce, among other things, laws against indecent exposure.
. . .
It's the homicide squad that gets the glamour, the vice squad that gets the fun, and the narcotics squad that gets to issue the ridiculously bloated estimates of the street value of the latest big drug-raid seizure.


Anti-Missile Technology Delights Astronomers
ASTRONOMERS are hailing a recent decision by the Defense Department to declassify a secret "Star Wars" laser system developed to help take the twinkle out of starlight.
The antimissile technology, they predict, will improve the performance of both existing and future telescopes by more than tenfold.
The original purpose of the "Star Wars" Strategic Defense Initiative research was to develop ways to track and destroy enemy missiles using laser beams.
The system that emerged is capable of measuring and canceling the distorting effects of the atmospheric turbulence on ground-based laser beams directed at incoming missiles high above the atmosphere.
The atmospheric distortion, caused by turbulent currents of warm air, diffuses and weakens the power of laser beams and blurs the images of targets.


Detroit Signs Sheppard
Free agent RAY SHEPPARD, a right wing who played with the Rangers last season, has agreed to a three-year contract with the Detroit Red Wings.
The 25-year-old Sheppard led the Rangers in game-winning goals with five last season.
He had 24 goals and 23 assists in 59 games. (AP)


Books of The Times; From Fierce Feminism To Jamesian Subtlety
The Dark Sister  By Rebecca Goldstein 272 pages. Viking. $19.95.
Hedda, the ungainly heroine of "The Dark Sister," bears a decided resemblance to the sourpuss professor featured in Rebecca Goldstein's last book, "The Late-Summer Passion of a Woman of Mind." Both have undergone traumatic experiences in their lives, and both have developed a forbidding intellectual armor of self-defense.
Both have cut themselves off from ordinary life, and both use their formidable intelligence to rationalize the emptiness of their lives.


Erroneous Triple Helping of DNA Is Implicated in Disease
ATYPE of genetic defect never seen before is responsible for a common disease of the peripheral nervous system and could explain many mysterious disorders that may be inherited, including Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia and even breast cancer.
The genetic flaw just discovered causes Charcot-Marie-Tooth syndrome, a familial disease in which the nerves of the feet and hands gradually atrophy, leading to a loss of sensation, deformity and, in rare cases, paralysis serious enough to require use of a wheelchair.
Unlike other genetic errors detected for diseases like cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy, the defect is not the result of a simple mutation in the biochemical subunits of a vital gene.


BRIEFS
*
Airgas Inc., Radnor, Pa., an industrial company, said it had acquired two industrial gas distributors in Rome, Ga.
Terms were not disclosed. *
A.
L.
Laboratories, Inc., Fort Lee, N.J., a pharmaceutical company, said it had acquired an approved new animal drug treatment from Fermenta Animal Health Co., Kansas City, Mo., allowing the company to sell chlortetracycline for animal feeds.
Terms were not disclosed.


Men, Women and Heart Disease: More Than a Question of Sexism
EVIDENCE is mounting that doctors treat women with heart disease less aggressively than they treat men, but experts say many more studies in men and women will be needed to determine whether the women are getting too little treatment, men too much, or both just the right amount.
Reports in a number of medical journals have led to charges of sexism in medicine, both in treatment and in the studies from which treatments are designed.
Too often, critics say, doctors rely on findings in men in caring for women.


Elton Back in Soccer
Rock singer ELTON JOHN has returned to the board of directors of the Watford club in the English soccer League, a year after selling the team. . . .
The former Phillies pitcher ROBIN ROBERTS, a member of the Hall of Fame, was named yesterday to the team's board of directors.


Taxpayer Role Sought In Bailing Out Banks
Buried in the debate over bank reform is a struggle involving Congress, the White House and the Federal Reserve over whether taxpayers should be given a permanent role in paying for future bank bailouts.
Congress has never granted any agency a blank check to spend taxpayer money in private-sector bailouts; a special law has financed each rescue.
But in a strange twist to a reform movement intended to shield taxpayers, the House and Senate Banking Committees would change the rules so that taxpayers henceforth absorb some of the cost of rescuing commercial banks.
Softened Senate Bill
The original bills were much tougher on taxpayers than the version that emerged on Friday from the Senate Banking Committee -- a version negotiated by Senator Phil Gramm, Republican of Texas, that preserves taxpayers' responsibility in principle, but in practice might drain away little public money.
A consensus appears to be emerging in Congress for the mild Senate version.
But whatever the actual language, the Fed and the White House have said in recent days that they will go along with a Congressional desire to recognize a taxpayer role.
The goal in Congress is to discipline the Fed, reflecting wide discontent with the Fed's practice of propping up failing banks.
By forcing the Fed to draw on public funds when it lends to some weak banks, Congress hopes the central bank will become more reluctant to make loans from its "discount window" -- especially if they extend the life of a dying bank, adding to a bailout's cost.
"The Fed would be forced to think twice about making the no-brainer kinds of loans it is now making," said Donald W. Riegle Jr., Democrat of Michigan, chairman of the Senate Banking Committee.
The House and Senate panels would alter a practice that has existed since the 1930's: having the banking industry alone bear the cost of bailouts through premiums paid to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
The Fed, after lending money to banks that later collapsed, has always gone to the F.D.I.C. for reimbursement.
Now, the House Banking Committee, in a bill approved in June, and the Senate committee's milder provision, adopted on Friday, would require the Federal Reserve to justify lending to some banks in danger of failing and to draw on taxpayer funds if the loans exceeded certain limits set by Congress.
The Fed endorsed the tougher House version before the Senate acted on Friday.
The Fed governors have not considered the Senate version, a spokesman said yesterday.
A White House official yesterday praised the Senate version, mostly because the Senate dealt more to the White House's liking with the separate issue of rescuing big banks.
"We think 'too big to fail' rescues should be done, but only in extraordinary cases of risk to the economy," said Robert R. Glauber, a Treasury under secretary.
"The Senate bill provides the necessary hurdles."
The American Bankers Association, representing the nation's 12,000 commercial banks, did not pick between House and Senate versions, but is lobbying for the principle that taxpayers, as well as the banking industry, must pay the cost of failures.
The association's support for a taxpayer role is understandable: Its insurance fund is nearly gone and the premiums paid by the nation's banks have tripled in recent years, to 23 cents for each $100 of deposits.
Study of Practices
A House Banking Committee study, released in June, spotlighted the Fed's lending practices.
The report found that over the last six years, the Fed had made loans to more than 300 banks that ultimately failed.
The Fed has not challenged this.
The resulting extra losses from extending the lives of dying banks were less than $2 billion over five years, said L. William Seidman, the F.D.I.C. chairman.
If Congress does, in fact, approve legislation that restricts Fed lending, the depositors most likely to be affected are those with uninsured funds -- more than $100,000 a depositor -- in a failing bank.
The Fed, by keeping a weak bank afloat, gives depositors time to transfer uninsured funds to healthy banks.
If a weak bank was closed more quickly, people might not have time to do this.
Allowing deposits to migrate can make a bailout more costly.
When the bank does fail or is merged, the F.D.I.C. has lost the opportunity to draw on uninsured deposits to help reimburse insured depositors or subsidize the merger.
"The principle on which most of the people in Congress are operating is to try to prevent us from covering depositors over $100,000," Mr.
Seidman said.
Limits on Lending
The House bill, in a key provison, limits to five days the period of time that the Federal Reserve can make loans to a bank whose capital, or available cash, falls below 2 percent of its outstanding loans.
Any lending beyond five days would not be eligible for reimbursement.
And the Fed could not collect collateral from the bank to assure F.D.I.C. reimbursement.
Instead, the money would have to come from the Fed's reserves.
If it was lost, the Federal Reserve would have less to give the Treasury to help pay Government expenses, in effect putting more of a burden on taxpayers.
The House bill also permits the Treasury to rule whether a given bank's sudden failure would damage the financial system or a regional economy.
Such a designation -- known as "too big to fail" -- would, when reported to Congress, enable the Fed to lend money to the bank to keep it going until a buyer could be found or the bank could be closed in some orderly fashion.
The recent bailout of the Bank of New England is this sort of case.
But under the House bill, the money would have to come from the Fed's pocket.
Compromise Is Accepted
The original Senate version would have imposed even tougher restrictions, requiring the Fed to lend from its own pocket to any "significantly undercapitalized" bank, whatever the period of time.
But on Friday, the committee accepted a compromise pushed by Senator Gramm.
If a loan of, say, $10 million to an undercapitalized bank goes beyond the five-day limit or some other specified period, and the money is lost in a failure, the Fed would have to pay from its own pocket only the lost interest, say $400,000, but not the principal, as in the House version.
The F.D.I.C. would repay the principal.
The Gramm compromise also changed the too-big-to-fail provision, requiring more public debate than the House version.
Under the Senate provision, not only the Treasury, but also the President and five of the Fed's seven governors, must decide that a bank is too big to fail.
Only then can the Treasury advance to the Fed the money to keep the bank temporarily alive.
But the payout would not come from the taxpayers' pocket; the Treasury would eventually recover the outlay through a special assessment on commercial banks.
Champions of Restrictions
The Congressional goal of restricting the Fed is set forth most passionately by Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, chairman of the House Banking Committee, and Senator Riegle.
This camp argues that the Fed too frequently tries to prolong the lives of banks that are clearly doomed and, as Mr.
Gonzalez puts it, is "cavalier" in failing to report its lending practices to Congress.
Still, Senator Riegle's committee accepted a compromise put forth on Friday by Senator Gramm that assigned most of the bailout expense to the F.D.I.C. while preserving the principle of Fed accountability.
"We never intended that the taxpayer should play a role; it is an unfortunate byproduct of an attempt to change the Fed's incentives," said Patrick Lawler, chief economist for the Senate Banking Committee.
"We think we now have something that deals with incentives, without putting any appreciable burden on the taxpayer."
Although the Fed is not publicly fighting the Congressional effort, the restrictions run counter to the Fed's view of its role as an independent supplier of emergency funds.
"I don't know that we are jumping up and down with joy, but we can understand what they are trying to do and we can live with it," John P. LaWare, a Federal Reserve governor, said last week.
"But my own view is that the lack of any discretionary flexibility is a mistake. One of the principal reasons for the Fed's existence is to provide emergency liquidity."


Soichiro Honda, Auto Innovator, Is Dead at 84
Soichiro Honda, a rebellious auto mechanic who defied the Japanese Government and built one of the world's biggest and most innovative auto companies from the ruins of World War II, died today.
He was 84 years old.
Mr.
Honda, who appeared to be in vigorous health until he was hospitalized recently, died of liver failure, a spokesman for Honda Motor Company said.


MS-DOS: The Latest Literature Helps Out
A MAJOR upgrade of an important piece of software gets computer book publishers scrambling.
The new version of MS-DOS, 5.0, is certainly a major upgrade, and no piece of software is more important than the one that keeps 40 million personal computers humming.
Here is a sampling of books for everybody from absolute beginners to seasoned veterans.
The premise of the "10 Minute Guide" series is that software is best learned in short, digestible lessons, one step at a time.
The "10 Minute Guide to MS-DOS 5," by Jack Nimersheim (Sams, $9.95) follows the pattern: from installing the program in the first place ("Turn on your PC.") through using the DOS Shell, the improved interface for the operating system.


Quotations of the Day
When I order abandon ship, it doesn't matter what time I leave.
Abandon is for everybody.
If some people like to stay, they can stay." -- Yiannis Avranas, captain of the Greek cruise liner that sank off the coast of South Africa on Sunday.  [ A9:2. ]
"We were so angry with the ship's captain that we wanted to throw stones at him." -- Irene Smith, a passenger who watched the captain leave the ship.  [ A9:2. ]


Policyholders Fault Request For Blue Cross Rate Raises
Dozens of heads of small businesses and advocates for people with AIDS, cancer and other illnesses called on New York's largest health insurer yesterday to rescind requests for steep rate increases for hundreds of thousands of people who buy their own policies or work for small businesses.
Many speakers at an all-day hearing ordered by the State Insurance Department contended that proposals by Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield for increases of 20 percent to 50 percent would be unaffordable for tens of thousands of New Yorkers.
If they have to go without insurance, the speakers said, taxpayer costs would rise.


Corn and Soybeans Down As Drought Relief Is Seen
Soybean and corn futures prices tumbled yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade as cooler temperatures and unexpected rain in the Midwest offered hope for drought relief.
Soybean futures settled 28 1/4 cents to 45 1/2 cents lower in Chicago, with the contract for delivery in August at $5.91 1/2 a bushel; corn was 4 cents to 10 cents lower, with September at $2.52 1/4 a bushel; wheat was 5 3/4 cents to 7 1/4 cents lower, with September at $2.90 3/4 a bushel; oats were 2 1/2 cents to 3 1/2 cents lower, with September at $1.31 1/2 a bushel.


Village Committees Learn to Guard Endangered Forest in Bangladesh
A GRASS-ROOTS environmental movement is growing in this overcrowded, climatologically vulnerable South Asian country, bringing awareness and strength to villagers struggling to subsist on the fringes of vanishing forests.
Radhakantha Burman is one of its local heroes.
For two years Mr.
Burman, a tribal village leader, has been guarding a 200-acre patch of sal trees, or shorea robusta, a tropical hardwood.
The trees stand on land that is in theory a common woods protected by forestry officials.
But corruption, thuggery and unchecked erosion had combined to deplete the land.
Wood for farm implements and leaves for mulch and cooking fires were getting harder to find.


Freedom to Fight
Two elderly Albanian boxers are planning a return to the ring to celebrate the lifting of a 28-year Communist ban on the sport.
The newspaper Bashkimi in Tirana, the capital, reported yesterday that the bout between AHMET GOLEMI and DHORI GERNJOTI, both age 50, would symbolize the revival of boxing in the small Balkan state.


Our Towns
The flock is always sparse on a weekday, but the Rev.
Michael Doyle believes that Mass is a wonderful way to start the day.
So he says the Mass and has communion at Sacred Heart even though there are only two of the devout there to share it.
Carmella Labato, who has lived only a block or so away from the church for 77 years, is one of them -- the other is the church secretary -- and Mrs.
Labato leads the prayer.
She prays for the 230 children who attend the parish school, for everyone in her family, for Father Doyle and everyone in the church, many of whom she names, for all the cars parked around the church that they be protected from vandals, and for two bills pending in Trenton, one to reduce everyone's sewer bills and the other to allow the church to create a credit union.


Canandaigua Seeks Winery
The Canandaigua Wine Company confirmed today that it was negotiating to acquire all of the assets of Guild Wineries and Distilleries, a grape growers' cooperative based in Woodbridge, Calif.
Guild is best known for Cook's champagne and is the seventh-largest winery in the United States.
Canandaigua is the third-largest, and the largest in New York.


Paul Brown, One of Pro Football's Primary Architects, Dead at 82
Paul Brown, a football innovator who founded the Cleveland Browns and the Cincinnati Bengals and built them into professional powers, died yesterday morning.
He was 82 years old.
Allan Heim, a spokesman for the Bengals, said Mr.
Brown died from complications caused by pneumonia, at his home in Cincinnati.


Subway Ads Offer Help to the Troubled
To the Editor:
"And Let's Bring Back Miss Subways Too" (letter, July 4) and "How Did the Subways Get So Full of Such Depressing Ads" (The Week in Review, July 21) complain about "depressing ads" in the subway.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
Sales of cars and trucks made in North America fell 9.2 percent in late July, but analysts, dealers and industry executives continued to express optimism that the market for new vehicles was climbing out of a recessionary trough.  [ Page D1. ]
The nation's military contractors and their lobbyists, under intense pressure from sharply shrinking Pentagon budgets and the collapse of cold war tensions, have developed new and in some ways more aggressive strategies than ever to tailor their tactics to the changing times.  [ A1. ]


New Du Pont Cuts
The Du Pont Company said one of its units, Du Pont Fibers, planned to eliminate 1,000 jobs in its United States operations in the next 15 months as part of a plan to reduce spending by $1 billion.
The unit, based in Wilmington, Del., has 19,000 employees in the United States.
Du Pont Fibers has already eliminated 700 positions this year in trying to cut costs by $150 million.
Du Pont Engineering, another unit of the E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, announced last week that it would cut 550 jobs to reduce costs by $100 million.


Tyson Incident Leaves King in Rare State: Quiet
When a deal was finally put together last month for an Evander Holyfield-Mike Tyson heavyweight title match, Tyson's promoter, Don King, sought to put the right spin on his role in the negotiations.
Amid rumors that the fear of losing Tyson to another boxing man, Harold Smith, had accelerated his willingness to make a deal, King began phoning newsmen to shoot down that notion.


Many Serbs in Croatia Yearn for Calm
For weeks, people who live in this garrison city, a 16th-century Hapsburg stronghold that once stood guard against the Turks, have been dreading the day when the violence raging through the towns and villages of eastern Croatia would reach their doorstep.
Overnight, between 3 and 4 A.M., it happened.
In two separate incidents, two cafes were firebombed, attacked by unknown assailants in passing cars who launched antitank weapons in the buildings and then finished off their work with a spray of machine-gun fire.


Bills Fail To Solve Problem of Balance
The Buffalo Bills yearn to perfect a new balancing act: continuing to score quickly off their no-huddle offense while at the same time maintaining an edge in overall ball-possession time.
It is a lofty and elusive goal that Coach Marv Levy includes in his blueprint for the Bills' sustaining their success.
This was something the Bills longed for but did not get tonight at Giants Stadium, where they lost to the Giants by 23-17 in a preseason game before 76,121 fans.
The Giants clobbered the Bills in possession time by 38 minutes 9 seconds to 21:51 and outrushed the Bills, 174 yards to 128 yards.


I. B. Singer Took Vegetarianism to Heart
To the Editor:
I was astonished that your obituary article on I. B. Singer (front page, July 25) gave short shrift to his vegetarianism.
Mr.
Singer contributed interviews and recipes to two of my books, "The New Vegetarians" (1988) and "Famous Vegetarians and Their Favorite Recipes" (1990).
I can assure you vegetarianism was essential to his vision as an artist.


Bronx Woman Shot to Death During a Fight Over a Dog
A 33-year-old Bronx woman was killed early yesterday by a bullet fired by a neighbor during an argument over a barking dog, the police said.
The woman, Nancy Freytes, of 2089 Arthur Avenue in the Tremont section, was not believed to be the target of the shooting, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Mary Wrensen.


Police Must Pay Attention to Family Violence
To the Editor:
Everyone has been shocked that a Milwaukee police officer ignored an assaulted boy, leading to the boy's death (news article, July 27).
The police officer appears to have decided a bleeding, frightened teen-ager could be ignored because this was merely a dispute between homosexuals.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS An Upset for Jarryd Anders Jarryd of Sweden, whose ranking was so low last year that he considered quitting the game, beat his 16th-seeded countryman Jonas Svensson, 6-7, 7-5, 6-4, in the first round of the Association of Tennis Professionals Championship yesterday in Mason, Ohio.
Just three seeded players had matches on the opening day of the event.
The top nine seeded players, including top-seeded Boris Becker, will start today.
In another match, 11th-seeded Jakob Hlasek of Switzerland beat Jimmy Arias, 6-1, 6-1. (AP)


New York Tells Dinkins How to Save It
Carlos A. Foster, wearing a Western bandanna, a Stetson and riding boots, wanted the Mayor to send cowboys on horseback into poor neighborhoods to teach children about AIDS between rope tricks.
Dan Gould thought the city should ban cars and trucks during the day south of 96th Street, making Manhattan a traffic-free mall.
Gilbert McKelvie would open storefront psychologists' offices to stop people from jumping off bridges.


Corrections
An article on Friday about the increasingly personal questions about AIDS that patients are asking doctors and dentists referred incorrectly to the advice given dentists by Dr.
Jack Rosenberg, the founder of an organization of gay dentists in Manhattan.
He says that while he tells them not to answer when asked if they are infected with the AIDS virus, he does not tell them to lie.


Airline Denies Seat to Disabled Official
In an act that has outraged some advocates for the disabled, a commuter airline affiliated with Northwest Airlines refused to allow the head of a White House committee on the disabled and his assistant to board a flight on Saturday because both were in wheelchairs.
Workers at the commuter airline, Mesaba Aviation, told the chairman of the President's Committee on the Employment of People with Disabilities, Justin Dart Jr., and his executive assistant, John Lancaster, that they would not be allowed aboard its flight from Minneapolis to Pierre, S.D.
Mr.
Dart and his party were then flown in a larger aircraft to another city in South Dakota and driven 165 miles to Pierre.


Tyson Incident Leaves King in Rare State: Quiet
When a deal was finally put together last month for an Evander Holyfield-Mike Tyson heavyweight title match, Tyson's promoter, Don King, sought to put the right spin on his role in the negotiations.
Amid rumors that the fear of losing Tyson to another boxing man, Harold Smith, had accelerated his willingness to make a deal, King began phoning newsmen to shoot down that notion.


Rev. Alvin A. Illig, 64, A Religious Publisher
The Rev.
Alvin A. Illig, a Roman Catholic publishing leader and founding director of the Paulist National Catholic Evangelization Association, died Friday.
He was 64 years old.
Father Illig died of colon, lung and liver cancer at St.
Paul's College in Washington, where he had lived since founding the association in 1977.


Budget for Connecticut Calls for Income Tax, Sort Of
Among the 128 new, higher or expanded taxes and fees in the non-income-tax budget approved by the legislature on Sunday and now being studied by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. is, well, an income tax.
It is the perfect kind of income tax for Connecticut, which prides itself on not taxing its citizens' income until they try to spend it: it taxes only nonresidents, commuters who work in Connecticut but live elsewhere.


Gillespie and Makeba
The jazz trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie and the South African singer Miriam Makeba will perform together in a free concert on Aug. 18 at 4 P.M. at the World Financial Center Plaza, between the Hudson River and West Street, and between Vesey and Liberty Streets.
The concert, part of the arts and events program at the financial center, is the last to be given by the two musicians during a five-month tour that took them to Europe and around the United States.
Information: (212) 945-0505.


At Saratoga, a Senior Idol Speaks Out
The great match race involving the filly Lite Light and the colts Hansel and Strike the Gold won't take place, despite the exuberant efforts of the family of M. C. Hammer to make it happen.
And Horatio Luro, the 90-year-old oracle and senior matinee idol of racing, says it's just as well for all concerned.
"The filly against the colts that won the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness and the Belmont?" he reflected.
"It's an extravaganza more than anything. But it doesn't prove anything."


Lockheed Joins Pratt in Pacts
The Air Force has awarded two contracts worth nearly $11 billion for the next generation of Stealth fighters, the Pentagon announced today.
The Lockheed Aeronautical Systems Company, a unit of the Lockheed Corporation, was awarded a $9.5 billion contract to develop the airframe while the Pratt &amp; Whitney Government Engine Business, a unit of the United Technologies Corporation was given an $1.3 billion contract to develop the engine.


Inquiry Is Under Way
The Michigan Racing Commission, state police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation are investigating Hazel Park Race Course for allegations of race-fixing, according to reports yesterday on "ABC World News Tonight."


Pollution's Clench Could Strangle L.I. Bays
Pollution is beginning to overwhelm both the natural and man-made defenses of the bays and harbors that are the heart of recreation and tourism on Long Island and an integral part of its natural heritage.
In Oyster Bay Harbor, home to the last open shellfish beds on the North Shore of Nassau, some waters are already contaminated by lead and petroleum.


Icahn's Creditors Make Deal
Carl C. Icahn, the chairman of Trans World Airlines, reached an agreement yesterday with his company's senior bondholders that paves the way for them eventually to be repaid in full.
The move ties a loose end in the deal that Mr.
Icahn struck last week with bondholders and other creditors.
Yesterday's agreement was with the holders of $65 million in so-called equipment trust certificates on which T.W.A. defaulted in February.
The holders are to receive $16.5 million immediately and an additional $16 million once T.W.A.'s various creditors consent to an arrangement under which the airline would make an expedited bankruptcy filing.


Shift of Michelob Account To D.M.B.&amp;B. Is Expected
Anheuser-Busch Inc. will move the advertising for its Michelob beer brands from DDB Needham Worldwide to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, the agency for Anheuser's flagship Budweiser brands, industry executives said yesterday.
The Michelob account, with $35 million in estimated annual billings, was placed in review in April.
Along with D.M.B.&amp; B., St.
Louis and New York, and DDB Needham, Chicago, the other finalists were BBDO Worldwide, New York, and Chiat/Day/ Mojo, Venice, Calif.


Dollar Declines Worldwide; Gold Advances in New York
The dollar declined on world currency markets yesterday, falling sharply against the German mark.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery rose 60 cents, settling at $356.20 an ounce.
The Republic National Bank quoted a late bid for gold of $356.35 an ounce, up 15 cents from Friday.


Pennsylvania Sets $14 Billion Budget And Large Tax Rise
Thirty-four days after the new fiscal year began, the Pennsylvania Legislature voted Sunday for a $13.9 billion budget and the largest tax increase in the state's history.
Passage of the budget and the signature of the Governor, Robert P. Casey, ended an impasse that had kept more than 100,000 state employees from receiving any pay for the past month.


Link Between Asthma and 'Safe' Ozone Levels Is Studied
A NEW study suggests that ozone pollution at levels generally considered safe can double a person's sensitivity to allergens that cause asthma attacks.
The research, reported in the July 27 issue of the British journal Lancet, is the most recent in a string of studies suggesting that ozone pollution at currently acceptable levels is a threat to human health.


Baker, After 23 Days on the Road, Is Encouraged but Still Cautious; P.L.O. Backs Off Remarks
A Palestine Liberation Organization spokesman today pulled back from conciliatory remarks made by Chairman Yasir Arafat's top political aide on Sunday.
The aide, Bassam Abu Sharif, said that he believed a way could be found for Palestinian representatives to take part in a peace conference while excluding the P.L.O.


Shuttle Gives Clue To Effect Of Quakes
AN analysis of shock waves produced by the sonic boom of a space shuttle descending over Los Angeles suggests that buildings might be vulnerable to low-frequency tremors like those produced along with other kinds of vibration in big earthquakes.
The sonic boom apparently set the tall buildings shaking at the very low frequency of once every two or three seconds.
The deep accumulation of sediment in the Los Angeles basin, on which the high-rise buildings rest, was so responsive to that frequency that it, too, began to oscillate.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 6


Treasury Issues Little Changed
Treasury note and bond prices were little changed yesterday as dealers and investors were plotting strategies for the flurry of Treasury auctions that start today.
"With no economic news of import, the market is preoccupied with gauging demand for the Treasury auctions," said one Treasury note trader.


Critic's Notebook; Counting Casualties Of Attacks On PBS
If the National Endowment for the Arts is being attacked by the armies of the right, led by Senator Jesse Helms and the Rev.
Donald E. Wildmon, can public television be far behind?
As that sitcom character on "Perfect Strangers" would put it, don't be ridiculous.
In recent months, campaigns have been waged against the series "P.O.V." and Bill Moyers, and the chilling effects have trickled down through PBS to a video artist named Charles Atlas.
Public television has long been a target for bully pulpiteers, notably in Republican administrations.
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, wielding such ornate brickbats as "nattering nabobs of negativism," would regularly be unleashed on what Richard Nixon perceived as leftist biases in the system.
During the Reagan years, William J. Bennett, once head of the endowment and the Federal drug policy director until last year, could be counted on for periodic broadsides about suspect programs, especially any that did not portray the Sandinistas in Nicaragua as demons.


CHRONICLE
A Manhattan judge yesterday ordered MARY McFADDEN, the fashion designer, to give her 23-year-old estranged fourth husband $600 a week in temporary maintenance and pay his insurance costs and medical bills.
Justice Edward Lehner of State Supreme Court awarded the $2,400 a month to JOEL DAVID YOHANNAN and awarded his lawyer, RAOUL FELDER, $7,500.


Guilty Plea In Slaying Of Gay Man
A 21-year-old college student pleaded guilty yesterday to fatally stabbing a gay man in Queens in what prosecutors termed a vicious burst of anti-homosexual violence.
The murder outraged gay organizations in New York City.
The victim, Julio Rivera, 29, was repeatedly smashed on the head with a hammer and knifed to death in a Jackson Heights schoolyard known as a gay cruising spot, prosecutors said.


F.B.I. Checking On Silverado
The Treasury Department asked the F.B.I. last fall to investigate allegations that regulators delayed until after Election Day 1988 their closing of a Colorado savings and loan where President Bush's son Neil was a director, documents show.
An F.B.I. spokesman today confirmed that the agency has been investigating the Silverado Banking, Savings and Loan Association for more than a year, but he declined to say whether the effort covered charges of pressure to delay Silverado's closing.


Japan Says It Won't Prosecute
A top Finance Ministry official said today that the Government would not prosecute Japan's scandal-ridden securities houses for creating billions of dollars worth of bogus securities trades, despite ample evidence of improper activities.
Nobuhiko Matsuno, head of the ministry's securities bureau, said at a news briefing that the trades, which were used to disguise illicit payments to some clients, appeared improper.
But he said the Government would not use one of its most potent legal weapons to prosecute the firms because of a technicality in the way the securities were traded.


CHRONICLE
A pair of back-to-back concerts on Thursday and Friday, with BILLY JOEL, PAUL SIMON, RIC OCASEK, CARLY SIMON and DON HENLEY, have sold more than 20,000 tickets to raise over $200,000 for the South Fork/Shelter Island chapter on Long Island of the Nature Conservancy.
The nonprofit international group buys and preserves wilderness sites.
It has saved more than 25,000 acres on Long Island.


Review/Opera; Seldom-Staged Strauss Amid a Desert Downpour
By day, the sun shines on this magical desert as it always has, but evenings have been wet and fierce, even by operatic standards.
By this weekend, it will have rained on 6 of the last 10 performances at the Santa Fe Opera.
Listeners keep coming: Friday night's "Schweigsame Frau" was standing room only, at least for the first two acts.
Although most of the seats in this desert theater are protected by a roof, they could not avoid the wetness being blown in by breezes from the building's open sides.
People here are used to bundling up against the night chill, but no one can remember so much rain.


Can't Count on Numbers; The Elaborate Effort to Adjust the Census By Using Statistics Adds Up to Ambiguity
Most experts agree that the 1990 census failed to ferret out about four million to five million Americans, a disproportionate number of them probably black, Hispanic or Asian.
Most also agree that the Census Bureau's statistical fix would better reflect the nation's total population.
But they are deeply divided on the critical question of whether the adjustment would provide more accurate -- and fairer -- counts for individual cities and Congressional districts.


Rivals in Travel Industry Encouraged by Joint Drive
IN the spring, battered by war and recession, leading hotels, airlines, car-rental companies and other travel-related businesses joined forces for the first time, setting aside traditional rivalries to promote travel.
Now, encouraged by the campaign's results, top executives of these companies are working to hold this coalition together.


Peugeot to Quit U.S. Market
After five years of steadily dwindling sales in the United States, Peugeot S.A. of France is calling it quits here.
Peugeot, which manufacturers Peugeots and Citroens, has sent a letter, scheduled to arrive today, to its 151 American franchisees, telling them that as of September the company will no longer produce cars for sale in the United States.
"We will continue to ship cars that are already in the pipeline, and our dealers still have an inventory of cars to sell," said Kim Derderian, a spokeswoman for Peugeot Motors of America Inc. in Lyndhurst, N.J.
"But Peugeot will not make any more cars for the American market."


Seoul Applies to Join the U.N.; Approval Is Seen This Week
South Korea applied for separate membership in the United Nations today in a bid that diplomats, including those of North Korea, said was certain to succeed after nearly a half century of failures.
"This step definitely will improve the international standing of both Koreas and will help smooth and improve relations between the two Koreas," the head of the South Korean observer delegation, Roe Chang Hee, said at a news conference shortly after meeting with Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar to submit the application.


B.C.C.I.'s Best Customer Is Also Its Worst Customer
At the heart of the scandals surrounding the Bank of Credit and Commerce International are three Pakistani brothers, the Gokals, whose tangled finances, soured loans and powerful political connections here are subjecting their powerful but publicity-shy family to unwanted attention from investigators from around the world.
The Gokal brothers, through a collection of shipping companies known as the Gulf Group, were the bank's largest customer -- as well as principal bad debtor, according to auditors who have reviewed B.C.C.I.'s records for the Bank of England, Britain's central bank and top banking regulator.


CHRONICLE
DORIS DAYfiled a $25 million libel suit yesterday against The Globe, a supermarket tabloid, in Los Angeles Superior Court.
The suit was over a July 23 article with the headline "Doris Day, 67, Lives Like a Bag Lady." Miss Day, who lives in Carmel, Calif., sought a retraction, but The Globe refused, her lawyer, John Lavely Jr., said.
The Globe, which is published in Boca Raton, Fla., refused to comment yesterday.


U.S. Posts Rise In Productivity
The productivity of American workers rose at an annual rate of 1.9 percent in the spring, the biggest advance in almost three years, the Government reported today.
The Commerce Department said the strong advance in productivity from April through June followed dismal showings in the two previous quarters when the country was mired in recession.
Productivity, defined as output per hours worked, fell at a rate of eight- tenths of 1 percent in the fourth quarter and showed no improvement in the first quarter.


Teen-Age Sex Survey Would Teach Risks
To the Editor:
As executive director of the only national nonprofit organization dedicated to the control of all sexually transmitted diseases, I find it unconscionable that the Department of Health and Human Services would cancel a survey of teen-age sexual activity (new article, July 25).


Howard R. Quick, 62, Executive for A.T.&amp;T.
Howard Roland Quick, former national administrator of the A.T.&amp; T. and Bell Systems public relations education program, died on Saturday at his home in Morristown, N.J.
He was 62 years old.
He died of a heart attack, a daughter, Louise Quick Spann of Mount Vernon, N.Y., said.


Federal Agencies Drag Feet in Bank Scandal; Neglected Laws
To the Editor:
"Scandal Reveals Holes in Rules for Foreign Banks," (news article, July 7) states that "Under present law, the offices of foreign banks in the United States fall under the regulatory responsibility of state bank examiners." The many foreign bank offices that operate under a Federal license are examined by national bank examiners from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Treasury Department.
Also, under the International Banking Act of 1978, the Federal Reserve has residual examination rights of foreign bank offices licensed by the states.


Tisch Group Cuts Bay Banks Stake
A group led by Laurence A. Tisch, the chairman of CBS, cut its stake in Bay Banks Inc. to 7.8 percent.
Last August, the group, which includes members of the Tisch family, reported taking a 9.5 percent stake in the Boston company.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the group said it sold 114,100 shares between July 3 and July 30 at $13.44 to $17.18 a share.
The group now holds 1,256,400 Bay Banks shares.
Bay Banks stock fell $1 today, to $15.50, in over-the-counter trading.


Federal Agencies Drag Feet in Bank Scandal; Justice Dept. at Work
To the Editor:
The accusation in "Global Scandal, Ragged Response" (editorial, July 24) that the Department of Justice has been "sluggish" in its investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International is simply wrong.
The Department of Justice was not only the first to expose criminal activities by B.C.C.I. but also investigations by Federal prosecutors are under way in four major cities, coordinated in Washington. (Those investigations have resulted in prosecutions and hundreds of grand jury subpoenas.) The matter is receiving the highest priority, and agents and prosecutors have been added to the investigation whenever necessary to meet the workload.
The department is conducting a thorough investigation of all credible allegations of wrongdoing.


Dickerson to Let Deeds Do His Talking for Colts
Eric Dickerson wants to make one thing perfectly clear: He doesn't want to be misquoted, misunderstood or have his words taken out of context anymore.
That's why he has started tape recording all of his interviews.


Review/Television; What Will Be Left Over From the News at 7 Menu
When "NBC Nightly News" moves from 7 P.M. to 6:30 P.M. on Sept. 9, joining the other network news programs, the slot that was once dominated by network news will be left to the tabloidy "Hard Copy" on Channel 2, "Jeopardy," the popular game show on Channel 7, and a new game show, "Rough Connections," on Channel 4.
New Yorkers who have trouble getting to their sets before 7 but want the day's headlines will then have a choice between "The MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour" on Channel 13 and "Fox News at 7" on Channel 5.
Whatever one's tastes, it is not a close call.
While "Macneil-Lehrer" is exploring the possibilities of peace in the Middle East or the likelihood of Clarence Thomas's elevation to the Supreme Court or the consequences of bank failures, the Channel 5 program, anchored by Jack Cafferty and Cora-Ann Mihalik, will be doing what local news does, only worse.


Quaker Oats Deal Seen With Michael Jordan
The Quaker Oats Company has scheduled a news conference in Chicago tomorrow at which it is expected to make a long-awaited announcement about signing the basketball superstar Michael Jordan to endorse its Gatorade brand.
Word of the agreement, which Quaker Oats has declined to comment on, had been anticipated since reports about it began appearing in the advertising trade press in June.
The reports said that Quaker would wait to announce the signing -- reportedly worth $18 million to Mr.
Jordan over 10 years -- after the Chicago Bulls guard's endorsement contract with the Coca-Cola Company expired on July 31.


Rain Cuts Soybean Prices; Daily Limit Expanded to 45
Prices of soybean futures continued to tumble yesterday as rain brought relief to drought-stressed fields in the Midwest.
Corn ended mostly lower, but wheat futures were mixed and oats advanced.
Soybeans settled 2 1/4 cents to 38 cents lower on the Chicago Board of Trade, with the contract for delivery in August at $5.69 1/2 a bushel.


U.S. Military Team to Advise Peru In War Against Drugs and Rebels
The Bush Administration plans to send military trainers to Peru to help the Peruvian military deal with drug traffickers and guerrillas involved in producing and smuggling cocaine, senior State Department officials said today.
Administration officials said the dispatch of more than 50 advisers, including Green Berets and Navy personnel, reflected an emerging view that Lima was losing control of its Andean mountain provinces to the drug barons and to the rebels of the Maoist Shining Path movement, who protect the traffickers.
No Combat Role, U.S.
Says
The new aid program, which the Administration plans to make public once it works out the details with Lima, will mark a break from more than 20 years of limited contact between the United States and a Peruvian Army known for a dismal human-rights record.


Democrats Expecting Rockefeller to Forgo '92
Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th will announce on Wednesday that he has decided not to seek the 1992 Democratic presidential nomination, a Democrat close to the West Virginian said tonight.
The Senator's spokesmen were refusing to comment beyond saying that he would hold a news conference at noon in Charleston, W.Va.
But several signs in recent days have pointed to a negative decision from Mr.
Rockefeller -- including the hastily called news conference at a Charleston hotel, not the likeliest forum for announcing a Presidential campaign.
He had also canceled several planned appearances recently and huddled with his family and close advisers over the weekend.


With Military Set to Thin Ranks, Blacks Fear They'll Be Hurt Most
As the military goes through one of its biggest contractions since World War II, it seems clear to all who have studied the matter that American blacks will be among those who will suffer most.
This is basically because blacks make up a far higher percentage of the military population than of the general population, and, by virtually universal agreement, they have been given greater opportunity for advancement in the military than in civilian life.


Don't Mind the Stares, It's Stockton's Duty
Even though he is a two-time champion who will be trying with all his trademark competitiveness to win again this week, Dave Stockton will also be the most important spectator at the P.G.A.
Championship.
The 49-year-old Stockton is the captain of the United States Ryder Cup team.
So besides playing, he will be scrutinizing as closely as possible what in effect is a final high-pressure tryout at Crooked Stick Golf Club for the remaining six spots on the 12-man American Ryder Cup team.


Prayers, Hope and Apologies Mark Anniversary of Hiroshima Attack


Ontario Recognizes Indian Self-Government
The government of Ontario today formally recognized an inherent right of Indians in that province to be self-governing, a goal long sought by Indian leaders.
In an agreement with the Chiefs of First Nations, representing the Indians of the province, Premier Bob Rae became the first government leader in the country to acknowledge this right, and committed himself to work to entrench it in the Canadian Constitution.


INSIDE
Justice Dept. Supports Kansas Anti-Abortion Group
The Justice Department filed court papers siding with an anti-abortion group many of whose members have been arrested trying to shut down three abortion clinics in Wichita, Kan.
The judge who is presiding over a suit that two clinics have brought granted the Government's request.
Page A10.
Seidman Resigns Bank Jobs


Veterans' Hospitals to Stop Tobacco Sales
The Department of Veterans Affairs said today that it had ordered all V.A. hospitals to stop selling tobacco products as of Oct. 1.
The department already restricts smoking at its 172 medical centers.
But the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Edward J. Derwinski, said an outright ban on tobacco sales was needed to reflect a commitment to a smoke-free hospital environment.


Europeans Press for Yugoslav Settlement
Fearful that Yugoslavia's violent ethnic conflict could reverberate well beyond its borders, foreign ministers of the European Community called today for wider international pressure to bring peace to the troubled Balkan nation.
At an emergency meeting here, the ministers called on the United States, the Soviet Union and the rest of Europe to back its mediaton efforts in Yugoslavia, while France and other community members urged that a Western European buffer force be sent to separate the warring Yugoslav factions.


Helms Defends Disclosure of Ethics Panel Report
Senator Jesse Helms, responding to the Senate Ethics Committee decision to investigate him for releasing a confidential document, denied today that he acted improperly.
In a statement from his home state of North Carolina, Mr.
Helms said it was perfectly legitimate for him to make public the recommendations of the committee's special counsel, Robert S. Bennett, in the case of five Senators linked to Charles H. Keating Jr., a campaign donor who owned a failing savings and loan association.
Mr.
Helms made minor modifications in the document and released it under his own name.


Sports of The Times; At One Time, Paul Brown Jumped for Joy, Too
PAUL BROWN's moment of ultimate triumph was surely on the day before Christmas in 1950 when the team he founded, owned, coached and named for himself, the Cleveland Browns, beat the Los Angeles Rams for the championship of the National Football League.
The Browns had been losing, 28-27, when, with 20 seconds left in the game, Lou Groza, in his plain white leather helmet and dirtied white uniform, lined up to attempt a 16-yard field goal for the Browns.
It was a gripping moment, not only in Municipal Stadium in Cleveland, where the action was taking place, but through much of the Midwest, where the game was being televised (it wasn't until the following year, when the Rams turned around and beat the Browns, that an N.F.L. championship game was nationally televised).


CHRONICLE
Does CARLY SIMON need chutzpah?
She paid $800 for an hour's lesson in the art from ALAN M. DERSHOWITZ, whose book on the subject was No. 1 on the New York Times best-seller list Sunday.
More than 1,000 people packed the lawn where ART BUCHWALD took up his gavel at a celebrity benefit auction Monday night at the Harborside Inn in Edgartown, Mass.


Yields Cut as Demand Rises For New York City Bonds
Strong demand yesterday for a $749.5 million issue of New York City bonds led securities dealers to reduce bond yields by about a tenth of a percentage point from the levels proposed earlier in the week.
Underwriters led by Merrill Lynch late yesterday set yields for $705.9 million of tax-exempt bonds ranging from 6.40 percent for bonds due in 1993 to 7.70 percent in 1998, 7.80 percent in 2002 and 8.10 percent in 2012 through 2021.


Chapter 11 Plan For Morse Shoe
Morse Shoe Inc., operator of the Fayva stores, has submitted a bankruptcy plan that would move most of the control over the discount shoe company to the bondholders.
A Morse management team, which bought out the company four years ago, will remain but will control only 5 percent of the company under a new stock issue, said Thomas J. Galligan 3d, the company's president.


Article Raises New Concern About Family Media's Fate
FAMILY MEDIA, the New York publisher whose magazines include Health and Discover, has been in precarious financial condition for well over a year.
And now its fate has been clouded further by the publication of an article in Advertising Age that portrays the company as urgently trying to sell its titles to other publishers and nearing bankruptcy.
The article, on the trade weekly's front page this week, has once again stirred concerns within the advertising and media communities.
In January, speculation about the survival of the company, which has about 200 employees, grew when it closed one magazine, Savvy Woman, and put its six others up for sale.
But when no sales were forthcoming, the speculation died down -- until now.


Guinness Import Adds Chief Operating Officer
The Guinness Import Company, the United States importing and marketing arm for Guinness Brewing Worldwide, named William T. Olson to the new position of chief operating officer yesterday, effective Oct. 1.
Michael J. Hughes will give up his position as president but will continue as chief executive of Guinness Import, based in Stamford, Conn., and of Guinness Import Company Canada, an importing and marketing arm based in Toronto.


Banks Follow Immigrants to Flushing
On a street where hardware, electronics and shoe stores competed for space 10 years ago, a gleaming new glass obelisk juts above the squat buildings.
Each block, it seems, has a new type of tenant -- with sleek gray steel, polished brass and tinted windows suggesting an international financial center.
Seven banks crowd into just two blocks in the din and traffic of Main Street in downtown Flushing, Queens, and the incongruous glass obelisk will make eight.
Wander down the side streets or nearby Roosevelt Avenue and Northern Boulevard and the number of banks multiplies to at least 35 -- American, Chinese, Korean, British, Indian, Pakistani and Colombian.


Food Notes
Harvest Fair
The 15th Annual City Gardeners' Harvest Fair will be held Aug. 17, from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. at Gateway National Recreation Area at Floyd Bennett Field in Brooklyn.
There will be produce contests, music, food, agricultural exhibits and games.
New York City residents who grow produce in the city can enter contests in more than 20 categories.
Entries must be presented Aug. 16 from 4 to 7 P.M. or Aug. 17 from 10 A.M. to noon.
For information: (212) 233-2926.
Fruit &amp;


OFFICIALS OF C.I.A. FACE NEW SCRUTINY IN IRAN ARMS CASE
At least five intelligence officials who worked in the Reagan Administration, including some who have since been appointed to senior espionage jobs in the Bush Administration, have been notified that they are under scrutiny in the Iran-contra investigation, according to Government officials and lawyers who have been following the case.
Of this number, at least two, both former employees of the Central Intelligence Agency, have been told in letters from prosecutors that they are targets of the inquiry, which means they may be charged with a criminal offense.


Steinbrenner Stewing Over a Gold Shortage By U.S. on Cuban Soil
In the distance, Mt.
Steinbrenner could be heard rumbling that Cuba was leading the United States in total medals, 39 to 28, at the Pan American Games going into today's competition.
A vice president of the United States Olympic Committee, George M. Steinbrenner 3d has been complaining about the caliber of athletes the United States has sent to this meet, and promising to do something about it, and soon.


Nikiforos Vrettakos Poet, 79
Nikiforos Vrettakos, one of Greece's best-known poets and the first leftist member of the Athens Academy of Arts and Sciences, died on Sunday.
He was 79 years old.
He had a stroke at his village home at Ploumitsa in the Peloponnesus and died on the way to a hospital in Sparta, friends of his family said.
Mr.
Vrettakos won the country's prestigious State Poetry Prize twice, and his work was translated into several languages.
He wrote about his experiences as a soldier in World War II and on the plight of the left after losing the 1946-49 civil war.
Many of his poems were set to music, some by the composer Mikis Theodorakis.
He caused a storm in leftist circles when he decided to accept the nomination to the Athens Academy in 1988.
Several other prominent poets had declined to join what they called the bastion of conservatism.
Mr. Vrettakos was married and had two children.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Sunday about a Vermont state judge's permission for CBS television cameras to film a trial in his courtroom without telling the jurors misstated the scheduled broadcast date.
The episode, on the program "Verdict," is scheduled for sometime before Sept. 15, not for this Friday.


Pirates Come to Town, but Mets Fail to Show Up
Silence.
That's what the Mets, who had talked endlessly about coming face to face with their chief rivals in the National League East, manufactured last night against the Pirates.
Silence.
It ran through the lineup for the Mets and ruled the atmosphere at Shea Stadium.
Not surprisingly, it was also the dominant theme of the clubhouse once the Mets' 3-1 loss to Pittsburgh was mercifully complete.


Accrediting Group Defends Diversity
Asked by Lamar Alexander to justify using cultural diversity as a standard to evaluate colleges and universities, the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools has told the Education Secretary that it continues to regard the relatively new standard as an "essential" criterion for judging the academic credentials of institutions.
But in reaffirming its use of this standard, the accrediting association said it was not seeking to infringe on any college's academic freedom or to promote numerical quotas and goals.
Cultural diversity involves evaluating institutions in part on the basis of their affirmative-action programs, the multicultural content of their curriculums and their efforts to foster racial harmony.


Women in the Wild Blue Yonder
Now that Congress has opened the door for women to enter the ranks of combat pilots, many Americans find themselves uncomfortable with the idea.
Why do so many people cringe at the thought of women in combat?
Full access to the military is a logical next step on the road to equal opportunity for women.
Perhaps the real question is why it has taken so long for women to enter battle.
The combat barrier somehow seems different, more ominous than other rights gained by women.
Not because it marks the invasion of women into one of the few remaining bastions of masculinity, but because it threatens what is perhaps the sole surviving gender myth of the 20th century: that women are the world's nurturers.
Can a nurturer also be a destroyer?


FEDERAL RESERVE MOVES TO REDUCE SHORT-TERM RATES
The Federal Reserve pushed short-term interest rates down a notch yesterday, a move that analysts said was needed to stimulate the economy, which is making only a sluggish recovery from the recession.
By continuing to reduce interest rates -- a process the Federal Reserve started in mid-1989, when the economy began sliding into recession -- officials of the nation's central bank hope to encourage consumers and businesses to spend and borrow more money.


Help for Cancer Survivors
To The Living Section:  We applaud Jane Brody for her sensitive and knowledgeable Personal Health column  [ July 17 ]  on the issues of personal relationships, job discrimination and health insurance for cancer survivors.


A $23,000 Film Is Turning Into a Hit
In 1989, with $23,000 in borrowed money, some of it from credit-card advances, Richard Linklater set out to make an affectionate pseudodocumentary about the alienated college graduates, neo-beatniks and assorted eccentrics in Austin, Tex., his hometown.
The result was "Slacker," a shoestring production that is rapidly accumulating favorable notices and a cult following as it makes its way into theaters around the country.
"Slacker" has been playing at the Angelika Film Center in New York City since July 5 and has opened at theaters in Los Angeles, San Diego, Houston and Dallas.
Critics have praised it as an inventive portrait of twentysomething malaise on the fringes of collegiate life.
The 100 or so people in the film drift in and out of coffee shops, bars, second-hand-book stores and ramshackle houses, almost seeming to bounce off each other.


Heeding the Painful Signal of Insufficient Credit
The last time Alan Greenspan spoke publicly about the economy, in mid-July, the Federal Reserve Board chairman optimistically reported that the recession appeared to be over, with a "solid economic recovery" on the horizon.
The central bank's move yesterday to lower short- term interest rates suggests that some of the optimism has faded.
"The Fed took out an insurance policy that the recovery will continue," said Robert Barbera, chief economist at Shearson Lehman Hutton, expressing a sentiment that some Fed officials seem to share.


Bush Welcomes Inquiry on 1980 Campaign
President Bush said today that he hoped a Democratic Congressional investigation into whether the 1980 Reagan-Bush campaign made a deal with Iran on 52 American hostages would be "fair, not just based on outrageously flimsy sources."
Mr.
Bush made his comments to reporters on Air Force One as he flew from Washington to Kennebunkport today for the start of his four-week vacation.


Player Is Booked
A University of Colorado football player who had been sought for nearly two weeks on allegations of theft has turned himself in to the office of the Boulder (Colo.) County district attorney, authorities said.
The University of Colorado police department escorted BRYAN CAMPBELL, 20 years old, to the county jail, where he was booked Monday and released after posting $15,000 bail.


Bridge
What will a real enthusiast do with the profits after winning some money at the card table?
The right answer: Use it to go to a major championship and win some glory.
Last month Ralph Buchalter of Oakland, Calif., and Harvey Brody of San Francisco won a Calcutta event in their area.
They invested the proceeds in a few days in Las Vegas, Nev., at the American Bridge League's Summer Nationals, and competed a week ago in the National Imp Pairs.
They won by one imp after surviving an appeal against a director's ruling.


Public &amp; Private; Enough Bookshelves
The voice I assume for children's bad behavior is like a winter coat, dark and heavy.
I put it on the other night when my eldest child appeared in the kitchen doorway, an hour after he had gone to bed.
"What are you doing down here?" I began to say, when he interrupted, "I finished it!"
The dominatrix tone went out the window and we settled down for an old-fashioned dish about the fine points of "The Phantom Tollbooth." It is the wonderful tale of a bored and discontented boy named Milo and the journey he makes one day in his toy car with the Humbug and the Spelling Bee and a slew of other fantastical characters who change his life.
I read it first when I was 10.
I still have the book report I wrote, which began "This is the best book ever." That was long before I read "The Sound and the Fury" or "Little Dorrit," the Lord Peter Wimsey mysteries or Elmore Leonard.
I was still pretty close to the mark.


Late Starter in Medicaid, Arizona Shows the Way
When Sandra Bejarano's 7-year-old son, Santiago, had headaches and a fever on a recent morning, she took him to their family doctor at an attractive midtown clinic.
The doctor took a blood count, and though he suspected a routine viral infection, he had them return the next day for another test, just to make sure.
For most Americans, an ordinary medical encounter.
And that is what was so exceptional: Ms.
Bejarano, who is 28 and unemployed, and her two sons are patients in Arizona's version of Medicaid, the Federal-state medical program for poor people.


Clues to a Dark Nurturing Ground for One Serial Killer
Perhaps the first sign that something was seriously amiss with Jeffrey L. Dahmer came in 1975, when he was a teen-ager.
A group of boys walking in the woods behind the Dahmer home found the head of a dog impaled on a stick, the police chief in Bath Township, Ohio, said recently.
The boys were so shocked at the sight that they took photographs, but they did not tell the police until Mr.
Dahmer was arrested two weeks ago in Milwaukee, the Police Chief in Bath Township, John Gardner, said.
Eric Tyson, who grew up across the street from the Dahmer home, said neighbors had also found frogs and cats impaled or staked to trees, and knew that young Dahmer kept animal skeletons in a backyard shed, near his pet cemetery.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-7
U.S. military trainers will go to Peru to help the Peruvian military deal more effectively with drug traffickers and guerrillas involved in the production and smuggling of cocaine, the Administration said.
Page A1
President Menem of Argentina is enmeshed in a scandal in which some of his advisers are charged with laundering drug money.
But the scandal may be a chance for the nation to begin exorcising its long history of corruption.
A6
The right of Ontario Indians to be self-governing, a goal long sought by them, was formally recognized by the province's government.
A5
The U.S. must ask Yasir Arafat to choose the Palestinian delegation for a Middle East peace conference and guarantee that Israel will trade land for peace, or else the Palestinians will not be represented at the talks, Mr.
Arafat said.
A6
Kidnappers holding two U.S. hostages said in a communique in Beirut that they would send an envoy with "an extremely important message" to the U.N.
Secretary General within the next 48 hours.
A6
A cease-fire in Yugoslavia was agreed to by the leaders of its warring factions.
The savage fighting had brought the nation to a standstill, and raised alarm throughout the rest of Europe.
A3
Europeans press for Yugoslav settlement A3
The owner of the Oceanos, the cruise liner that went down off the coast of South Africa, has a history of mishaps, with three ships having sunk in the last three years.
A2
Impact on cruise industry of liner's sinking is small D1
U.N. Journal: Running to run the world's agenda A4 NATIONAL A8-18
Interests rates were pushed down a notch by the Federal Reserve, a move that analysts said was needed to stimulate the economy, which is recovering from the recession at a sluggish rate.
A1
The nation's senior bank regulator, William Seidman, announced his resignation, more than a year after the White House tried very publicly to remove him from office.
D1
The Medicaid program in Arizona has become a model for the quality of care it offers and its ability to maintain costs.
It is run like a giant health maintenance organization.
A1
At least five intelligence officials who worked in the Reagan Administration, including some who occupy espionage jobs in the Bush Administration, have been notified that they are under scrutiny in the Iran-contra investigation, Government officials said.
A1
Bush welcomes '80 campaign inquiry A18
Helms defends disclosure of ethics panel report A18
The shrinking of the military will have a significant effect on blacks.
It is generally agreed that blacks have been given greater opportunity for advancement in the military than in civilian life.
A1
Needle-exchange programs were endorsed by the National Commission on AIDS as a way of reducing the spread of AIDS among drug users, who are a rising proportion of people infected with the disease.
A1
New York dentist faces fine for refusing to treat AIDS patient A14
Doctors reassess the risk of asbestos A15
The Justice Department has sided with an anti-abortion group in Wichita, Kan., that is fighting a Federal judge's effort to keep three abortion clinics open there.
A10 Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th will announce today that he has decided not to seek the 1992 Democratic presidential nomination, said a Democrat close to the West Virginian.
A8
Ruling clears special election in Pennsylvania A9
Wide attack on hiring of illegal aliens A10
Child's love of cruelty may hint at the future killer A8
Six in Amish family killed as truck slams a buggy A17 REGIONAL B1-4
Gov.
Cuomo's panel on black affairs disassociated itself from a City College professor's angry attack on Jews at a black cultural festival it co-sponsored last month.
B1
A budget without an income tax will be signed or vetoed today by Governor Weicker, he said, and then proceeded to gather support for the veto his opponents in the legislature are expecting.
B1
Dinkins finds millions more for the schools B2
News analysis: Mayor Dinkins tries a new tack B3
To counter tax cynics, Florio's party tries ads B2
A woman was killed and dismembered in her Washington Heights apartment, the police said.
A suspect, a man who rented a room from her, was arrested in the home.
B1 Julio Gonzalez had undergone "a brief psychotic episode" and therefore was not responsible for starting the fire at the Happy Land Social Club that killed 87 people, a psychologist testified.
B3
In Brooklyn and the Bronx, two games turn deadly B3
Police say officer abducted and raped woman B4
Adopted son says father didn't have sex with children B4
Banks are following the immigrants to Flushing.
There are at least 35 banks -- American, Chinese, Korean, British, Indian, Pakistani and Colombian -- tailoring their strategies to serve the savings-minded residents.
B1
About New York: Learning to love things that slither B3 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 The Living Section
Restaurant inspections have new rules and are run by many new inspectors.
The emphasis is no longer on rat holes but on conditions that more directly affect food, like the temperatures of refrigerators and steam tables.
A1
The queen of food promotion C1
Monster trucks and their drivers C1
De Gustibus C6
Wine Talk C8 Arts/Entertainment
A $23,000 film attracts a following C13
Weaving a life of the Jameses C13
Jewish exhibit in Berlin is in jeopardy C13
Theater: "Waste," at the Living Theater C13 Education Page
Black churches are helping schools in inner-city neighborhoods fight the social ills that seem to doom many children to educational failure.
Because of their success, the churches have been attracting funds from private and governmental sources.
A1
Educators draw outline for nationwide testing A19 Health Page
Finding the secrets of caffeine, the drug C1
Personal Health C11 Sports B5-10
Baseball: Pirates add to Mets' woes B5
White Sox rout Yanks, 14-5 B5
Tomlin continues mastery of Mets B9
Columns: Berkow on Paul Brown B7
Claire Smith on Baseball B5
Football: Handley can't understand boos for Simms B5
Dickerson hoping for a season without controversy B7
Golf: Stockton taking a close look B8
Pan American Games: Steinbrenner upset B8
Sports Business: F.T.C. denied on college games B9 Obituaries D21
Harry Reasoner died at 68.
His wry wit and low-key, unflappable delivery were mainstays in network newscasting for four decades.
Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A20
Press Iraq to disarm
D'Amato celebrates too soon
The right way to rerun 1980
Hang in there, Mr. Weicker
Letters A20
Anna Quindlen: Enough bookshelves A21
Leslie H. Gelb: Ox-goring time in New York A21
James Reston: A jerky start toward '92 A21
Elaine Tyler May: Women in the wild blue yonder A21


Ruling Clears Special Election in Pennsylvania
A Federal appeals court yesterday ruled that a special election could be held in November to fill the vacant United States Senate seat in Pennsylvania left by the death of John Heinz.
The decision, which overturned a decision by a Federal district judge in June, appears to clear the way for Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, a former two-term Governor of Pennsylvania, to become a candidate for the seat.


Harry Reasoner, 68, Newscaster Known for His Wry Wit, Is Dead
Harry Reasoner, whose wry wit and low-key unflappable delivery were mainstays in network newscasting for four decades, died last night at Norwalk Hospital in Norwalk, Conn.
He was 68 years old.
He died of cardiopulmonary arrest, said a CBS News spokeman, Tom Goodman.
Mr.
Reasoner had been in declining health for some time.
He had operations for lung cancer in 1987 and 1989.
On June 12, he underwent surgery for removal of a blood clot on the brain, and later developed pneumonia.


A Drug Scandal Embroils Argentina's President
Historically, military rule and highly autocratic governments in Argentina meant that few scandals that touched the presidential palace were ever permitted to come to light.
Today, in the midst of Argentina's push toward democratization, that is changing as the country's President, Carlos Saul Menem, finds himself enmeshed in a scandal in which his in-laws and some of his closest advisers are charged with laundering drug money.


Challenge for Mayor: Testing Some Ideas He Got From Public
Taking a new tack to reach his constituents, Mayor David N. Dinkins threw open his doors on Monday and listened to the public.
Now comes the tough part: making sure at least some of the suggestions become reality.
If he doesn't do this, political strategists say, he will be open to charges that the whole event was a public-relations ploy.
And he may aggravate the problem the event was supposed to solve -- his difficulties in communicating his message to New Yorkers.


F.T.C. Loses a Round On Televised Football
A complaint filed by the Federal Trade Commission that charged the College Football Association and Capital Cities/ABC Incorporated with illegally conspiring to limit the number of college football games on television was dismissed yesterday.
James Timony, an administrative law judge for the F.T.C., had listened to arguments by commission lawyers that the C.F.A.'s negotiation of a $300 million package with ABC was designed to make a profit.
But Timony ruled yesterday in Washington that the C.F.A. is a nonprofit organization and therefore legally out of the reach of the F.T.C.


2 Are Slain in Arguments Over Games
One youth was playing in a pickup basketball game yesterday in Brooklyn.
Another was playing touch football in the Bronx.
Neither survived his game, the police said.
The 15-year-old Brooklyn youth, Marc Haynes, was stabbed and killed yesterday afternoon because he refused to pass the basketball to a teammate, the police said.


U.S. Backs Wichita Abortion Protesters
The Justice Department filed a motion today on behalf of an anti-abortion group that is fighting a Federal court order curbing its demonstrations at three abortion clinics here.
The anti-abortion organization, Operation Rescue, has engaged in demonstrations blocking access to the clinics for much of the last month, and hundreds of its supporters have been arrested on charges of trespassing and loitering.


The Pop Life
Bad News About Concerts
The concert industry, like the economy at large, is suffering from a recession that is wreaking havoc on tours and threatening to bankrupt promoters.
The Sister of Mercy tour featuring Public Enemy, Gang of Four and Warrior Soul was canceled on July 30 because of poor ticket sales, and the Whitney Houston, Club MTV (featuring Bev Bell Devoe and Tony Toni Tone) and Steve Winwood tours are all limping along, playing to less-than-capacity houses.


Accounts
*
Anheuser-Busch Inc. confirmed yesterday that the advertising account for four Michelob brands had been awarded to the St.
Louis office of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles.
The agency assumes the account from DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago, which won it from D.M.B.&amp;B. in 1984. *
Labatt's U.S.A.
Inc. to Rotando Lerch &amp; Iafeliece, Stamford, Conn., for two imports.
Clausthaler, a non-alcoholic German brew, had previously been assigned to Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos Inc., Boston.
Red Stripe, a Jamaican beer, was not previously advertised in the United States.
Billings have not been determined.


Dollar Declines After Fed Acts to Trim Interest Rates
The dollar closed lower yesterday as the Federal Reserve took steps to push interest rates downward.
The Fed added reserves to the nation's banking system, a move that makes it cheaper for banks to borrow money.
The step was seen as a signal by the central bank that it wanted lower interest rates to stop the economy from slipping back into recession.


Corrections
An article on Monday about the politics of drawing City Council districts in New York misidentified Herman Badillo.
He is a former Bronx Borough President, not the current one.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 7


Wine Talk
THE 1855 classification of the Wines of Bordeaux holds up as a monument to conservatism and intransigence.
But it serves as a perfect point of reference for discussing the quality of the best Bordeaux wines.
If someone says of a particular chateau, "It should be a first growth," or "It's better than half of the classified growths," other wine enthusiasts understand exactly what is meant.
A good example of how the 1855 classification can be used is the town of Pauillac.
Everyone who is interested in wine has heard of Pauillac, in the wine country north of Bordeaux.
And even some who haven't know the names of its three first growth chateaus, Lafite-Rothschild, Latour and Mouton-Rothschild.
Basking in their reflected glory, Pauillac considers itself the most famous wine community in the world.


Lights! Camera! Catching An Intruder in the Act
A new electronic security system allows several convenience stores or small businesses to be monitored and controlled from a single location.
The Telepix system, made by the Sony Corporation and the Westinghouse Electricei Corporation, lets a security guard turn on lights, open or lock doors, activate cameras and microphones, even talk with an intruder, from afar.
The system is made up of two main parts -- a receiver and a transmitter.
The transmitter, a small box about the size of a telephone book, can be hooked up at the store to cameras, loudspeakers, microphones, videocassette recorders, alarms, locks and telephone lines to the receiver and the police.
The receiver includes a set of buttons and controls with a black and white screen.


Federal Agencies Drag Feet in Bank Scandal; Alan Garcia Allegations
To the Editor:
In "Global Scandal, Ragged Response" (editorial, July 24), you state that the Bank of Credit and Commerce International reportedly helped "former President Alan Garcia of Peru siphon millions into hiding." These allegations are based on two reports by private investigators, Rafael Garcia, a private investigator in Miami, and Kroll Associates, a private investigative agency in New York City.
The reports alleged foreign bank accounts in which Alan Garcia and his wife had secreted millions of dollars.
Each of the banks named in the reports has advised that no such accounts for the benefit of Alan Garcia or his wife exist.
Some of the banks say that the alleged bank numbered accounts referred to in the Rafael Garcia report bear no relationship to any digital banking code that they have ever used.


CHRONICLE
A judge in Burbank, Calif., ruled on Friday in favor of CLINT EASTWOOD in a $100,000 lawsuit charging him with maliciously ramming the car of STACY McLAUGHLIN, after she mistakenly parked it in his space.
Mr.
Eastwood had paid $960 to repair Ms.
McLaughlin's car, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


U.N. Journal; World's No. 1 Guessing Game Is Coming This Fall
Floating around the United Nations Secretariat is an agenda for the 46th General Assembly, which begins here on Sept. 17.
A modest document by United Nations standards, it manages nevertheless to include some 30 pages of listings, day by day and hour by hour, of ceremonies, meetings and consultations meant to involve every member nation by the time the Assembly ends in mid-December.
But nowhere in it is there any mention of what will be the most popular topic of the session: the selection of a new Secretary General.
Javier Perez de Cuellar, the 71-year-old incumbent, will complete his second five-year term on Dec. 31., and he has indicated he has no desire for another term.


A Look at the City; Ox-Goring Time in New York
"The question is, what do we do to help the city avoid financial disaster?" Gov.
Mario Cuomo crooned at the other end of the phone, as New York City stares down the cannon of budget deficits that could total $16 billion over the next four years.
But the Governor knows better than anyone that the real question is not WHAT should be done, but WHO will do it.


Lindros Impresses
ERIC LINDROS made a big impression in Team Canada's first official Canada Cup workout, on Monday in Toronto.
The 6-foot-5-inch, 228-pound Lindros, who starred with the Ontario Hockey League's Oshawa Generals before being selected first over all in the National Hockey League draft by the Quebec Nordiques, displayed the rare combination of size, speed and skill that has made him the game's hottest new commodity.


6 in Amish Family Killed as Truck Slams a Buggy
Six members of an Amish family were killed and four others injured Monday night when a pickup truck slammed into the rear of their horse-drawn buggy.
The driver of the pickup was charged today with aggravated vehicular homicide.
The 26-year-old driver, Douglas A. Lyons of nearby Fredericktown, had been drinking and refused to submiit to a breath test, said David Schultz, an Ohio state trooper.


A Jerky Start Toward '92
In case you missed it and even if you're not ready for it, the Presidential campaign of 1992 has now begun.
The first thing George Bush did after his summit meetings in London and Moscow was to call his political advisers to Camp David for a planning session on the coming campaign.
This almost aroused the Democrats from their prolonged sleep, especially since the President is now blaming them for every disaster from the budget deficit to the recession.
Both parties have had a hard time.
At home, they have had to deal with difficult economic, social and moral tangles, and abroad with the end of the cold war, collapse of the Soviet empire in Eastern Europe and renewed aggression in the gulf.
So there is now a pause for reflection on the Bush record, which is not as good as the Republicans claim or as bad as the Democrats charge.


An Unlikely Perch for a Sunbather


Educators Draw Outline For Nationwide Testing
For the first time, a group of high-level education policy-makers and classroom teachers has put together the working elements for a national examination system like that advocated by President Bush.
The group of 450 people, which met last week in Snowmass, Colo., agreed on the outlines of a nationwide testing system for students in elementary and high schools.
The plan would allow regions to develop their own tests and grade them according to a national standard so that the results could be compared across the country.
The New Standards Project, as the group is known, also produced dozens of sample questions for such a test.


Easing by Fed Helps Dow Rise 38.24
Lifted mainly by news of an easing of interest rates by the Federal Reserve Board, stock prices rose sharply yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average landing just 8 points short of its record close two months ago.
Some other indexes reached record levels.
The Dow rose by 38.24, or 1.3 percent, to 3,027.28.
Trading was moderately heavy at 174.6 million shares.
Advancing issues outpaced decliners by 1095 to 502.
The stock exchange reported that 121 companies made new highs, while just 9 fell to new lows.


Staying Healthy Takes Courage


Tomlin Quietly Keeps Mets' Batters Silent
The Pittsburgh Pirates call him "Whisper," which has nothing to do with what he does to the Mets' offense.
Randy Tomlin just doesn't talk very much.
And when he does, it is a good idea to get as close to him as one can.
"Sometimes," Bobby Bonilla said last night before the Pirates beat the Mets, 3-1, at Shea Stadium, "you don't even know he's around."


The Hot Rods of the 90's Go Crash! Crunch! Crush!
"PROTECT these wonderful drivers from danger." As the evening's invocation for the monster trucks faded away, 10,000 raucous fans at the Lebanon Valley Speedway here roared back to life.
Awash in spotlights were 10 men posed gladiator-style atop the six-foot wheels of giant pickup trucks with names like Bearfoot, the Carolina Crusher and UFO.
The air smelled of burning oil and soon vibrated with revving engines.


Economic Scene; Federal Gold, Census Rainbow
THE nation's governors and mayors are sure that some five million Americans slipped through the census net in 1990.
And they know that about $60 billion in Federal aid -- $236 per person in 1989 -- is linked to population.
That, in part, explains why New York City and dozens of other localities are demanding that the census be adjusted to compensate for the undercount.
It will not be easy to convince a Federal court to second-guess the Bush Administration's decision to stick with the initial count.
But even if the cities prevail, suggests Michael Murray, an economist at Bates College in Maine, the plaintiffs will be disappointed: There simply is no pot of gold at the end of the legal rainbow.


Hang in There, Governor Weicker
Gov.
Lowell Weicker's case for a Connecticut income tax has gotten an unintended boost from its opponents in the General Assembly.
For the third time, after two vetoes, the legislators have adopted a no-income-tax budget that's riddled with gimmicks and punishes taxpayers who can least afford to pay.
If that's the best they can do, they are conceding that Mr.
Weicker is right.
Connecticut is five weeks into its new fiscal year without a budget.
The Senate's Democratic leaders, determined to embarrass the man who broke their party's hold on the governorship, cling stubbornly to the discredited tax patchwork that got the state into its current bind.
The House, controlled by more enlightened Democrats, has approved an income-tax-based budget; Senate support is two votes short.


Oops! Sorry, Monica, Says the I.T.F.
MONICA SELES must be wondering if she can do anything right in the eyes of her sport's establishment.
The International Tennis Federation said yesterday that Seles had jeopardized her eligibility for the 1992 Olympics by failing to provide medical documents explaining her late withdrawal from Yugoslavia's team for the Federation Cup competition last month in England.


For New York Restaurants, New Rules, New Inspectors
"Do not offer me anything to eat or drink; do not offer me any money," said the man in the light blue inspector's smock stamped with the seal of the New York City Department of Health.
"No, no," said the restaurateur, fear in her eyes, nervousness in her voice.


Dinkins Finds Millions More For the Schools
New York City officials have agreed to provide the Board of Education with $32 million more in a settlement that avoids a lawsuit that might have jeopardized the city's ability to sell bonds.
The suit, threatened by the board, was based on a 15-year-old state law known as the Stavisky-Goodman Law.
It requires the city to spend as large a proportion of its budget on schools in any fiscal year as the average percentage spent over the previous three years.


To Counter Tax Cynics, Florio's Party Tries Ads
Amid indications that their $750 million property-tax rebate program is not winning as many friends as they had hoped going into the fall elections, New Jersey Democrats announced today a statewide radio advertising campaign to promote the program.
Some 2.2 million homestead rebate checks began going out last week, and while most recipients welcome the money -- up to $500 -- many are complaining that it does little to counter the record $2.8 billion tax increase that Gov.
Jim Florio pushed through the Legislature last year.


60-Minute Gourmet
THE number of barbecue sauces on the market is growing at an astonishing rate.
Each claims to have a magic blend of herbs and spices that enhance foods cooked over open fire, but while some are fairly good, most others are humdrum and loaded with sugar.
It is clear from looking at the ingredient lists that the sauces are simple -- and much cheaper -- to make at home.
First think of the flavor you want to achieve: Spicy?
Herby?
Fiery?
Sweet?
Then pick the appropriate ingredients.


AIDS Panel Backs Efforts to Exchange Drug Users' Needles
In a report that sharply criticized the Bush Administration's drug control efforts, the National Commission on AIDS today endorsed needle-exchange programs to reduce the spread of AIDS among drug users.
The commission said the Administration had failed to recognize the link between AIDS and drug use, a failure it called "bewildering and tragic." Drug users make up a rising proportion of people infected with the AIDS virus.
It also criticized Congress for failing to finance drug treatment programs requested by the Administration, and state governments for not providing more money for drug treatment.
The report is the first time the commission has taken a position on programs in which drug abusers exchange their used hypodermic needles for clean ones, and it provoked immediate criticism from the Administration.
The Director of National Drug Control Policy, Bob Martinez, said the commission offered "no clear scientific evidence" that needle-exchange programs reduce what he called "risk-taking behavior" related to transmission of the AIDS virus.
Dr.
Herbert Kleber, deputy director of the drug policy office, said he did not believe that any of the demonstration programs were conclusively positive.
"There are extremely good intentions in all these studies," Dr.
Kleber said, "but they all have weaknesses, and we cannot support needle-exchange programs until enough evidence is there for the Surgeon General to certify them."
Dr.
Don C. Des Jarlais, a member of the AIDS commission and director of research on chemical dependency at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan, said there were "tens of studies that give evidence that needle-exchange programs work."
"The case is not scientifically proven," he added, "but the evidence is surprisingly clear and consistent." At the same time, he said, there is no evidence at all for the claim that needle-exchange programs increase drug use.
Reaction in New York
In New York City, where Mayor David N. Dinkins has criticized needle-exchange programs as a surrender to drug abuse, officials would say only that they were interested in the commission's report and would review it.
But in response to it, the Mayor asked the city's acting health commissioner, Dr.
Margaret Hamburg, to review the evidence from what appears to be a successful needle-exchange program in New Haven, and then report to him.
Researchers released their favorable report of the New Haven experiment last month.
The Federal panel's endorsement of similar programs so soon afterward was coincidental.
Recommendations from the commission, whose 15 members are appointed by the President and Congress, have no legal force, but today's report, one of a series the commission is doing on national AIDS policy, is expected to be influential as states and localities consider the issue of needle exchanges.
The report said one of the most important factors in curbing the spread of AIDS was to get drug users into drug treatment programs, because data show that those who get treatment are less likely to become infected with the HIV virus that causes AIDS.
It also called for more money from Federal, state and local governments for drug treatment on demand to eliminate situations like that in New York City, where there are only 38,000 publicly financed treatment slots to handle the city's estimated 200,000 intravenous drug users, about half of whom are believed to be infected with the AIDS virus.
It is estimated that 75,000 of those drug users would seek treatment it if was available.
Needle-exchange programs have been at the center of a debate over how to prevent AIDS among drug users, who can become infected by sharing needles.
They can then transmit the virus to their sexual partners and unborn children.
The Administration has barred the use of Federal money to pay for needle exchanges, and 11 states, including New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, outlaw the sale or possession of hypodermic needles without a prescription.
Advocates for people with AIDS have repeatedly been arrested in New York City and elsewhere for openly defying the law by distributing clean needles.
Researchers reported last month that the New Haven program, authorized by the Connecticut Legislature and carried out in a partnership between the state drug program and the Yale University medical school, reduced the rate of infections among drug users in the city by 33 percent. 'Laws Are Obsolete'
Dr.
Des Jarlais said laws restricting the purchase or free distribution of clean needles simply do not prevent any drug use, but rather increase the spread of AIDS.
"These laws are obsolete and dangerous to to the public health," he said.
And Dr.
June Osborn, a pediatrician who is chairman of the AIDS commission, said: "The flash-fire potential of HIV transmission through injection drug use has been demonstrated repeatedly in this country and around the world. It is an issue of the greatest urgency."
One of the strongest Congressional opponents of needle-exchange programs is Representative Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of Manhattan.
"There is no guarantee that these free, or exchanged needles won't be shared as well," a member of Mr.
Rangel's staff said today in explaining the Congressman's view.
Dr.
Des Jarlais said he believed that the reason a person opposed both needle-exchange programs and treatment on demand for drug users was: "People just believe that drug users are 'not like me' -- they are just bad people, and they should be punished."
"But," he continued, "in reality that approach doesn't work. There are too many of them to put them all in prison, imprisonment costs far too much, you can't keep them in prison forever and, besides, putting them in jail won't treat their drug dependence."
The commission report pointed out that the Administration has proposed spending $332 million to increase the size of prisons by 3,600 inmate-beds but only $99 million for additional drug treatment slots, even though the prison beds cost nine times what each drug treatment slot costs.
But Dr.
Kleber took the commission to task for its criticism of the Administration, which he said has steadily worked to increase the availability of drug treatment.


Zeroing In on Oil Far Below the Sea
Three discoveries this spring of large oil and gas deposits miles beneath the surface of the Gulf of Mexico marked a triumph for one of the newest advances in exploration technology: the precise, three-dimensional mapping of rock layers under the ocean floor.
The latest exploration techniques, combined with new methods of drilling in deep water, promise to substantially expand the nation's oil resources and lower production costs.
The Gulf of Mexico discoveries buttressed 1989 estimates by the United States Geological Survey and the Minerals Management Service that the deep waters of the Gulf of Mexico could eventually yield nearly as much oil as the estimated 10 billion barrels of Prudhoe Bay in Alaska.


EXECUTIVES
*
A.
L.
Laboratories Inc., Fort Lee, N.J., a pharmaceuticals manufacturer, named Robert A. Pudlak vice president for finance and chief financial officer and George S. Barrett president of its subsidiary Barre-National Inc., Baltimore. *
Dairy Queen Operators Association Inc., Minneapolis, which represents 2,600 stores of International Dairy Queen Inc., named Harris Cooper executive director and chief executive. *
McGraw-Hill Inc., New York, a publishing and information-services company, appointed Susan S. Buchanan senior vice president for information management. *
Microcel Technology Inc., Edison, N.J., a maker of advanced composite materials, appointed Robert W. Truxell president. *
Norstar Bank, Melville, L.I., a subsidiary of Fleet/Norstar Financial Group Inc., named Patrick A. McAuliffe group senior vice president of the corporate banking division for the New York region. *
Olympic International Bank and Trust Co., Boston, a subsidiary of U.S.A.
Bancorp Inc., named Robert E. Mitchell president and chief executive.


Handley Puzzled by Boos Aimed by Fans at Simms
Coach Ray Handley stopped short today of criticizing Giants' fans, but said he was surprised at their harsh treatment of Phil Simms during the team's exhibition opener on Monday night.
Under the glare of a full house at Giants Stadium, Handley thought he was being booed in his head-coaching debut by the crowd after a play failed to work in the fourth quarter, even with the Giants comfortably leading the Buffalo Bills.


Yankees Get 5 Runs in First but Prove No Lead Is Safe
They looked spiffy after the first inning, sorry after the fourth and sad after the ninth.
The Yankees rolled into the new Comiskey Park like a new team tonight and then they rolled over and died a scant few innings later.
New York's 5-0 lead after one inning vanished faster than free hot dogs as the White Sox rebounded to grab a 14-5 victory.
What appeared to be a certain triumph for the Yankees and a smart way to open a series became another depressing loss that included shortstop Alvaro Espinoza taking the mound in the eighth.


Lebanese Islamic Group Hints Release of Hostages Is Near
Kidnappers holding the American hostages Terry Anderson and Thomas Sutherland said in a communique in Beirut today that they would send an envoy with "an extremely important message" to the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, within the next 48 hours.
But by the end of the day, United Nations officials said they had received no direct communications from any potential envoy.
United States officials here said they had received no visa applications that would lend credence to the report of a special envoy, but a senior Islamic cleric in Beirut suggested to reporters there that the "envoy" could be a released hostage carrying a special message to United Nations officials.


Univision Chief To Multimedia
J.
William Grimes, the chief executive of Univision Holdings Inc., the country's largest Spanish-language communications company, today was named a vice president and corporate group executive of Multimedia.
Mr.
Grimes, a former top executive at the ESPN sports cable network, will assume responsibilities that include acquisitions, government and legislative relations and special operations.


Review/Television; What Will Be Left Over From the News at 7 Menu
When "NBC Nightly News" moves from 7 P.M. to 6:30 P.M. on Sept. 9, joining the other network news programs, the slot that was once dominated by network news will be left to the tabloidy "Hard Copy" on Channel 2, "Jeopardy," the popular game show on Channel 7, and a new game show, "Rough Connections," on Channel 4.
New Yorkers who have trouble getting to their sets before 7 but want the day's headlines will then have a choice between "The MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour" on Channel 13 and "Fox News at 7" on Channel 5.
Whatever one's tastes, it is not a close call.
While "Macneil-Lehrer" is exploring the possibilities of peace in the Middle East or the likelihood of Clarence Thomas's elevation to the Supreme Court or the consequences of bank failures, the Channel 5 program, anchored by Jack Cafferty and Cora-Ann Mihalik, will be doing what local news does, only worse.


Retired Mill Employees Assured on Pensions
A week after a Congressional hearing focused attention on the plight of thousands of retired mill workers who have lost 30 percent of their pension in the failure of a California insurance company, the mill's former owner agreed today to make up the difference for most of the workers.
David Murdock, a California financier who bought Cannon Mills in 1982 and sold it in 1985 to Fieldcrest Mills of Massachusetts, announced at a news conference here that he would "personally make up the shortfall to all the workers and Cannon."


Book Notes
Pirated in Arabic
Peace may be coming to the Middle East, but not, it seems, to the world of Middle Eastern publishing, where some skulduggery in Beirut, Lebanon, and Amman, Jordan, has Houghton Mifflin up in arms.


Kings Sign Huddy
The Los Angeles Kings signed free agent defenseman CHARLIE HUDDY to a multiyear contract yesterday.
Terms were not announced.
The Kings acquired rights to the 11-year National Hockey League veteran from Minnesota on June 22.
Minnesota acquired Huddy from the Edmonton Oilers in the 1991 expansion draft. (AP)


DOCTORS REASSESS RISK OF ASBESTOS
Asbestos can never be eliminated from the environment, and Americans should learn how to live with it safely rather than try to remove all of it from buildings, a panel of the American Medical Association says.
Contrary to what was described as public "misconceptions," asbestos poses far less risk to the health of the everyday occupants of buildings than that posed by smoking, drug and alcohol abuse, improper diet and lack of exercise, the association's Council on Scientific Affairs says in a position paper published today.


Jewish Wing for Berlin Museum in Jeopardy
Pressed by a $3 billion budget deficit and facing heavy outlays for such large projects as the preparations for a bid for the Olympics in 2000, city officials here say that a $68 million extension of the City Museum that was to have documented the culture of Berlin's prewar Jewish population will probably have to be postponed four to five years.


The Right Way to Rerun 1980
"People back home don't give two hoots about it, what happened 10 years ago. Jimmy Carter lost the election." Bob Michel, the House minority leader, dismisses as sore-loser partisanship the Democratic Congressional leadership's decision to formally investigate reports of secret deals between officials of the 1980 Reagan campaign and Iran over the release of the American hostages.
The charge is unfair, and President Bush does well to discount a political motive.
The Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, and House Speaker Thomas Foley overrode their own caution to embark on a course as perilous for Democrats as for Republicans.
A careful investigation serves former hostages, former Reagan aides and the wide public.
Republicans would do better to participate in the inquiry, assuring its bipartisanship.


Bell Atlantic Deal
The Bell Atlantic Corporation, a regional Bell company based in Philadelphia, won approval from the Federal Trade Commission to acquire an interest in the American Financial Service Group, a subsidiary of MNC Financial Inc. of Baltmore.
The F.T.C. granted an early termination on Friday for the required waiting period under antitrust laws.
Officials at MNC were unable to comment on any specific terms of the transaction.


Books of The Times; Murder and Mystery From Watts to Bologna
A Red Death By Walter Mosley 284 pages.
W.
W.
Norton. $18.95.
A Glancing Light By Aaron Elkins 243 pages.
Charles Scribner's Sons. $18.95.
Good writers, including mystery writers, somehow know how to make their fictional characters foretell events before they actually happen in real life.
They strike the prescience key on their typewriters or computers and out comes a story that later bounces off the front pages and emits radiation from the nightly horror news on television.
Only the writers, of course, know where that magical key is located.


Quotation of the Day
"I feel today as though somebody has removed a shot put from my gullet. I'm now available for any kind of job that will pay a lot of money to do practically nothing." -- L. William Seidman, resigning as the nation's senior banking regulator.  [ D1:6. ]


Diving Gold For Lenzi Of U.S.
Mark Lenzi defied the boos and whistles of a partisan crowd as he stood on the 1-meter springboard, then nailed the final dive of the competition to win a gold medal for the United States today at the Pan American Games.
He and Abel Ramirez of Cuba dueled dramatically on the 1-meter springboard for more than an hour in the hot, humid pool complex, where the 3,500 fans jammed into overhanging seats roared and hooted as if they were at a boxing match.


Black Churches Renew a Mission: Education
Those who would save America's inner-city schools are discovering a long-neglected resource: the black church.
From after-school tutorials to summer schools, computer classes to family science activities, black churches are renewing their historic commitment to education.
But now they are getting money from private foundations and some government agencies, who see black churches as their best link to children in neighborhoods beset by poverty, violence and school failure.


In Career Twilight, McNeil Wages Fight For Player Freedom
Free agency for National Football League players and a collective-bargaining agreement are nebulous notions to most players, especially at this time of year, when those who aren't sweltering on the practice field are sweating the roster cuts.
The labor issues have not drifted past Freeman McNeil, an 11-year veteran who is the Jets' career rushing leader and fourth among active running backs with 7,604 yards.
That is why McNeil has a lawsuit pending against the league in which he is seeking free agency for himself and ostensibly for all N.F.L. players.
The lawsuit, which was filed in April 1990, has survived several challenges by the league and is scheduled for trial in Minneapolis next February.


Personal Health
A 63-YEAR-OLD woman with insulin-dependent diabetes takes a three-week trip to Europe.
A 65-year-old man who has had coronary bypass surgery goes trekking in Nepal.
A 72-year-old man with a pacemaker and a 58-year-old woman with emphysema complete a three-week tenting safari in Kenya.
People with chronic diseases are no longer confined to short, "safe" vacations close to home.
Travel to far-off and exotic lands is common today among the growing millions of people with serious but controllable illnesses, physical disabilities and other health-related conditions, like allergies and pregnancy.


Motorola Offering Smaller Phone
Motorola Inc., one of the largest makers of cellular telephones, said yesterday that later this month it planned to sell what it called the smallest and lightest phone on the market.
The Microtac Lite Digital Personal Communicator Telephone weighs 7.7 ounces and measures 11.6 cubic inches, or a bit larger than a package of Twinkies.


Review/Television; What Will Be Left Over From the News at 7 Menu
When "NBC Nightly News" moves from 7 P.M. to 6:30 P.M. on Sept. 9, joining the other network news programs, the slot that was once dominated by network news will be left to the tabloidy "Hard Copy" on Channel 2, "Jeopardy," the popular game show on Channel 7, and a new game show, "Rough Connections," on Channel 4.
New Yorkers who have trouble getting to their sets before 7 but want the day's headlines will then have a choice between "The MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour" on Channel 13 and "Fox News at 7" on Channel 5.
Whatever one's tastes, it is not a close call.
While "Macneil-Lehrer" is exploring the possibilities of peace in the Middle East or the likelihood of Clarence Thomas's elevation to the Supreme Court or the consequences of bank failures, the Channel 5 program, anchored by Jack Cafferty and Cora-Ann Mihalik, will be doing what local news does, only worse.


Kuwaitis Predict Fires Will Be Out by March


Arafat Wants to Be Asked By U.S. to Name Delegates
Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, said today that the United States must ask him to choose the Palestinian delegation for a Middle East peace conference and guarantee that Israel will trade land for peace.
Otherwise, Mr.
Arafat said, Palestinians will not be represented at the proposed October talks since, he said, none would attend unless they were authorized to do so by his organization.


Agency Moves to Halt Sales Of Large Fireworks to Public
The Consumer Product Safety Commission has voted to ban the sale to the public of large-shell fireworks, saying they have caused eye losses and other facial injuries.
The vote, taken Monday, applies to the type of aerial shells that are larger than 1.75 inches in diameter and are fired from reusable tubes.


Many Call, But Few Cancel After Cruise Ship's Sinking
Travel agents said yesterday that they had received many telephone calls from worried customers after the sinking of a Greek cruise ship off South Africa, but that few had canceled their bookings.
The cause of the sinking of the Oceanos in the Indian Ocean on Sunday is under investigation, and several agents and cruise industry officials said they were hoping it was an accident.


Corrections
An entry in the Company Briefs listing of Business Day yesterday misidentified the Damon Group.
It is a holding company for the Damon Corporation and is based in New York.


Paul F. de Gara, 88, Allergist for Kennedy
Dr.
Paul F. de Gara, an allergist who treated President John F. Kennedy for extreme allergy to dogs, died Saturday at the New Rochelle Hospital Medical Center.
He was 88 years old and lived in the Westchester County town of Pelham.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Almac's Inc, East Providence, R.I., an operator of 46 New England supermarkets, was purchased for more than $100 million by Wetterau Inc., Hazelwood, Mo., a food wholesaler; Leonard Green &amp; Partners, a Los Angeles buyout firm, and the Yucaipa Companies, Claremont, Calif,, a supermarket investment and operating company. *
First of America Bank Corp., Kalamazoo, Mich., agreed to buy Champion Federal Savings and Loan Association, Bloomington, Ill., pending Government approval. *
Oakwood Homes Corp., Greensboro, N.C., signed a letter of intent to acquire 14 North Carolina manufactured-home stores operated by Foster's Housing Center Inc. *
Riverwood International Corp., Atlanta, a packaging company, agreed to acquire another packager, Minnesota Automation, Crosby, Minn.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Titan Corp., San Diego, a high-technology company, acquired a computer consultant, Stonehouse Group, Denver, in exchange for common stock. *
Toshiba Corp,, Tokyo, opened a computer-disk-drive factory in San Jose, Calif.  *
Valcom Inc., Omaha, Neb., a computer retailer, completed an agreement to merge with Inacomp Computer Centers Inc., Troy, Mich., to form Inacom Corp. *
Willis Corroon P.L.C., London, an insurance company, agreed to acquire two Cleveland insurance firms, J. J. Balaguer &amp; Co. and J. E. Moenkhaus &amp; Associates.
The firms will merge as Willis Corroon, Cleveland.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 2
July 26
Aug. 3
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.4
7.3
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
210.6
210.8
218.5
Distillate stocks
121.8
120.4
119.2
Crude imports, daily
5.6
5.8
6.6
Product imports, daily
2.5
1.7
2.7
Crude stocks
345.7
347.0
379.7
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
87.6
88.8
94.6
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


NCNB and Sovran Set Up Community Loan Program
NCNB and C&amp;S/Sovran, which agreed last month to a multibillion-dollar merger, announced yesterday that Nationsbank, the company that will be formed by their deal, will lend $10 billion over 10 years for community development.
The program will be aimed at consumer and commercial affordable-housing loans, loans to businesses that are owned by members of minorities, loans to not-for-profit groups and other similar transactions.


Bank Funds And C.D.'s Fall in Week
Yields on short-term securities, both money market funds and certificates of deposit, moved down significantly during the last week, continuing their recent downtrend.
Rates will probably drop ven lower, according to The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest-rate publication based in North Palm Beach, Fla.


Psychologist Calls Bronx Fire a Psychotic Episode
A psychologist testified yesterday that Julio Gonzalez suffered "a brief psychotic episode" and therefore was not responsible for starting the fire at the Happy Land Social Club that killed 87 people.
The psychologist, Dr.
Roy Aranda, was the first witnes presented by the defense, which contends that Mr.
Gonzalez is not guilty by reason of insanity.


Employers of Illegal Aliens Facing Stronger Action
Armed with favorable rulings from Federal courts, the Justice Department is stepping up enforcement of the immigration law to punish employers of illegal aliens.
But employers say the Government's efforts have left them confused about the law and vulnerable to prosecution.
Immigration officials and judges are telling employers that in addition to checking identification documents of all job applicants they should investigate "suspicious circumstances" suggesting that an applicant or a worker might be an illegal alien.


Warring Yugoslavs Agree on Truce
The leaders of Yugoslavia's warring factions agreed tonight to a cease-fire in the savage fighting that has brought the country to a standstill and raised alarm throughout the rest of Europe.
The critical factor in the cease-fire was an agreement by rebel Serbs inside the breakaway republic of Croatia to halt the fighting that has killed more than 200 Croatian policemen and civilians, and an unknown number of Serbs.


Official at Treasury To Join Smith Barney
Michael E. Basham, a Treasury Department official, believes in the strength of the private sector.
After two years in Government service, he is returning to Wall Street to see if he can persuade state and local goverments to privatize their assets.
Mr.
Basham, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Federal finance since 1989, has been named a managing director with Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
Beginning in September, he will be in charge of developing privatization projects that the firm hopes to undertake for state and local governments.


City College Professor Assailed for Remarks on Jews
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's advisory committee on black affairs disassociated itself yesterday from a City College professor's angry attack on Jews at a black cultural festival it co-sponsored last month.
The committee's executive director, Andre Hawkins, said in a statement that the professor, Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., made "palpably clear expressions of bigotry" during a two-hour lecture on July 20 at the Empire State Black Arts and Cultural Festival in Albany.


New LaFontaine Talks
The terse dialogue between the Islanders and their unhappy superstar Pat LaFontaine is set to resume this morning in Toronto with some 11th-hour negotiations between General Manager Bill Torrey and LaFontaine's agent, Don Meehan.
The floundering franchise, which has been for sale for the last six months, has until Saturday to make a new contract offer to LaFontaine, who is entering his option year but formally requested a trade last winter.
He will become a free agent if the offer is not forthcoming.


I.B.M. Unit in Deal With Food Chains
An I.B.M. subsidiary signed agreements to provide computer services for two supermarket companies.
Terms of the contracts with the Supermarkets General Corporation of Woodbridge, N.J., and the Cullum Companies of Dallas were not disclosed by the Integrated Systems Solutions Corporation, the International Business Machines Corporation subsidiary.
Under the long-term agreement with Supermarkets General, the I.B.M. subsidiary will provide data processing, software and store computers.
Supermarkets General operates the Pathmark chain in the Middle Atlantic States.


Metropolitan Diary
AMANDA TOBIER is straightening out the children's section of the Wall Street bookstore where she works.
She is approached by a woman wheeling her young son in a stroller.
A rather noisy son, it should be added.
The mother asks Ms.
Tobier's help in finding a book.
"What is the name of the book?" Ms. Tobier asks.


A Pudding Dissent
To The Living Section:
I enjoyed the article about English puddings by Florence Fabricant, "English Puddings for All Seasons (and All Sweet Cravings)"  [ July 31 ] , but as a longtime aficionado of summer pudding, must take gentle exception to her rule of assembly.


Vons Divides Account Between Agencies
Vons Companies, the Los Angeles area's largest supermarket chain, restructured its $25 million advertising account yesterday, dividing the business between two agencies and creating a new compensation system based on foot traffic in its stores.
Vons assigned DDB Needham Worldwide, Los Angeles, and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi DFS Pacific, Torrance, Calif., to its Vons and Pavilion units, respectively.
Tianguis, the company's chain of Hispanic-oriented stores, remains at Valdes Zacky Associates Inc., Los Angeles.
Western International, Los Angeles, was awarded all media buying.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.69
5.79
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.51
7.31
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.47
5.58
7.27
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.80
7.86
8.58
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.17
8.22
8.83
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.15
9.15
9.92
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.06
7.07
7.47
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Federal Agencies Drag Feet in Bank Scandal
To the Editor:
"Slippery Banks, Slow Regulators" (editorial, July 13) advocates an increasing Federal role for regulating international banks.
However, the very example you use to support your argument -- the case of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International -- could be used as a textbook study to show why the Federal Government should not have sole domain over these institutions.


Market Place; Divergent Views On Intel's Future
HAS the mighty Intel Corporation peaked? The question has split Wall Street analysts.
"They are all either raging bulls or bears, but there doesn't seem to be any consensus," said Drew Peck, semiconductor analyst for Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.


Frederick the Great Would Be Appalled
To the Editor:
Contrary to "A Worry for Germany: Resurgent Nationalism" (news article, July 27), Frederick the Great, technically king
in
Prussia, rather than
of
Prussia, did not "often invade foreign lands." The exception was the largely German-speaking province of Silesia.
More often it was Prussia that was invaded, especially during the Seven Years War (1756-63), when Frederick battled the combined armies of France, Austria and Russia and earned the title "the Great."
Being "happiest when reviewing his troops" would not apply to Frederick.
Essentially, he was a man of peace: artistic, well read and an accomplished musician.
He was probably happiest while playing the flute.


An Artist Whose Metier Is Squid Heads and Crab Claws
FERNANDO LARA approaches the display window at the Citarella Fish Company in Manhattan like a latter-day Diego Rivera.
Instead of an artist's smock, he wears a black rubber apron.
He wears a New York Mets cap rather than a beret and, instead of paint, his palette includes gray sole and white scallops, deep rose salmon fillets, orange stone crab claws and blue-black mussels.
Every morning the diminutive artist, who is 36 years old and was born in Mexico City, regards the empty window at 2135 Broadway (75th Street) with the eagerness and fear of a muralist in front of a blank wall.


Carol Wilson Trueblood, Assistant to Magazine Editor, 50
Carol Wilson Trueblood, assistant to the editor of The Washington Monthly, which she helped to found, died Saturday at Georgetown University Hospital.
She was 50 years old and lived in Georgetown.


Police Say Officer Abducted and Raped Woman
A 30-year-old New York City police officer abducted a Queens woman from outside her home early yesterday, forced her to drive with him in her own car and then sodomized her twice along the way, the police said.
The officer was later pulled over by a patrol car because he was driving erratically, the police said.


Corrections
An obituary on July 15 about Robert Adamson Maes included some erroneous descriptions of his career.
As reported, Mr.
Maes was president of the Independence Foundation of Philadelphia.
But it was his late father, Dr.
Urban Maes, who was a surgeon, former president of the American College of Surgeons and a professor at Tulane and Louisiana State Universities.


About New York
Roy Pinney had kindly placed a plate of takeout fried rice and shrimp in front of a guest.
He seemed to weigh things and conclude that it wouldn't hurt to ask.
"If it doesn't offend you, I have a friend I'd like to have join us for the meal," he said.


Seidman Resigning Banks Job
More than a year after the White House tried very publicly to remove him from office, L. William Seidman, the nation's senior bank regulator and a forcefully independent official, today announced his resignation.
The departure of Mr.
Seidman promises a dramatic change in the way Washington supervises the banking and savings and loan industries at a pivotal time.
In both style and substance, he has dominated the regulatory scene in recent years as a strong presence in Congress and with an alternately warm and cold and then warm again relationship with the Administration since he was named chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in 1985.


Miracle In Making For Bo
CONTRARY to the proclamations by Madison Avenue ad men and contrary to the hype that has become Bo Jackson, "Bo don't know everything."
No less than Bo Jackson made that admission yesterday.


Emergency Care for Children
Parents may be better off taking critically ill children directly to an emergency room because many pediatricians' offices lack the equipment and the drugs often needed in an emergency, a study has found.
At least half of office visits to the pediatricians surveyed involved children with acute illnesses, like meningitis, severe asthma, seizures or head injuries, according to the study published in the current issue of the journal Pediatrics.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Fed pushed short-term interest rates down a notch, a move analysts said was needed to stimulate the economy, which is making only a sluggish recovery from recession.
The Federal funds rate fell to 5 1/2 percent from the 5 3/4 percent.  [ Page A1. ]
The Fed move suggests that some of the optimism voiced by Greenspan recently has faded.
Economic Analysis.  [ D8. ]
L.
William Seidman announced his resignation as the nation's senior bank regulator, more than a year after the White House tried very publicly to remove him from office.  [ D1. ]
American blacks will be among those who will suffer most as the military goes through one of its biggest contractions since World War II.  [ A1. ]
Travel agents say they have received many calls from worried customers after a Greek cruise ship sank off South Africa, but say few people have canceled their bookings.  [ D1. ]
Strong demand for New York City bonds led securities dealers to reduce yields about a tenth of a point.  [ D14. ]
Banks have followed immigrants to Flushing, tailoring their strategies to serve savings-minded workers.  [ B1. ] Companies
Corning and Vitro agreed to market housewares together around the world.
The agreement with Mexico's giant glass manufacturer is an indication of the quickening pace of economic integration between the U.S. and Mexico.  [ D1. ]
Taco Bell is leading the way in finding ways to make fast food even faster.  [ D1. ]  Two automated systems that Taco Bell is testing sprang from a company founded on the principle that machines can make fast food faster, and better, than people can.  [ D4. ]
NCNB and C&amp;S/Sovran said Nationsbank, the merged bank, would lend $10 billion for community development.  [ D2. ]
Farley Inc. has agreed to turn over control of West Point-Pepperell to bondholders and lending banks.  [ D6. ]
Motorola said that later this month it planned to sell what it called the smallest and lightest phone on the market.  [ D4. ]
Cannon Mills' former owner said he would make up a pension shortfall caused by an insurer's failure.  [ A16. ] Markets
Stock prices rose sharply, lifted mainly by the Fed rate move, with the Dow adding 38.24, to 3,027.28.  [ D1. ]
Prices of soybean futures continued to tumble as rain brought drought relief.  [ D15. ]  The dollar closed lower.  [ D15. ] International
Unemployment in eastern Germany surged in July, topping a million for the first time.
But the rise was much smaller than expected, and the Government saw it as a sign that the region's economy was moving toward recovery.  [ D3. ]
Business Technology Three-dimensional mapping of rock layers under the ocean floor promises to expand greatly the nation's oil resources and lower production costs.  [ D1. ]
A new electronic security system allows several small businesses to be monitored from a single location.  [ D7. ] Today's Columns
Even if cities prevail in getting the census adjusted, they will be disappointed: There is simply no pot of gold at the end of the legal rainbow.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Family Media's fate has been clouded further by an article that portrays it as urgently shopping its magazines to other publishers and nearing bankruptcy.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D6. ]
Has Intel peaked?
Some say its industry hold is threatened by other companies and changing technology.
Market Place.  [ D8. ]


Cornelius V. S. Roosevelt, Ex-C.I.A. Official, 75
Cornelius V. S. Roosevelt, a retired official of the Central Intelligence Agency, died Saturday at his home in Washington.
He was 75 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his sister, Grace McMillan.


Corrections
A brief article in Business Day on Saturday about a dividend increase at the GTE Corporation referred incorrectly to the company's annual revenues.
They were $21.40 billion in 1990.


Microwave Cooking
CORN is the paradigm of foods that make the cook rush.
To achieve sweet corn perfection, cooks are supposed to pick it, shuck it as they walk to the kitchen and then thrust it into the already boiling water.
This is a lofty and nearly unattainable goal.
The best one can hope for is same-day corn from a local farm stand or Greenmarket.
Some markets sell the relatively new ultrasweet corn, which has been hybridized.
The point is to have corn that stays sweet for days.
How unfortunate.
To my palate, ultrasweet corn tastes as if sugar was added to the cooking water -- an old trick for resuscitating old corn.
I don't like it.


The Secrets of Caffeine, America's Favorite Drug
MOST scientists who study coffee's health effects sound like fickle lovers.
One week they love it.
The next week they hate it.
But they always agree on what it does in the brain.
And now they are figuring out how it works.
Caffeine is the most widely used psychoactive substance on earth, said Dr.
Solomon Snyder, director of the neurosciences department at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.
People love caffeine, he said, because it elevates their mood, decreases fatigue, enables them to work harder and helps them think more clearly.
Researchers have even found that caffeine improves the racing performance of cross-country skiers at high altitudes.


Keep the Heat on Iraq to Disarm
One by one, weapons secrets are being squeezed out of Baghdad.
This week, after many lies, Iraq finally acknowledged it was conducting a secret biological weapons program and pursuing yet another nuclear weapons program.
Iraq's grudging revelations confirm that Saddam Hussein intended to arm himself with weapons of mass destruction.
They also confirm the need to keep the pressure on him to tell all.


The Behind-the-Scenes Wizard Who Brought You the Lean Potato
TO most of the corporations that promote food, anything edible is Eden's new apple, any taste-maker is a potential Eve, and the telephone line twines the two.
But to the woman who promotes more tons of food a year than anyone else in the country, the telephone plays second fiddle to the taste buds.
"I'm calling to tell you about our new, reduced-fat mayonnaise with an indefinite shelf life," said one public-relations representative the other day.
"Hello," boomed the cheery voice of the next caller.
"Our new cooking oil spray provides a finer mist than hair spray and that means less grease in the pan . . . ." Then Maggie Waldron called.


Higher Schizophrenia Risk Tied to Birth Timing and Flu
PEOPLE born immediately after an influenza epidemic may be at significantly higher risk for developing schizophrenia as adults than babies born in years without high flu rates, new studies suggest.
Scientists recently compared rates of schizophrenia among people born in the spring of 1958 after a winter influenza epidemic in England and Wales and rates among those born two years earlier and two years later, when influenza was not as prevalent.
They found that the number of cases averaged 88 percent higher among people born a few months after the epidemic's peak than among those born at the other times.


Mr. D'Amato Celebrates Too Soon
An exhilarated Alfonse D'Amato was quick to flash the thumbs-up sign after the Senate Ethics Committee cleared him of most allegations of misconduct.
But it was hardly an exoneration.
Nearly half the witnesses invoked the Fifth Amendment.
And while the committee rightly recognized that many of the charges were baseless or frivolous, it had to leave other allegations unresolved because of continuing criminal investigations.
The committee's performance was disappointing.
It issued a skimpy 9 1/2-page statement instead of a detailed report of its findings.
And its failure to criticize the Senator for dunning New York's financial community for campaign contributions demonstrates once again the Senate's lenient standards.


Arafat Says He Must Pick Palestinian Delegation


For Sale: False Degrees
Newspapers in two of India's major cities, Bombay and New Delhi, recently carried advertisements offering doctoral degrees from the University of California at Los Angeles in return for a written thesis and a fee of $2,000 to $5,000.
The degrees are forgeries, and shoddy ones at that, according to U.C.L.A. officials.
But some are believed to have been used as credentials to help get teaching jobs at universities in India.


Harrelson Called 'Safe'
Frank Cashen, saying he had met recently with Manager Bud Harrelson to discuss recent events surrounding the Mets, said he had no current plans to replace Harrelson.
"I don't want to sound like I'm equivocating, and so the answer at the moment is that Buddy is safe for the year," said Cashen, the general manager of the Mets.
"But I also don't want to sound like a hypocrite. I have no plans at the moment to make a change."


Sixth Noriega Co-Defendant Pleads Guilty
Another of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's co-defendants pleaded guilty to drug charges today after Government prosecutors promised Federal protection for his family.
The defendant, David Rodrigo Ortiz Hermida, a 35-year-old Colombian, could have faced 35 years in prison for racketeering and drug trafficking under the same February 1988 indictment that charged General Noriega, who was deposed as military ruler of Panama by invading American forces almost two years ago.


A Losing Spell Finally Ends For Hershiser and Dodgers
Darryl Strawberry and Lenny Harris hit two-run homers and Orel Hershiser won for the first time in a month as the Los Angeles Dodgers beat the Cincinnati Reds, 5-2, tonight to snap a four-game losing streak.
Hershiser (4-2) allowed just one run and five hits over six innings for his first victory since July 6.
The right-hander had no-decisions in his last four starts.


E. T. McCormick, 80, Former S.E.C. Member
Edward T. McCormick, a former member of the Securities and Exchange Commission and former president of the American Stock Exchange, died on Monday at Danbury (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Green Valley, Ariz.
He died of a heart attack while attending a family reunion in Ridgefield, Conn., his son, Edward Jr., said.


Give Needy Tenants More Rental Assistance
To the Editor:
Your July 15 report on the effect on poor tenants of a strike by Legal Services of New York gives the impression that only free legal services stand between the poor and possible eviction.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
You note that Legal Services handles about 21,000 tenant-landlord disputes each year.
Since there are approximately 400,000 housing court actions filed each year, Legal Services affects only 5 percent of all housing cases, and thus cannot be a significant factor in averting evictions.


Weaving a Tapestry of the Jameses
A portrait in R. W. B. Lewis's monumental biography, "The Jameses: A Family Chronicle," shows a darkly handsome Henry James in profile, the future author of "Portrait of a Lady" and "Washington Square," emerging into a kind of fragile manhood, staring into the middle distance and perhaps pondering the subleties of the human soul.
The year was 1862, and Henry James, at the age of 19, was about to begin his literary career, writing short stories and unsigned book reviews for The Atlantic Monthly.
His older brother, William, the country's founding psychologist and most original philosopher, was studying chemistry at Harvard.
Two younger brothers, Garth Wilkinson and Robertson, were (or were soon to be) in the Union Army, where both saw combat.
His sister, Alice, 12, was confiding to her diary.


Real Estate; Making Old Shopping Centers New
WITH the decline in new construction, developers of shopping centers are putting a new emphasis on improving existing centers.
The case of Maurin-Ogden Inc., Louisiana's largest developer and operator of shopping centers, suggests that the shopping center company's growth can continue, even when the development business is stagnant.
In the early to middle 1980's, Maurin-Ogden could not find prime sites to build new shopping centers fast enough.
It had so many properties of its own that it declined to manage shopping centers owned by others.
Now the company is buying existing centers, and renovating and expanding them.
It also manages more than six million square feet of commercial real estate for third parties, like banks, insurance companies and the Resolution Trust Corporation.
"We had to change the way we did business in order to survive," said Roger H. Ogden, the chief executive officer, from the company's headquarters in Mandeville, 25 miles north of New Orleans.
Mr.
Ogden, who is vice president of the board of trustees of the International Council of Shopping Centers in New York, considers the company representative of how developers around the country are reorganizing for the 1990's.
Since reaching a high of 2,036 new centers built in 1986, shopping center construction has declined 50 percent; only 1,019 new centers were built in 1990.
Contributing to this construction slowdown have been the national recession, the overbuilding resulting from the deregulation of financial institutions in the early 1980's, the overhaul of the nation's tax laws in 1986,making real estate a less attractive investment, and the tightness of real estate financing.
As new center construction drops off, however, the renovation and expansion of existing centers have relatively increased.
According to the council, renovation and expansion contracts accounted for 24 percent of the total value of all shopping center construction contracts in 1990.
By contrast, renovation and expansion contracts averaged only 5 percent of total contract value during the 1960's, 9 percent during the 1970's and 17 percent during the 1980's.
Council research indicates that investment in the renovation and expansion of existing centers will equal, and possibly exceed, investment in new development in the 1990's.
Maurin-Ogden currently has more than $11 million of renovation and expansion projects under way.
The expansion of the 300,000-square-foot Ambassador Row shopping center built by Maurin-Ogden 10 years ago in Lafayette, La., is typical of what the company is now doing.
The $3.5 million project includes construction of a new 54,000-square-foot Delchamps food store and the renovation of the existing 32,000-square-foot Delchamps store for a new tenant, a clothing store operated by Weiner Enterprises of Houston.
The entire center will be freshened up with cosmetic renovations, said James E. Maurin, president of the company's development arm.
Maurin-Ogden is also renovating a 30-year-old shopping center in Alexandria, La.
The company acquired a 50 percent interest in the 275,000-square-foot MacArthur Village five years ago.
When the $3.5 million overhaul is completed next year, MacArthur Village will look brand new with a new facade, modern lighting, a renovated parking lot and many new tenants, Mr.
Maurin said.
Maurin-Ogden has several other renovation and expansion projects under way and 10 more on the drawing boards, but the company is having difficulty getting financing for a development it is trying to get off the ground in Baton Rouge, La.
Mr.
Maurin said the company had spent months trying to get a one-year construction loan to build a 70,000-square-foot center anchored by a 45,000-square-foot food store.
The project is 85 percent preleased, and a life insurance company has agreed to make the permanent loan once the center is built.
The lack of construction financing is the main problem facing the shopping center industry at present, Mr.
Maurin said.
"Five years ago banks would have been standing in line for this loan," he added.
"The deal would have been done in days."
Despite the lean times, Maurin-Ogden has managed to grow.
The company owns 3.5 million square feet of retail space and manages an additional 6 million square feet of real estate, including office, apartment and warehouse space, in Louisiana, Mississippi, Florida, Texas and Oklahoma.


A Few Pennies Can Save Our Family Farmers
To the Editor:
"Protect Consumers, Not Dairy Farmers," your July 25 editorial about the crisis facing our nation's dairy farmers, is ill informed.
Our country at its founding was an agrarian nation of small farms.
In the last 200 years, large corporate farms have come to dominate our landscape, but some of our past -- the family farmer -- still survives.


Magazine Corrects a Cookie Recipe
POOR Aunt Vertie.
In an article about sugar cookies in the July 1991 issue of Gourmet magazine, she is described as "almost a saint" who rejected marriage to stay on the farm in Nebraska and tend her invalid mother and brothers.
But forever after, her name will be associated with cookies that are considered downright dangerous.
Gourmet's recipe for Aunt Vertie's sugar cookies called for one quarter teaspoon of oil of wintergreen, an ingredient not intended for internal consumption.
Last week the magazine sent letters to nearly 800,000 subscribers warning them not to use the oil of wintergreen and to substitute wintergreen extract or vanilla or almond extracts.


Two More Accounts For Rosenfeld, Sirowitz
Household cleaners and a former football hero made news yesterday at Rosenfeld, Sirowitz, Humphrey &amp; Strauss, New York.
The agency announced that the Dial Corporation of Phoenix had given it two more accounts, for Parsons ammonia and Sno-Bol toilet-bowl cleaner.
Billings were not disclosed.
Rosenfeld, Sirowitz became a Dial agency in May, when it was assigned Dial's Breck hair-care line.


Rolls-Royce Plans To Cut More Jobs
Rolls-Royce P.L.C., the British aerospace company, expects to reach its goal of eliminating 6,000 aerospace jobs by early next year and is working out terms to cut 3,000 jobs, its chairman, Lord Tombs, said.
Rolls has already cut 3,000 people from its work force of 34,000 through voluntary departures.
If there are not enough voluntary resignations to complete the new round of cutbacks, there will be layoffs, Lord Tombs said.
Most of the cutbacks have been in the military division; the rest will come from the civilian aerospace division.
Rolls-Royce also set a separate goal of cutting 1,000 jobs from its industrial-power business by the end of the year.


Review/Theater; Aeschylus to Mamet, An Epic in 2 Hours
The Living Theater has finally tossed in the kitchen sink.
Through several decades, some of the company's vast productions have aroused suspicions it was trying to encompass the universe in one show.
But one could always dream up some little thing it missed.
Not this time.
"Waste," an environmental epic concocted by Hanon Reznikov and presented at various outdoor locations through Aug. 25, shamelessly (Mr. Reznikov's word) plunders plays and operas from 2,500 years and 3 continents to convey more than anyone could possibly comprehend about water and air pollution, vegetarianism, feminism, war, imprisonment, homelessness, wage slavery, nuclear contamination, the disappearance of species, garbage and the politics of all these things.


Marketing Deal by Vitro And Corning
In an indication of the quickening pace of economic integration between the United States and Mexico, Corning Inc. and Vitro S.A., Mexico's giant glass manufacturer, agreed yesterday to market their housewares together around the world.
Pending final negotiations and approvals by the directors and the governments, the partnership would create jointly owned companies in each country with combined annual sales of more than $800 million.


Son Says Father Didn't Have Sex With Adoptees
Kodzo Dobosu, who won praise for adopting hard-to-place children, often let his children sleep in his bed but never sexually or physically abused them, one son testified yesterday.
Mr.
Dobosu faces charges of sexually abusing one of his daughters and is now seeking in Family Court to regain custody of his children.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
AL -- Suspended Carlos Martinez, Cleveland first baseman, for three games, effective Aug. 7, for charging Kansas City pitcher Kevin Appier in a game last week.


Tempers Flare at Tompkins Square Park Three Years After Riot


Astronauts Say a Haze Obscures the Earth
Astronauts on the space shuttle Atlantis said today that a thick haze was enshrouding the Earth and obscuring views from space.
They speculated that ash from recent volcanic eruptions in Japan and the Philippines and the thick smoke emanating from oil fires in Kuwait might be at least part of the cause.


Owner of Lost Greek Cruise Ship Has History of Maritime Mishaps
The Greek company that owned the Oceanos, the cruise liner that went down off the coast of South Africa on Sunday, has a history of maritime mishaps, with three of its ships now having sunk over the last three years.
The Oceanos foundered off the coast of Transkei, a nominally independent homeland of South Africa.
In a rescue operation involving merchant and navy ships, helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft, all 571 passengers and crew members aboard the cruise liner were rescued in the face of gale-force winds and heavy seas.


Woman Is Found Slain and Dismembered in Washington Heights
A 37-year-old woman who worked at a midtown Manhattan securities firm was killed and dismembered in her Washington Heights apartment, the police said yesterday.
A suspect, a 23-year-old man who rented a room from her, was arrested in the home by detectives late Monday night after they discovered the woman's torso carefully wrapped in plastic and hidden behind a bed.
The woman's head, legs and arms were then found in plastic garbage bags outside the apartment building at 34 Hillside Avenue, east of Fort Tryon Park.


Mervyn's Wins Florida Stores
A Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday declared Mervyn's, a division of the Dayton Hudson Corporation, the victor in a small bidding war over several Florida stores owned by the Allied Stores Corporation.
Judge J. Vincent Aug Jr., who is overseeing the bankruptcy proceedings related to the reorganization of Allied and Federated Department Stores Inc., approved Mervyn's final $80 million cash offer for eight Jordan Marsh stores in southeastern Florida.


Persis Emma Gladieux, Horticulture Expert, 82
Persis Emma Gladieux, a teacher and expert in Japanese horticulture, died July 30 at the Woodbine Nursing Center in Alexandria, Va.
She was 82 years old and lived in Alexandria.


For Weicker, Today Is Day For Budget: Sign or Veto
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. announced today that he would sign or veto a budget without an income tax on Wednesday, and then spent the rest of the day gathering support for the veto his opponents in the legislature are expecting.
The legislators who put together the budget, which continues Connecticut's reliance on a sales tax, began a counterattack against the editorials and interest groups calling for a veto, pointing out that nearly all of the goods and services subject to the sales tax for the first time under their plan would also be taxed under proposals based on an income tax.


Dentist Faces Fine Over AIDS Patient
An administrative law judge has recommended that the New York City Commission on Human Rights fine a Manhattan dentist for refusing to treat a patient who had AIDS.
The judge, Rosemarie Maldonado, ruled that Dr.
William Hurwitz violated public-accommodations laws that guarantee equal access when he refused in 1987 to perform a root canal on John Campanella, who had been diagnosed with AIDS the year before.


Special Team at B.S.B. For North America
Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, New York, has established a unit to specialize in what the agency calls the "emerging North American common market" caused by expansion of free-trade opportunities.
The unit, called the B.S.B.
Americas Team, is divided into three groups, based in the agency's offices in New York, Mexico City and Toronto.
They are meant to monitor how liberalized trading regulations could affect operations like media buying and television and print production, as well as investigate ways to improve marketing across borders.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
ACA Joe Inc., San Francisco, a clothing retailer and franchiser, announced that Michael Stephen Gans, president and chief operating officer, had been dismissed. *
Centex Corp., Dallas, a home builder, appointed Vicki A. Roberts treasurer.


South Jamaica Journal; Remnant of a Nightmare Fails to Fulfill a Dream
First it was a symbol of urban violence.
Then it reflected a hope of community revival.
And now it is a battered monument to failure and frustration.
On the corner of Inwood Street and 107th Avenue in troubled South Jamaica, Queens, a two-and-a-half-story, wood frame house awaits demolition.
Its interior has been destroyed by vandals and scavengers.
Doors and windows have been boarded up.
The sidewalk and the yard are choked with weeds.


For Weicker, the High Ground Is Elusive
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. climbed toward the moral high ground today as he told Connecticut why he was vetoing, for the third time, a budget that does not include an income tax.
But one of Mr.
Weicker's problems, in his long battle with the General Assembly, may be that the high ground in Connecticut is opposition to an income tax.
And it was occupied long ago by those he attacked today as spineless, deep in space, or exploiting the state's fiscal crisis for their own gain.


Israel Has to Do More Than Agree to Talk; Jews in Jerusalem
To the Editor:
You report July 30 a claim by King Hussein of Jordan that "The Muslim world, the world as a whole, they all called for an international Jerusalem." The Arab claim on the city consists of three elements: religious right, rights of residence and rights to sovereignty.
No one disputes the religious Muslim claim, although Jerusalem is never mentioned in the Koran.
The League of Nations mandate -- the legal basis for the modern revival of the Holy Land -- clearly states the provision for the Jewish homeland shall "safeguard civil and religious rights of all the inhabitants of Palestine." It was under King Hussein's rule that Jews were denied access to their holy places, under his control.


January Trial Date Set for Kennedy Nephew
The judge who will preside over William K. Smith's rape trial ruled today that it would begin on Jan. 13, saying she wanted to avoid conflicts with holidays while trying to seat a jury.
The decision, issued by Judge Mary Lupo of Palm Beach Circuit Court, denied prosecutors' request for a trial date of no later than Oct. 2.


12 Die as Thousands Try to Flee Albania


An Ear for the Art of Dealing Antiques
HE said it himself, right off the bat: "I'm just not a typical antiques dealer. I use antiques as my artistic expression."
"I fought it for years," Vincent Mulford continued, with the same intensity as if he was discussing a nicotine habit.
"Dealers I knew said, 'You can't carry this weird stuff.' "


Unusual Alliance Against Drugs
In an unusual collaboration, the Justice Department and two private foundations are joining in an $8 million program to curb drug abuse among adolescents living in high-crime neighborhoods.
The department and the foundations will select from two to five cities where they will set up experimental programs over the next three years, and then replicate the successful models nationwide.


The Guru People Swear By Or At
To many, this certainly would not be the appropriate time to write about Walter Hriniak.
There is no controversy raging about the Chicago White Sox and their hitting, and Hriniak is, after all, that hitting instructor known for causing controversy with a capital C.
He has been accused not only of trying to program hitters, but also of cloning them in the style of his successes.
Years ago he was caught up in a war of words with Ted Williams because of differing approaches to hitting when Williams consulted with the Boston Red Sox and Hriniak tutored his own dedicated followers like Dwight Evans and Wade Boggs.


Lord, Dentsu Now Free To Pursue Car Accounts
A decision by Peugeot S. A. to end the sale of cars in this country frees its advertising agency, Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, New York, to pursue other automotive accounts.
Though billings in previous years from Peugeot Motors of America Inc. of Lyndhurst, N.J., ran as high as $25 million, in the last two years they ranged from $10 million to $12 million, said Kathryn Woods, an agency spokeswoman.
Lord, Dentsu has handled Peugeot's account since 1986, assuming it from HDM, a predecessor agency.
Lord, Dentsu will continue its advertising efforts for Peugeot's 1991 models, which carry the theme "Beyond the obvious," for "as long as it is appropriate," Ms.
Woods said.


U.S.-Communist Trade
The United States posted a $1.4 billion trade deficit with Communist countries in the first quarter of 1991, the International Trade Commission said.
That compares with a $922.9 million deficit a year earlier and is "well below the record quarterly deficit of $3.3 billion for July-September 1990," the commission said.
"The deficit in trade with China increased from $1.9 billion to $2.2 billion and the surplus in trade with the Soviet Union declined from $932.4 million to $802 million," the commission said.


No Progress on No. 1 Pick
Gene Michael, the Yankee general manager, today called the mother of Brien Taylor, the team's No. 1 draft pick, but Michael said she remained reluctant to meet with him and discuss a possible contract.
"I didn't make any new offer," Michael said.
"She is still reluctant to meet. That's discouraging."
Michael also sent Bettie Taylor a conciliatory letter because she said he had previously failed to show respect for her.
The club has offered Taylor a $650,000 package while the family is seeking a $1.2 million contract.
"We're not going to change anything," Michael said.


Mets Draw Their Ace to Discard Pirates at Shea
Number 16 was on the mound.
Lots of zeros were on the scoreboard.
For the Mets, the season may or may not be already lost, but not every shining moment is gone.
With his colleagues having collapsed around him and August having been strangely transformed into a fight for respectability as much as a struggle for the title in National League East, Dwight Gooden overpowered the Pirates last night to lead the Mets to a 7-1 triumph.


Henry C. Bayer, Securities Partner, 48
Henry Charles Bayer, managing partner and co-founder of Mercury Securities, a Manhattan investment firm, died on Monday at Southampton (L.I.) Hospital.
He was 48 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Pop in Review
'At the Court of King Oliver'
Alice Tully Hall
"At the Court of King Oliver," the first concert of the Classical Jazz festival, presented music from the 1920's, when the New Orleans trumpeter Joe (King) Oliver took his Creole Jazz Band and his Dixie Syncopators into recording studios.
Although he was a jazz pioneer, Oliver died in obscurity in 1938.
His music is less than seven decades old, but listening to it demands a radical readjustment for ears trained on pop, European music or more recent jazz.
Seeking the melody is pointless, because the melody is everywhere and nowhere.
In the music Oliver recorded in 1923, which made up most of the program on Tuesday night, solos and accompaniment often merge.
Flamboyant individuality balances with teamwork; although instruments have customary roles, everyone improvises while everyone carries the tune.
At Lincoln Center, the clarinetist Michael White led nine musicians in transcriptions of Oliver's repertory, and it was a chance to hear the music's many layers in ways the murky recordings have always impeded.
Process and product were interchangeable in Oliver's jazz; a good part of its splendor was the fact that the band was toying with the music as it went along.
Playing the music note for note destroys the original process, and the music was altered in various ways: rendered more formal for much of the evening and slightly burlesqued here and there.
While the music perked up when it departed from the transcriptions to allow band members' own solos, even the note-for-note Oliver was spunky and revealing.
As recorded, the Oliver band's slow blues and jaunty rags were models of compression, packing an introduction, a theme or two and various episodes and stop-time breaks into the 3-minute 20-second maximum playing time.
The music reveals the tension and synthesis between New Orleans' Creole musicians, who were educated in European music, and its lower-class hot-jazz musicians: decorous ensemble introductions soon give way to strutting improvisation, and the nearly continuous clarinet obbligatos move between classical arpeggios and bluesy slides.
The Oliver bands' trademark was to have the rest of the group drop out as the two cornetists, Oliver and his protege Louis Armstrong, played tandem phrases they had come up with during the song, to create a magically coordinated double improvisation.
There were three cornetists onstage at Alice Tully Hall -- Wynton Marsalis, Nicholas Payton and Greg Stafford -- but only two played at a time, and all three caught some of the style of Oliver and early Armstrong.
That style was stiffer rhythmically and more self-effacing than the sound of trumpeters to follow.
Instead, it had an easy, leisurely assurance and a sly way with blue notes.
Mr.
Marsalis, playing "King Porter Stomp" with Wycliffe Gordon, on tuba, and Don Vappie, on banjo, merged his own long-breathed approach with the Oliver style, interpreting the original solo while adding something of his own.
In his own solo on "Snake Rag," Mr.
Marsalis switched to an Armstrong mode, broadening his tone and slyly dragging out notes.
The band couldn't always match its models.
Fred Lonzo had too many crowd-pleasing trombone growls, Mr.
White just missed the suave sweetness of Oliver's clarinetists and two slow blues, featuring the singer Thais Clarke, sounded like self-conscious reproductions instead of death-haunted or sultry declarations.
But in a musical tradition that changes as fast as jazz, it is remarkable to find a young ensemble that looks back as convincingly as the one that performed "At the Court of King Oliver." The group also included Farid Barron, on piano, and Herlin Riley, on drums.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
USING heavy timbers to contain sloping ground or to make a terrace with steps is often easier, more attractive and less expensive than building with masonry.
Six-by-six-inch timbers, usually eight feet long and called landscape ties, are a good choice for such projects.
These are available at lumber yards and at many home supply stores and gardening centers.
The first step in virtually every project that involves containing or terracing sloping ground is to measure the slope's length, called the run, and its angle of incline, called the rise.
To determine these, drive a stake into the ground at the top of the slope, then tie a string to it at ground level and walk down to the bottom of the slope.
There, pull the string taut and hang a line level (a vial containing a bubble, available at hardware stores) from it.
Raise or lower the string until the bubble indicates that the string is level.
Extend a tape measure or yardstick vertically from the ground and read the distance at which it crosses the string.
This distance is the rise; the length of the string is the run.
Often the rise is too great to measure with a yardstick; in that case, have a helper hold a long pole vertically while you measure the height of the string by standing on a stepladder.
To make sure the pole is vertical, have the helper place a carpenter's level alongside it.
If the slope is greater at one side of the area to be contained than at the other, use the larger measurement.
Generally, retaining walls two feet high or less are easiest for amateurs to build because little, if any, bracing is needed to counteract the pressure of the ground behind them; in many areas, walls higher than three feet require obtaining a building permit.
To cope with too great a rise, plan an arrangement of shorter intermediate walls, steps or terraces instead.
The sum of their heights must equal the rise.
Ties forming the base of a wall are usually placed in a trench about two inches deep for stability; keep this in mind when calculating.
To make adjustments to the heights of walls, ties can be buried deeper.
To build a single retaining wall, choose a spot near the base of the slope where a wall of convenient height (less than three feet) will extend higher than the rise at that level by an amount sufficient to contain the sloping soil on the downhill side of the wall.
Later, this soil must be shoveled behind the wall to complete the project.
Dig a trench along this line.
It may help to mark the direction of the trench with a stretched string fastened to stakes driven into the ground.
The depth of the trench should extend at least four inches below the depth to which you plan to remove soil in front of the wall; normally soil is removed to grade level, which is the point from which the rise is measured.
Fill the trench with crushed stone for drainage to within two inches of the top.
Then set the ties into the trench, end to end.
To anchor the ties, bore through each about two feet from the ends using a heavy-duty electric drill equipped with a 5/8-inch-diameter drill bit long enough to penetrate the tie.
Then insert 15-inch lengths of half-inch-diameter steel reinforcing rod (available at building supply stores) into the holes and drive them into the ground with a sledgehammer.
If additional layers of ties are needed, place them on top of lower layers like bricks so that the ends of ties do not lie directly over those below.
Fasten the layers by drilling and inserting eight-inch lengths of rod.
Often, ground slopes in two directions, creating a low point at one end of the slope and the need for two retaining walls that form a corner.
To build them, begin at the lowest corner of the site.
Dig a trench across one slope, wide enough and deep enough to accommodate a tie and sufficient crushed stone.
Use a stretched string with a line level attached as a guide to both direction and depth.
Whenever the ground rises, you must dig deeper than 12 inches (the thickness of a tie, plus two inches for stabilizing the tie above, plus four inches for crushed stone below).
Extend the trench about four inches, then start a new trench segment at that point by digging down only six inches.
Continue at that depth until you reach the other end of the slope or must dig a higher segment.
Follow the same procedure to dig the trench for the adjacent wall, extending across that slope to the same height as the trench for the first wall.
When you are finished, add crushed stone and lay and anchor the ties as described, beginning at the lowest corner of the site.
In the bottom tier, leave a gap of about four inches at the buried end of each tie.
Fill the gap with crushed stone, creating a continuous layer of stone beneath the ties.
Making steps or terraces up a hill involves one or both of the previous techniques.
Steps should be uniformly sized, 4 to 8 inches high for easy climbing.
Terraces, which are usually broader and not necessarily designed to be used as steps, can be of varying and greater heights.
To divide a slope into uniform steps, divide the run in inches by a figure that yields a whole number.
The number, minus one, is the number of steps needed.
The amount by which the number must be multiplied to obtain the run is the distance in inches from the front of each step to the back.
For example, a run of 180 inches can be divided by six steps, each measuring 30 inches from front to back.
However, only five steps project above grade; the top of the lowest step is even with the base of the slope.
To determine the height of each step, divide the rise by the number of steps projecting above grade.
If the rise in the example is 30 inches, each of the five steps mentioned must be six inches high.


Jays Gain Breathing Room By Thwarting Tigers Again
Joe Carter's tie-breaking two-out single highlighted a three-run seventh inning tonight as the Toronto Blue Jays increased their lead in the American League East to six and a half games with a 5-2 victory over the second-place Detroit Tigers.
Toronto has won the first two games of the three-game series.
Cory Snyder led off the seventh with a walk and moved to second on a single by Pat Borders.
Frank Tanana (8-8) fell behind by 3-0 to Devon White before completing an intentional walk to load the bases.
Roberto Alomar's sacrifice fly drove in the tying run.


A Publisher Turns Its Final Page
Battered by debts and the most severe advertising slump in years, Family Media Inc., the publisher of Discover, Health and five other magazines, announced yesterday that it would close its doors immediately.
The shutdown is considered the largest failure of a media enterprise since the recession began a year ago.
The closing ends more than a year of speculation in the media and advertising industries over the fate of the New York publisher, whose magazines covered health, science, sports and home improvement.


Warm Welcome and Musical Goof
In many ways, the competition being held in this coastal city on the eastern shore of Cuba might legitimately be called "the other Pan American games."
With the majority of athletes competing 700 miles away in the larger, bustling capital city of Havana, some officials here were concerned that the 820 athletes competing in seven sports might feel removed from the games.


Eiland Is Latest Victim On a Battered Staff
If you throw it, we will hit it.
If you play us, we will beat you.
If you let us, we will embarrass you.
Those three sentences capsulize what opponents have been doing to the tumbling Yankees and their terrible pitchers.
Another starter imitated a soccer ball tonight and was kicked around Comiskey Park as the White Sox hammered Dave Eiland and defeated the Yankees, 10-2.


Dinkins Tries to Ease Tension From Canarsie Bias Incidents
Mayor David N. Dinkins met privately with more than 40 members of the clergy and other leaders in Canarsie yesterday, trying to defuse the racial tensions that have rocked the predominantly white neighborhood this summer.
With the Rev.
Al Sharpton and civil liberties groups planning marches this weekend, the Mayor's low-key diplomacy in the residential neighborhood in southern Brooklyn was aimed at averting an escalation of racial violence, which could become a political liability for him, his aides said.


INSIDE
Living With Arms Cutbacks
The St.
Louis region, one of the first to plan for reductions in military spending, is emerging as a laboratory for the post-cold-war economy.
Last of five articles, page D1.


Senator Robb Appears Before Grand Jury


Russians Whisking the Party From the Workplace
Boris N. Yeltsin's ban on the Communist Party's traditional workplace patronage has taken gentle hold of the Zotov Bread Factory, with the plant's party secretary nervously stressing that she knows more about dough kneading than party proselytizing.
"I've always worked hard here regardless of my party membership," said Galina G. Letuchnaya, the bread factory's chief Communist.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Advance Display Technologies Inc., Golden, Colo., a fiber-optics subsidiary of American Consolidated Growth Corp., said it had signed a letter of intent to acquire another fiber-optic concern, Strahl Technologies Inc., Vancouver, British Columbia. *
Alberto-Culver Co., Melrose Park, Ill., said it had reached an agreement to acquire about 25 percent of the capital stock and 75 percent of voting control in Cederroth Nordic A.B., a Swedish consumer products concern, from Salve Holding B.V.
The transaction is valued at about $18 million.


Larry Kane, 61, Dies; Men's Wear Designer
Larry Kane, an award-winning designer of men's fashions, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 61 years old.
He died of a brain tumor, his wife, Helayne, said.


VETO BY WEICKER BLOCKS 3D BUDGET
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. vetoed a budget for the third time today, but in a scornful veto message he offered legislators no clear options except to override it or give up their opposition to an income tax.
"The whole Coalition III is a gimmick," he said, referring to the name given to the third budget without an income tax passed by a coalition of Republicans and Democrats.
"Actually, gimmick is the kind word for what is the shame and scandal of our generation."


Search for a Pass Rush Is Continuing for Jets
Some people call it the Jets' white whale.
Some less literary types call it a pass rush.
This generation of Jets might have even read about how a quartet of larger-than-life football heroes known as the New York Sack Exchange terrorized quarterbacks a decade ago.


Political Memo; Democrats' Distress Grows As Presidential Field Shrinks
Democrats struggled today to adjust to the last thing they needed six months before the Iowa caucuses: an already tiny Presidential field that keeps shrinking.
As expected, Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th announced in Charleston, W.Va., today that he would not seek the 1992 Democratic Presidential nomination.
That announcement, just three weeks after Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House majority leader, took himself out of the race, combined with the demurrals of other Democratic heavyweights to create a frustrating, embarrassing pattern for the party.


Company Tells of Dangers In Overusing Asthma Drugs
A pharmaceutical company has advised Federal regulatory officials of a new report that suggests that excessive use of the most widely prescribed asthma drugs, beta-2 agonists, may increase the risk of fatal asthma attacks.
Officials of the United States subsidiary of Boehringer Ingelheim G.m.B.H. of Germany said in an interview Tuesday that the company recently wrote a confidential letter to the Food and Drug Administration alerting it to the preliminary results of the company-sponsored study in Canada.


Vice President to Head A New Unit at Boeing
The Boeing Company has named John B. Hayhurst vice president in charge of a new large-airplane development unit of the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group.
The new unit will study the airlines' changing needs for large aircraft and develop airplane configurations to satisfy them.
Mr.
Hayhurst, who is 43, has been vice president of marketing for the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group since October 1987.
He will be succeeded by Richard L. James, currently the director of airline analysis in the marketing organization.


Clear Sound, Clear Conscience
THE plans sound good.
The prototypes look good.
And music lovers who care about the environment might be able to rest easy, if millions of pounds of garbage produced by compact disk packaging is to be no more.


Latest Move by Dr. J
The Golden Bear now has a doctor in the house.
JULIUS ERVING is joining JACK NICKLAUS as a consultant in Golden Bear Sports Management, formed earlier this year to represent athletes and other performers.


Cadwell Names Executive To Build Up Food Accounts
CADWELL DAVIS PARTNERS, which has found success by specializing in advertising for pharmaceuticals and health-care products, is hiring a senior manager as part of ambitious efforts to broaden its client roster into the food field.
On Aug. 19, Patrick Knisley will join the agency in New York as executive vice president and general manager, a new position just under Herman Davis, chairman and creative director, and Frankie Cadwell, president.
Mr.
Knisley, 42 years old, has been a senior vice president and group director at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, where he has worked for 11 years.


'Attorney' Gotti Reprimands the Court
His lawyer disqualified by the judge, John Gotti rose angrily yesterday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn and defended himself, calling the prosecutor in the case a "bum."
"He can't handle a good fight, and he can't win a fair trial," the reputed mob leader said, shaking a finger at the assistant United States Attorney, John Gleeson, who is prosecuting Mr.
Gotti and three others on racketeering charges.


Boeing Increases Size of New Issue
Taking advantage of lower interest rates, the Boeing Corporation said it had increased the size of its 8 3/4 percent debenture issue to $400 million, from the $300 million initially planned.
The 30-year debentures, which are underwritten by the First Boston Corporation, have been priced at 99.474 to yield 8.8 percent, about 65 basis points more than the when-issued price yesterday of the 30-year Treasury bond that will be priced today.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Managed-Care Pilot Program Should Proceed in Brooklyn
To the Editor:
As you report July 22, it is unlikely that New York State will this year consider assuming the burden of New York City's share of Medicaid costs, which are estimated at $2 billion annually.
Containing these costs, which have steadily increased over the last decade, has been a topic of discussion between and within the city and state governments, and the subject of more than one task force.
The state's assumption of Medicaid costs should not be the only target in the city's efforts to reduce spending in this area.
There is another answer.
To deal with these soaring costs, the State Legislature in the last legislative session adopted legislation calling for a statewide managed-care initiative.
This legislation mandates the participation of Medicaid recipients in comprehensive, coordinated health care programs, which social services districts will be required to develop.
This legislation supports the recommendation of two New York City task forces that called for managed-care initiatives for Medicaid recipients.


Books of The Times; A Riddle: Why Do People Work So Hard at Resting?
Waiting for the Weekend  By Witold Rybczynski  260 pages. Viking. $18.95.
Do we work to rest, or rest to work?
This chicken-egg conundrum has puzzled the architect Witold Rybczynski for many years now.
And as we know from such delightful books of his as "Home: A Short History of an Idea" (1986), in which he explored the nature of what is comfortable, and "The Most Beautiful House in the World" (1989), where he investigated the elements of architecture, when Mr.
Rybczynski is puzzled by something, he starts asking questions so obvious that few people have thought to ask them before.


U.S. Notes Sell Well At Auction
Note and bond prices were little changed yesterday as the credit market readily digested a heavy supply of new issues, including $12 billion of 10-year Treasury notes and a flurry of corporate offerings totaling $1.43 billion.
The Treasury notes, the second leg of this week's three-part Treasury financing, totaling $38 billion, sold yesterday at an average yield of 7.94 percent.
By late in the day, prices of Treasury notes had improved slightly and the yield on the new notes had fallen to 7.93 percent, down from 7.95 percent a day earlier and well below 8.13 percent a week ago.


Dollar Up in Light Trading; Gold Prices Post a Decline
The dollar drifted higher yesterday in light, uneventful trading mainly influenced by profit taking and technical factors.
Gold was lower.
Gold slipped 10 cents on New York's Commodity Exchange, finishing at $356.60 an ounce.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $356.65, 55 cents lower than Tuesday's late quote.


Angels Drop Marshall
MIKE MARSHALL, who signed with the California Angels less than two weeks ago, was granted his release yesterday after going 0 for 7 in two games.
"Right now, I'm not in a frame of mind to be a bench player," said Marshall, who realized that he was not going to be anything more than a part-time player behind WALLY JOYNER at first base, DAVE WINFIELD in right field and DAVE PARKER as the designated hitter.


Pacific Bell Bonds
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company reoffered $225 million of Pacific Bell 40-year bonds to investors at a yield of 8.9 percent.
The bonds, which are callable in 10 years and carry an 8 1/2 percent coupon, were priced at 95.643.
They were rated AA3 by Moody's and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Hall Makes Trouble for Opponents
Like him or not -- and there might be more people who don't like him -- Mel Hall is having a remarkable season for the Yankees.
A .300 hitter only once in his eight-year career, Hall entered last night's game in Chicago leading the team in hitting with a .314 average and in runs batted in with 65.
Envisioned primarily as a pinch-hitter when the season began, Hall first forced himself into the lineup as a platooned outfielder, then became an everyday player.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  AMERICAN LEAGUE
California Angels -- Released Mike Marshall, infielder-outfielder.
Purchased the contract of Chris Cron, infielder, from Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.


New York City Embraces Notion Of Selling Cheaply Priced Bonds
On Monday, a Wall Street bond broker suggested to Mayor David N. Dinkins that New York City sell municipal bonds in denominations as small as $250.
A good idea, city officials said.
So good, in fact, that the city was already working on a similar plan.


State Seizes Paterson Schools
The New Jersey Board of Education today seized administrative control of the Paterson schools, thus placing two of the three largest districts in the state under its control.
The takeover resulted from a yearlong inquiry in which investigators documented a pattern of petty personal rivalries, inefficiencies and mismanagement in the system.
It serves 22,000 students, mostly black and Hispanic, in 31 elementary and three high schools.
In 1989 the state board took control of Jersey City's schools.
The Paterson district is the state's third largest behind Jersey City and Newark.


Scandals Prompt Kaifu to Offer Securities Reform
Battered by links between his political allies and Japan's financial scandals, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu has proposed a program of securities reform that his supporters said represented his best, and perhaps only, chance to win another term in office this fall.
But Mr.
Kaifu's efforts were complicated, in the view of many analysts, by a growing impression among voters that virtually every powerful political figure in Japan had been tainted by some form of involvement, however indirect, with one scandal or another.
The Prime Minister, for instance, is struggling to hold on to one of his most powerful and popular Cabinet colleagues, Finance Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto, who is under pressure to resign because his personal secretary was revealed to have helped arrange a fradulent bank loan.


Accessories in Leather
Costello Studio  315 East 91st Street, New York, N.Y. 10128; (212) 410-2083.
Lush is the word Michele Costello, a leather artisan for six years, uses to describe parchment, a thin, translucent, cream-colored leather made from sheepskins that are dried instead of tanned.
"I like the fact that every piece is different," said Ms.
Costello, who works with exotic leathers like parchment and shagreen, a shiny, grainy leather made from stingray, dogfish or shark.
Ms.
Costello makes customized home accessories like wastebaskets, lampshades, table tops and screens in parchment, often hand-tooled with gold leaf.
She can also cover walls with parchment.
Parchment, used since Biblical times, has veered in and out of style through the years.
In the 1920's and 30's, it was used by the French interior designer Jean-Michel Frank for walls and screens in Art Deco rooms.
"It's very durable," Ms.
Costello said.
"In its natural state, you can erase pencil marks on it." When lacquered, it can even cover bathroom walls, she said.
Ms.
Costello prefers the expensive shagreen, which can be dyed, as an accent leather on accessories like picture frames and jewelry boxes.
Ms.
Costello's prices start at $55 a square foot for work in parchment and at $150 a square foot for shagreen.
Prices include leather and labor.
Robert Falotico Studios  315 East 91st Street, New York, N.Y. 10128; (212) 369-1217.
"Restoration work can go just so far," said Robert Falotico, a leather artisan who has worked with new and antique upholstery leather for more than 30 years.
Still, a good leather chair or sofa can be cleaned, restored and made usable once again.
Mr.
Falotico, who learned the leather trade from his father, can remove oil stains left by skin and hair, clean scouring powder stains, and dye discolored areas to the leather's original hue.
And if a leather sofa or table top is beyond repair, Mr.
Falotico can usually make a new one, distressing the leather to make it appear old.
Mr.
Falotico also makes tooled leather table tops and fake bookbindings, the leather spines with gold-tooled titles seen on cabinets that hide video equipment.
Mr.
Falotico charges $75 an hour plus materials.
Roberts Leather Studios  214 West 29th Street, Unit 403, New York, N.Y. 10001; (212) 736-3717.
Carlos Echegaray, an upholstery leather artisan for 23 years, can clean and restore antique leather items, including chairs and sofas.
"Old leather can look very nice," he said.
But much of his work is fashioning customized leather table tops from cowhide.
Mr.
Echegaray stretches the leather and adds a gold-tooled border, using a 500-year-old process that blends heat, gold leaf and a gilding wheel.
A variety of border patterns are available, though Mr.
Echegaray usually suggests something relating to the table's period.
Stretching, tooling and leather for a 48-by-24-inch desk costs $400 to $500.
Mr.
Echegaray accepts mail orders for leather table tops.
He also makes leather backgammon boards.


CHRONICLE
The PRINCE and PRINCESS OF WALES have sailed off on a 10th-anniversary cruise aboard a yacht somewhere off the Italian coast.
While the cruise is shrouded in secrecy, the couple arrived in Naples yesterday amid much speculation in the European press that they would repeat their honeymoon itinerary.
They were not exactly alone this time: their sons, PRINCE WILLIAM and PRINCE HARRY, were aboard.


Long Days Loom in P.G.A. Event
Moisture is usually the ally of golfers on courses set up for major championships.
It makes narrow fairways easier to hit, hard greens easier to hold and the speed of severely sloping putts easier to control.
But at the 73d P.G.A.
Championship, which begins Thursday at the Crooked Stick Golf Club, moisture has become an enemy.
While the course designer, Pete Dye, definitely intended his transformation of flat cornfields into 7,289 yards of rolling fairways and water hazards to be one of the most rugged layouts in the world, rain will very likely make it the longest-playing course ever to hold a major championship.


Ethan Canin Discusses Writing and Medicine
The patient was strapped to a bed in the psychiatric emergency room at Massachusetts General Hospital.
Ethan Canin, then a third-year medical student, was about to give him an injection.
Suddenly, the patient saw the "Canin" name tag and started shouting: "Kill the Jews! Kill the Jews! Kill the Jews!"
Mr.
Canin was poised with a needle above the raving man.
"The guy had a German-sounding name," he said, "and I had to take a long walk around the ward to calm my first instincts. It was unpleasant. But, you know, for a writer, medicine has the merit of constantly bringing you close to the dark side of life."


In the Nation; The Peru Syndrome
After quick military victory in the desert war, President Bush exulted that the nation had "kicked the Vietnam syndrome" -- its supposed reluctance, after defeat in Indochina, to send U.S. troops to fight elsewhere in the world.
Did that conviction embolden Mr.
Bush to embark on military intervention against the Shining Path in Peru?
Or have Presidents suffered more, and for longer, from what might be called "the Peru syndrome" -- the idea that U.S. forces are required, and can prevail, anywhere U.S. interests appear to be threatened, or might be advanced?


Reading Up on Childhood Disabilities
"WHEN you have a child who is born with Down syndrome, after the initial shock, you want information," Steve Riggio said recently.
"You want to know how to raise the child. You want books on Down syndrome."
Mr.
Riggio, the executive vice president of Barnes &amp; Noble Bookstores Inc., spoke from personal experience.
His daughter Melissa was born three years ago with Down syndrome.
Despite his company's connections to the publishing industry, Mr.
Riggio had great difficulty finding books about her chromosome disorder.


So Far, St. Louis Handles Arms Cuts
As one of the first regions to confront weapons cutbacks and develop plans for dealing with them, the St.
Louis area is emerging as a national laboratory for the post-cold-war economy.
For many individuals and companies, the rapid change has been bewildering and painful.
But St.
Louis has responded quickly with government and private efforts to help laid-off workers and further the diversification of the region's economy.


Quotation of the Day
"Yes, it would be easy for me to sign this budget, devised in the wink of an eye on scrap paper and cocktail napkins, and then stand back to watch it crash and burn. I do not wish that ill on its proponents. I will not visit that ill upon the state." -- Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut.  [ B4:1. ]


Israel Has to Do More Than Agree to Talk
To the Editor:
A closer reading of "Israel's Grand Bargain" (Op-Ed, July 24) by Martin Indyk, executive director of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, indicates that the bargain may not be so grand.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir is at his best when he does nothing.
Time after time, Mr.
Shamir has resisted United States and European efforts for an Arab-Israeli or Israeli-Palestinian peace.
While Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's efforts at bridging Syrian-Israeli and Palestinian-Israeli differences may result in a regional conference, Mr.
Shamir's words and actions indicate otherwise.


Idaho Senator Says No To a Third Term in '92
United States Senator Steve Symms, whose blunt Republican partisanship and staunchly conservative views have energized supporters and exasperated opponents in his nearly two decades in Congress, announced today that he would not seek another term.
"I look forward to starting another career in 1993," the two-term Senator and former Representative said at a news conference at the his family's fruit ranch here, 30 miles west of Boise.


Plan to Use Grand Central Air Rights for Tower Is Rejected
A state judge yesterday upheld the rejection by New York City planners of a proposal to transfer air rights underground from Grand Central Terminal to a development site four blocks away.
By virtue of its novelty and daring, the proposal has been closely watched since it was presented five years ago.
Sylvia Deutsch, then chairwoman of the City Planning Commission, even raised the specter of air rights stretching to Yonkers when she and other commission members turned down the proposal two years ago.


As Reopening Nears, The Morgan Library Gets a Good Scrubbing
On scaffolding high above the East Room of the Morgan Library on East 36th Street, Alan Farancz confronted the webbed foot of a mermaid -- or rather a merman.
"A fish centaur," he dubbed the creature as he applied soapy liquid with a soft-bristled brush, then patted it off with naphtha-soaked cotton.
The plaster foot gleamed white.
The cotton's surface looked like mud.
"Fifty years of dirt," he said.


Astronauts Experiment With Fire in Space
Astronauts set a small, controlled fire aboard the shuttle Atlantis today in a test to see how quickly flames spread in space.
Col.
James Adamson ignited the fire inside a sealed aluminum container by flicking switches.
Flames in the shape of teardrops slowly traveled along a 4.3-inch strip of ashless paper, which burned for about a minute.


Gay Candidate for City Council Says He Has AIDS Virus
One of two gay candidates running for a seat on the New York City Council in lower Manhattan said yesterday that he has tested positive for the virus that causes AIDS and would make that part of his campaign.
The announcement by Thomas K. Duane is believed to be the first time a candidate seeking elected office in the state, and perhaps the nation, has openly admitted being infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
At a time when doctors, teachers and food workers have found it professionally ruinous to disclose their infection, Mr.
Duane seems to be turning that stigma on its head.


Southwestern Bell Unit Names Five Finalists
The Southwestern Bell Telephone Company, St.
Louis, has named five finalists in a review meant to improve the integration of its business advertising and direct marketing accounts.
Billings were not disclosed.
The finalists are: the incumbent, D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, St.
Louis, in conjunction with a new partner, Clarion, Greenwich, Conn., D.M.B.&amp; B's direct-marketing division; TBWA Kerlick Switzer, St.
Louis, with the incumbent direct-marketing agency, Saugatuck Direct, Westport, Conn.; Rapp Collins Marcoa, New York, and Carmichael Lynch and Colle &amp; McVoy, both of Minneapolis.


Johannesburg Journal; Anti-Apartheid Paper: A Scandal Is Its Trophy
Only last year, The Weekly Mail, the most prominent of South Africa's cluster of alternative newspapers, faced a crisis of identity.
Its attempt to become a daily newspaper collapsed after two and a half months because of insufficient financial support and competition from Johannesburg's three other dailies.
Morale sagged among the newspaper's small staff.
Even the purpose for which The Weekly Mail was founded in 1985, its opposition to apartheid, seemed eclipsed by the political changes introduced by President F. W. de Klerk.


Study Criticizes Community Policing
Community policing, the problem-solving philosophy that guides Commissioner Lee P. Brown's efforts to make New York City safer, has produced few tangible results in the city where he put it into effect, an independent study has concluded.
An audit by Washington consultants says that putting into action Houston's community policing program, established and heavily promoted by Mr.
Brown when he was Police Chief here, has been difficult and that the department has viewed the philosophy as an "end in itself," rather than as a tool to reduce crime and improve service.


Kohl Threatens Serbia Over Cease-Fire Violations
As domestic pressure mounted for full recognition of Yugoslavia's breakaway republics, Chancellor Helmut Kohl threatened Serbia today with economic sanctions and acceptance of the independence of Croatia and Slovenia if cease-fire violations continue.
Mr.
Kohl addressed himself to the Yugoslavs in a televised appearance.
It came one day after European Community foreign ministers, frustrated by the failure of their latest mission to negotiate a permanent truce, asked the Community's executive branch to explore economic sanctions against republics that blocked a cease-fire and financial rewards for those that cooperated.


Reds' Dibble Is Fined But He Escapes Ban
ROB DIBBLE, the Cincinnati Reds reliever, received a fine but no suspension yesterday from the National League for hitting DOUG DASCENZO, a Chicago Cubs base runner, with a thrown ball.
The National League president, BILL WHITE, met with Reds Manager LOU PINIELLA at Riverfront Stadium and revealed his decision.
White left without talking to reporters.


Norwest Selling Preferred Stock
The Norwest Corporation, a commercial banking company based in Minneapolis, said yesterday that it was selling $175 million of convertible preferred stock to institutional investors privately with the help of a group of underwiters.
"We decided it is a good time to augment capital," said John Crumrine, the company's treasurer.


Fragile Truce In Yugoslavia; The Fighting Wanes, But Hatreds Smolder
After six weeks of fighting in two republics that has left more than 300 people dead, tens of thousands homeless and an economy in ruins, Yugoslavia has reached another tenuous peace that, according to the deadly logic of this Balkan confict, bears the seeds of war.
Throughout the day, there were scattered reports of gunfire and mortar attacks in eastern Croatia -- one sign that not all the combatants in the blood feud between Serbs and Croats are prepared to accept the cease-fire declared Tuesday night by the country's federal presidency, an eight-member group whose relevance and power wanes with each futile attempt to stop the country's slide toward collapse.


'More Optimism' on Captives, Bush Says
With no sign yet of a hostage release in Lebanon, President Bush nonetheless said today that "there is more optimism" that one or more of the captives could be freed based on what he termed "persistent reports from a lot of capitals" that hostage developments were imminent.
At the United Nations, where Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar awaited word from the kidnappers who said Tuesday that they were sending an envoy with an "extremely important message," some officials indicated that the Secretary General had sent an envoy to the Middle East.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority priced $375 million of insured revenue bonds through Dean Witter Reynolds to yield 6.75 percent for a maturity in 2006 and 6.81 percent for a maturity in 2019.


Pop in Review
Pete Cosey  The Knitting Factory 47 East Houston Street Manhattan
The guitarist Pete Cosey's opening show on Friday night was clearly split between one-chord funk pieces that boiled and jazz pieces that started fairly miserably and ended the same way.
Mr.
Cosey, a minor legend among guitarists for his work with Miles Davis's mid-1970's funk band, is an eccentric, and at his best he made a few notes, twisting and grinding away, into a complex ball of electronic and metallic sound.
Mr.
Cosey was using a guitar synthesizer, and he was backed by a band that included Melvin Gibbs on bass and Doni Hagen on drums.
Mr.
Cosey played asymmetrical lines that used an electric piano's sound, except that the notes were bent and splayed.
Mr.
Cosey's compositions, built around ostinatos for the most part and featuring ribbons of melody played by the trumpeter Billy Brimfield and the tenor saxophonist Carter Jefferson, opened into great expanses of improvisation.
When Mr.
Gibbs, who propelled the band, took the initiative, the show became a series of accompanied duets between the bass and guitar, with Mr.
Cosey suggesting an elliptical, skewed version of a pop or blues cliche, and Mr.
Gibbs answering back.
The band also played two pieces by Thelonious Monk -- "Straight, No Chaser" and " 'Round Midnight" -- and it ran aground doing them.
But when it was improvising, the band was a mass of funk interaction, making the sort of music that gave improvisation a good name, even if it was within a limited musical context.


If Not the Real Thing, The Next Best Thing
FAKES continue to be fashionable: furs and costume jewelry, reproduction furniture, even breasts.
The latest fakes for the home are 18th- and 19th-century landscape and animal paintings that at a glance could pass for originals.


Cool Winds From Land Of Curries
LIKE the original chrome Waring blender, this fan is a classic, a design that has been made in India for more than 30 years.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.60
5.70
8.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.38
5.42
7.38
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.44
5.47
7.32
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.79
7.80
8.60
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.18
8.17
8.82
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.10
9.15
9.90
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.05
7.06
7.48
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Hewlett-Packard
The Hewlett-Packard Company said it would acquire Avantek Inc., a microwave electronics company, for $4.60 a share, or a total of $82.8 million.
Avantek, which is based in Santa Clara, Calif., makes microwave components for use in radio communications, satellite receivers and electronic warfare.
Hewlett-Packard, based in Palo Alto, Calif., said the acquisition would strengthen its own microwave components business.


Jim Crow's Ghost; Savannah and Civil Rights -- A Special Report; Ways of Older South Linger In City of Thomas's Boyhood
In January 1964, a half-year after this seductive, unhurried river city banished its segregated lunch counters and water fountains, a triumphant Martin Luther King Jr. arrived here to hail the passing of Jim Crow.
The moment, later captured in a local photo exhibition proudly entitled "We Ain't What We Used to Be," is still remembered as one of the purest and sweetest in the often sorrowful 250-year history of blacks in Savannah.


Police Officers in Milwaukee Vote No Confidence in Chief
The police union today overwhelmingly voted no confidence in Police Chief Philip Arreola for suspending three officers who questioned but did not arrest Jeffrey L. Dahmer.
But Chief Arreola said he would ignore the vote urging him to resign.
The Milwaukee Police Association said its survey of 1,339 officers found nearly 92 percent rated Chief Arreola's performance as poor or unacceptable.


Profit Off 58% At Woolworth
The Woolworth Corporation said yesterday that earnings fell 58 percent, to $21 million, or 16 cents a share, in the second quarter, which ended July 27.
That compares with earnings of $50 million, or 39 cents a share, in the period a year earlier.
Revenue rose 1.7 percent, to $2.23 billion from $2.19 billion.


'Sesame Street' for Budding Scientists
It's no secret that American students score poorly on international tests in math and science.
Yet one of the education goals adopted by President Bush and the nation's governors would make U.S. students first in the world in science and math achievement by the year 2000.
Can that be achieved when the average American child watches 23 hours of television a week?
It can if television is used to enhance learning rather than replace it.
That's the focus of a joint venture by Channel 13, the New York flagship station for the Public Broadcasting Service, and Texaco Inc.


Braniff Is Seeking Bankruptcy Protection
Barely five weeks after it began commercial flights, Braniff International Airlines yesterday became the third airline by that name to seek bankruptcy protection from creditors in the last nine years.
Braniff International, based in Dallas, has been operating charter flights since December and began commercial flights on July 1 from there to Newark; Orlando, Fla.; Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and Islip, L.I.


A Whole New World for Belichick
He has the same boyish look, the same shock of hair flopping over his forehead, the same caution when he speaks.
Only now, Bill Belichick is part of a new world.
For 12 years he had been an assistant coach with the Giants and their defensive coordinator when the team won two Super Bowl championships.


Children Ailing From Mount Pinatubo's Eruption Receive Medical Attention


Report on Navy Blast
Tests by Navy and independent scientists suggest that the explosion that killed 47 sailors on the battleship Iowa on a training exercise in 1989 may have been an accident, not sabotage as the Navy has said.
The conclusion is based in part on the discovery that Navy stockpiles contained gunpowder bags that can explode under extreme pressure.
Article, page A14.


U.S. Judge in Abortion Case Is Target of Death Threats
The Federal district judge who has kept hundreds of anti-abortion protesters from shutting down three abortion clinics here said today that he had received "very serious death threats" and was now under the protection of United States marshals.
"This has been the most awkward and stressful time of my life," the 62-year-old judge, Patrick F. Kelly, said during a brief interview in his chambers.
"It's scary. The strain from the threats is tremendous."


Egyptian Predicts P.L.O. Will Bend
The Egyptian Foreign Minister said tonight that he did not believe that the Palestine Liberation Organization would block a Palestinian delegation from joining a Middle East peace conference in October, even if it did not include P.L.O. members.
In an interview here, the Foreign Minister, Amr Moussa, predicted that the Palestinian leadership would also settle on what he described as one of several "imaginative alternatives" now being discussed to resolve the standoff between Israel and the Palestinians over the participation of delegates from East Jerusalem.


Correction
An article on July 27 about controversies over Germany's past referred incorrectly in some editions to Frederick the Great.
He was King of Prussia, not Emperor.


Umpire Files Lawsuit Against Piniella
National League umpire Gary Darling and his union filed a defamation suit against Lou Piniella today because the Cincinnati manager said Darling was biased against the Reds.
The $5 million suit, filed in the Philadelphia Court of Common Pleas, contends that Darling's reputation was "severely damaged" by Piniella's remarks made after the Reds' 7-3 loss to San Francisco last Saturday.


India Debates Rogue Bank's Actions
India's Finance Minister said today that the Government had uncovered financial fraud at the Bombay branch of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International some years ago, but it had not found any illegal payments to Government officials.
The remarks by the minister, Manmohan Singh, brought an angry response from opposition lawmakers in the Parliament, who accused him of creating a cover-up and walked out in protest.


Rural Retreats (In New York) To Better Enjoy the Summer
NOT everyone in town bolts to greener pastures when summer's hot winds blow.
There are city gardeners who devote their all to an urban patch.
Susan Rowland's jungle-like rooftop terrace is in Brooklyn, more or less in the shadow of the Williamsburgh Bank tower.
Michael Straus's English-style backyard is in lower Manhattan, more or less in strolling distance of Chinatown.
And neither gardener hankers for the hinterlands.


Hanzlik Retires
Denver Nuggets forward BILL HANZLIK, who missed all of the 1990-91 season because of back surgery, announced his retirement to become an assistant to the Charlotte Hornets' new head coach, ALLAN BRISTOW.


Talking Deals; U.S. Trade Stance Draws Criticism
EVEN by the glacial standards of international trade negotiations, the current round of talks under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade has moved slowly.
With the 108-nation talks virtually at a stalemate, there is now a risk that partial agreements -- aimed at reducing international barriers for industries like investment banking -- may unravel.
The impasse has also prompted some Administration and private trade experts to question the United States' wisdom in insisting on the virtual elimination of trade-distorting agricultural subsidies as the key to any deal to liberalize international trade.


Market Place; Varity's Struggle With Poor Image
FOR much of the past decade, as the Varity Corporation bounced from one financial crisis to another, it carried an unfortunate image among stock traders.
And that image persisted even after the company began to get its financial house in order.
"The initial reaction when people looked at the stock price at $2 or $3 was that it was a company going out of business," said Tobias M. Levkovich, an analyst at Smith Barney.
"Here was a company with $3.6 billion in sales last year, and people said: 'No, I'm not going to follow it. It's a penny stock.' "


Mobil Debentures
The Mobil Corporation yesterday offered $250 million of 8 5/8 percent debentures due in 2021 at a price of 99 to yield 8.719 percent through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch &amp; Company.
The debentures, which are not callable, are rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service and AA by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation.
They carry a yield that was 57-hundredths of a percentage point greater than that of 30-year Treasury bonds at the time of pricing.


Must We Be Musty? A Museum Says No
THE National Academy of Design is bringing the outside in.
This summer, the entire museum is devoted to three exhibitions about the outdoors.


Murray Heilweil, Retired Executive, 80
Murray Heilweil, a retired vice president of Hasbro Industries, died on Sunday at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 80 years old and lived in Greenwich.
He died of cardiac arrest, his wife, the former Charlotte Freeman, said.


9 Airlines Face Suit On Prices
A Federal judge in Atlanta yesterday converted an antitrust lawsuit against nine airlines into a class action that could benefit millions of domestic passengers and cost the carriers hundreds of millions of dollars.
The antitrust suit charges that the airlines conspired to keep ticket prices artificially high at 23 hubs, the airports to which the carriers funnel many of their connecting flights.


Brown Recalled As a Family Man
Paul Brown, the first coach of the Cleveland Browns and the Cincinnati Bengals, was remembered today in his hometown as a family man who made his life in football part of his life at home.
Brown died Monday at his home in Cincinnati of complications from pneumonia.
He was 82 years old.


Holdup Ends In a Slaying; 5 Arrested
Five Waterbury teen-agers coldly laid a plan to rob a Chinese restaurant's delivery man, then killed him in front of an audience of other youngsters, the police in the Connecticut city said yesterday.
They said the robbers made off with only $18 worth of take-out food, which they ate.
"In New York City, there was the wilding in Central Park," Capt.
Robert Moran, the acting chief of detectives, said.
"Here in Waterbury, it wasn't quite as random as that."


AIDS Definition Is Widened To Include Blood Cell Count
The Federal Centers for Disease Control has revised its definition of AIDS, and the change could add tens of thousands of people infected with the virus to the ranks of those considered to have the disease.
The change, to take effect in January, allows doctors to diagnose the disease based on blood levels of a kind of immune system cell depleted by the AIDS virus.
Until now, the Atlanta-based agency has defined AIDS based on opportunistic infections or other conditions resulting from damage to the immune system.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13
The sanctions against Iraq will continue, the U.N.
Security Council decided, though it will allow Baghdad a one-time exception to sell about $1.6 billion worth of petroleum to pay for food and medical supplies.
Page A1


CHRONICLE
BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN faces a lawsuit from two former assistants who contend that he owes them overtime pay from his 1984-85 "Born in the U.S.A." tour.
He is countersuing one of the men, saying that he took tapes and other property.
Both suits will be heard on Sept. 11 in New Jersey Superior Court in Freehold.
MICHAEL BATLANof Ocean Township, N.J., and DOUGLAS SUTPHIN, of Long Branch, N.J., filed suit against Mr.
Springsteen in August 1987.
Mr.
Batlan was his personal assistant and guitar technician for more than 12 years before he quit in 1985.
Mr.
Sutphin, an assistant to band members and a musical instrument technician, was laid off the same year, after 10 years on the job.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
California regulators received a $3 billion French offer for Executive Life and agreed to turn the seized insurer over to groups backed by the giant bank, Credit Lyonnais, unless a better deal is forthcoming.
The deal was welcomed as good for policyholders, who generally would get 81 cents on the dollar.
Executive Life gambled on high-risk junk bonds and lost.  [ Page A1. ]


Bitter Argument Erupts at Trial On Bronx Fire
In an unusually bitter courtroom argument yesterday, the defense lawyer and the judge in the Happy Land murder trial clashed angrily over the judge's questioning of a key defense witness.
The fight erupted after the witness, a neuropsychologist, testified that the defendant, Juan Gonzalez, lacked the mental ability to think through the repercussions of his act when he set fire to the Happy Land Social Club and killed 87 people.
The testimony went to the heart of the defense case -- that Mr.
Gonzalez was not sane when the fire was set.


Blurred Response to B.C.C.I.
A member of Britain's highest court is directing his Government's inquiry into the scandal-ridden activities of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
That's an instructive example for Washington.
The ramifications of B.C.C.I.'s outrages are so widespread that only by focused, coordinated investigation can the Government hope to uncover the whole story -- if it means to.
Indeed, the absence of coordination among official supervisors explains how B.C.C.I. could carry on undetected for almost two decades.
Established in 1972 by Pakistanis with Middle Eastern capital, it was officially based in Luxembourg and the Cayman Islands, renowned for their lax regulation, but actually managed from London.


Rail Executive Chosen As Tenneco President
Michael W. Walsh, the chairman and chief executive of the Union Pacific Railroad Company, will become the president of Tenneco Inc. on Oct. 1 and will later be named chief executive and chairman, Tenneco said yesterday.
Mr.
Walsh, who is 49 years old, is a former United States Attorney for the Southern District of California and manager of worldwide operations at the Cummins Engine Company.
He had no experience in railroads when he came to Union Pacific in 1986.
Still, the railroad was able to increase its earnings to $560 million last year from $322 million in 1985, in part because Mr.
Walsh compressed nine layers of management into three, cutting 800 managers.
Mr.
Walsh also instituted "town meetings" of the railroad's far-flung employees.


Weeklong Wonders: Quickly Qualifying to Drive a Bus
As Janet Lucci steered a 27,000-pound city bus down Bay Parkway in Bensonhurst, a passenger started yelling that she was driving too slowly.
"I'm gonna be late for work!" he shouted. "Speed it up, will you, honey!"
Ms.
Lucci did not speed it up.
It was her first day ferrying passengers and a 40-foot vehicle through the mean and unpredictable streets of New York, and she was taking no chances.


Stocks Narrowly Mixed; Dow Slips 0.67
Stock prices were narrowly mixed yesterday as investors consolidated their positions after Tuesday's rally.
Blue-chip issues, which are good indicators of market sentiment, moved within a narrow range, while the broader market posted small gains in moderately heavy trading.


Calendar: Frank Lloyd Wright, to See and Hear
Homage to Wright
American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
An exhibition of decorative objects and furnishings designed by Frank Lloyd Wright, including tables, chairs, leaded-glass windows and glazed porcelain dishes, starts next Thursday and runs through Oct. 27.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Tuesday through Sunday (open until 8 on Tuesday and Friday).
Museum admission: $4.50; $2 for students and those 65 and older; members and children age 12 and under, free.
A lecture series will be offered on some Tuesday evenings.
Leaded-glass windows will be the topic on Sept. 10; Edgar Tafel, a designer who apprenticed with Wright for nine years, will lecture on Sept. 24, and the curator of the exhibition, David A. Hanks, will lecture on Oct. 8.
Fee for each lecture, including museum admission, $10 ($5 for members).
Family workshops will be offered from 11 A.M. to 2 P.M. on three Saturdays: Sept. 14 (making furniture with blocks), Sept. 21 (paper window designs) and Sept. 28 (printing and graphic design).
The first two have a materials fee of $6, which includes museum admission for one child; the third workshop is free, except for museum admission.
Garden Possibilities
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.
The herbs and annuals weekend will include talks and demonstrations on growing and cooking with herbs, centered around the Luce Herb Garden, which is being restored.
There will also be guided tours of the annuals collection of more than 90 species and 9,000 plants.
Hours: 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday.
Suggested contribution: $3; $1.50 for students and those 62 and older; $1 for children age 6 to 16.
Solely Day Lilies
Old Westbury Gardens, 71 Old West
bury Road between the Long Island Expressway and Jericho Turnpike; (516) 333-0048.
The Long Island Day Lily Society is sponsoring a sale of traditional and miniature day lily plants in various colors from 1 to 4 P.M. on Sunday.
Members will answer questions about selecting and growing day lilies.
Admission to the garden is $4.50; $1 for children age 6 to 12.
Contemporary Furniture
Pritam &amp; Eames, 29 Race Lane (off Railroad Avenue), East Hampton, L.I.; (516) 324-7111.
A show of tables, headboards and mirrors in wood and bronze by Judy Kensley McKie starts on Saturday and runs through Sept. 24.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday through Saturday (closed Wednesday); noon to 4 P.M.
Sunday.
Free.


Clifford Jahr, 54, Dies; Entertainment Writer
Clifford Jahr, a writer who specialized in the world of entertainment, died Tuesday at New York Hospital.
He was 54 wears old.
He died of AIDS, said his sister, Beverly J. Murphy.


Connecting at City Hall
They started lining up around dawn on Monday morning, the 2,200 New Yorkers who'd accepted Mayor David Dinkins's invitation to come down to City Hall and give him some help.
Maybe he would take their advice, maybe he wouldn't.
But his offer to
listen
drew an extraordinary response and taught a huge lesson: Voters are not so much apathetic as frustrated by the distance between themselves and their leaders.
Given the chance to be heard, they leap at it.
Not everyone saw the Mayor.
Most were diverted to the second floor and other city officials.
But the 60 or so who did thought it was worth the wait.
Valeria Joseph, who wants the Mayor to visit her church and encourage children to attend, said: "I feel blessed. I had no idea I would get in."


In Aftermath of Gulf War, a Palestinian Exodus


Pop in Review
Crime and the City Solution
CBGB  315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street  Manhattan
Crime and the City Solution, a Berlin-based Australian band that played on Tuesday night, tried to defy history and lost.
One of rock's tenets is never to use a violin player, and this band did.
The results were lachrymose and huffy, even though the fault didn't always lie with the violin player.
The band, which has a good reputation among rock connoisseurs, walked through a set of gray and dire pieces.
Its lead singer, Simon Bonney, head cocked, did a lot of intoning, half braying and half talking through lines like "This road is my road/this road is your road/this road is our road." And the songs were filled with rhymes that clanked.
Among the better rhymes paired "dreamed" with "ice machine."
The music was better than the writing; the band has a tight rhythm section that jumped from meter to meter within songs, and kept the flow of the music from becoming predictable.
Its drummer, Mick Harvey, used brushes and improvised until the drum patterns came close to falling apart, and its bassist, Thomas Stern, often played up on the neck of the bass, giving the music a clarity that lightened its intensity.
But rock isn't just about music, and pretentiousness won out.
Part of the way through its set, the band played a version of "Sometimes I Feel Like a Motherless Child" that would have been perfect for a rock comedy show if such a thing existed.


Taking a Chance and the 5,000 Meter
With the world championships coming up in Tokyo later this month, Arturo Barrios of Mexico knew he was taking a chance in running the 5,000-meter race at the Pan American Games.
He took that chance, and wound up breaking his own Pan American record tonight, winning in 13:34.67.
His old record, set in 1987 here, was 13:41.40.


Judson Jerome, Writer, 64
Judson Jerome, a poet and writer, died on Monday in Greene Memorial Hospital in Xenia, Ohio.
He was 64 years old and lived in Yellow Springs, Ohio.
He died of lung cancer, his wife, Marty Jerome, said.


Israel Has to Do More Than Agree to Talk; Truth Without Justice
To the Editor:
"Israel's Blunder -- and Honesty" (editorial, July 22) states that the investigation of last October's Temple Mount riot by Ezra Kama, an Israeli magistrate, is far more credible than the whitewash produced two weeks after the incident by a government-appointed commission.
However, it was disappointing that Judge Kama declined to use his authority to order the prosecution of any police officer whose reckless gunfire be documented.
Even if it is impossible for a court to establish the connection between a specific officer's gunfire and any of the 17 deaths that occurred that morning, there are charges less serious than homicide that could be brought, as well as disciplinary measures against officers who share in the blame.
To date, not a single police officer has been charged or disciplined.


Another Rights Group Says No to Thomas
Leaders of a major civil rights lobby urged today that the Senate reject the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, becoming the latest in a line of liberal organizations to oppose the black appellate court judge.
Like other groups that oppose the nomination, the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights said it disagreed with Judge Thomas's judicial philosophy on issues like privacy and affirmative action.
It also asserted that he failed to enforce civil rights laws while chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in the Reagan and Bush administrations.


Court Criticizes School's Ordering Drugs for Boy
A Federal judge has ruled that school officials violated the rights of a disruptive boy for three years by requiring his parents to give him a drug to control his behavior.
Federal District Judge Martin Loughlin ruled on Aug. 1 that Casey Jesson, who is now 12 years old, is entitled to 7 1/2 months of compensatory education after he finishes high school or turns 21.
The ruling, on a lawsuit against the school district brought by the boy's parents, was made public Tuesday.
Judge Loughlin also ordered the Derry Cooperative School District to pay the parents' legal fees and begin an individualized education plan for Casey in the fall that will be subject to review at least once a year.
Matthias Reynolds, the lawyer for the school district, said he would appeal the ruling.
Mr.
Reynolds argued that the drug, Ritalin, a mild central nervous system stimulant that Casey began taking in 1985, eased the hyperactivity and that not until he was taken off the drug in 1987 did his behavior and grades deteriorate.
The judge commended school officials for their overall handling of the boy, who was transferred in and out of regular classes because of behavioral problems.
The evidence was hat the school authorities "acted with the patience of Job," he said.
Nevertheless, he concluded, the boy must be given special help in order to receive a fair and adequate education as defined by Federal law.
Judge Loughlin criticized Casey's school for insisting that the parents consent to Ritalin or another drug as a condition of the boy's attending regular classes.
The parents argued that the drug made their son act like a "zombie." The New Hampshire Civil Liberties Union joined with the parents in 1988 in arguing that the school's requirement violated Casey's constitutional right to privacy and his civil rights as an educationally handicapped child.
In addition, the parents argued that the school had not tried hard enough to educate him before resorting to Ritalin.
In June, a Federal jury trying the case became deadlocked on that issue and on the Jessons' demand for payment for medical care, past and future therapy, reimbursement for their lost wages and damages for pain and emotional distress.
Robert Murphy, the Jessons' lawyer, said he hoped that the family and school district could agree on a new educational plan without a new trial, but a new trial has not been ruled out.


Louisiana Abortion Law Is Halted in U.S. Court
A Federal district judge today struck down Louisiana's strict new anti-abortion law but expressed his personal distaste for doing so.
The judge, Adrian G. Duplantier, ruled that the Louisiana statute must be held unconstitutional under the terms of Roe v.
Wade, the 1973 United States Supreme Court decision that guaranteed a woman's right to choose abortion.
But in his written opinion, the judge added that he "wholeheartedly" agreed with the dissenting opinion written by Justice Byron R. White in the Roe v.
Wade case.


California Judge Barred in Police Beating Case
The presiding judge in the case of four white police officers charged with beating a black motorist has been temporarily barred from handling the trial by a state appeals court, which says it is considering disqualifying him from the case permanently.
The ruling, issued Tuesday by the Second California District Court of Appeal, was good news for the four defendants, who have been trying to have the judge disqualified on the ground that he has shown bias against them.


Another Lawsuit Filed Against Tyson
MIKE TYSON has been hit with another lawsuit in which a woman has accused him of grabbing her buttocks.
ROSIE JONES, 27 years old, of Bridgeport, Conn., the 1990-91 Miss Black America, filed a suit against the former heavyweight champion in Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday, alleging that he grabbed her buttocks at the opening of an Indianapolis convention last month.
"Mike Tyson is a role model for our young people," said Jones, "and if he can go around grabbing on women and treating them like they're no one, that tells young people it's O.K. to do that."


People
*
Lynn Fantom has been named president of the New York office of Kobs &amp; Draft Advertising Inc., a new position.
She has been general manager there since 1986. *
Anthony Howard Fisher has been named senior vice president at McCann-Erickson, New York, where he is an associate creative director.


Barbara Ewing Ylvisaker, Nurse and Nutritionist, 66
Barbara Ewing Ylvisaker, a registered nurse who in the 1960's helped to create one of the nation's first federally financed neighborhood health centers, in Trenton, died Sunday at New England Baptist Hospital in Cambridge, Mass.
She was 66 years old.
Her husband, Paul, said she died of cancer.


Cuomo Urges CUNY to Act On Professor
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today urged the City University of New York to take disciplinary action against Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., the City College professor who delivered a racially charged speech at a state-sponsored conference here last month.
Mr.
Cuomo, whose Advisory Committee on Black Affairs was one of three state agencies that sponsored the black cultural festival at which Dr.
Jeffries spoke, stopped short of calling on CUNY to dismiss the professor, as several lawmakers have done.


Cuomo Urges CUNY to Act On Professor
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today urged the City University of New York to take disciplinary action against Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., the City College professor who delivered a racially charged speech at a state-sponsored conference here last month.
Mr.
Cuomo, whose Advisory Committee on Black Affairs was one of three state agencies that sponsored the black cultural festival at which Dr.
Jeffries spoke, stopped short of calling on CUNY to dismiss the professor, as several lawmakers have done.


2 American Conductors Thriving in Europe
They are both American conductors, one well established at the height of his profession and the other well on his way.
But both have found Europe a better place than America to build their careers.
Michael Tilson Thomas, the 46-year-old principal conductor of the London Symphony Orchestra, has been well known in the United States since his debut, at the age of 24, with the Boston Symphony.
That was in New York City in Philharmonic Hall in 1969, when William Steinberg suddenly fell ill and Mr.
Thomas got a chance to fill in.


5 POWERS AT U.N. DECIDE TO ALLOW IRAQIS TO SELL OIL
The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council have decided to continue sanctions against Iraq, but agreed today to allow Baghdad a one-time exception to sell up to $1.6 billion worth of petroleum, with part of the money to be used to buy food and medical supplies.
Along with the permission to sell the oil comes a tough set of restrictions that would keep the revenue out of Iraqi hands and make sure that others, including the United Nations and countries with war-related claims against Iraq, are paid first.


Benjamin Garcia Jr., Union Executive, 50
Benjamin Garcia Jr., an executive vice president of the Social Service Employees Union, died on Saturday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 50 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, said his daughter Yvette.


A Deal Raising Complex Questions
The announcement today that French investors would acquire the seized Executive Life Insurance Company of California from state regulators is heartening to policyholders, but still leaves many questions to be answered.
The dozens of cities that held Executive Life guaranteed investment contracts, for example, are still involved in a lawsuit seeking terms comparable to those of holders of individual life insurance policies and annuity holders.


Are You Ready? Here Goes: 'Have an Airport Nice Day'
Just when you thought you had seen your last little yellow happy face -- those silly, smiling relics of the 1970's -- and were almost certain that the phrase "have a nice day" had been banished from ordinary conversation, the Port Authority has decided to go one better.
It is spending $90,000 to teach workers to say, "Have an airport nice day."
As phrases go, it is not as elegant as a line from Shakespeare or Frost or as slick as a slogan from Madison Avenue.
Purists even complain (in the nicest way, of course) that it is ungrammatical.
But yesterday 50 people who work at the New York area's three major airports were saying it, in unison, just as nicely as they could, under the direction of a ventriloquist who has both a doctorate and a dummy.


Ruling on Noriega Documents
A Federal judge today ordered the Government to turn over classified documents at the heart of Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega's efforts to show that he worked with American intelligence agencies in Central American drug deals, the Panamanian general's lawyer said.
The sealed ruling by Federal District Judge William M. Hoeveler followed a week of closed hearings in July attended by prosecutors, defense lawyers and attorneys for the Central Intelligence Agency and the State Department.


Iraqis Said to Retrieve Arms in Kuwait
The Iraqi military, in violation of the cease-fire agreement, has made several night raids into Kuwait to retrieve stockpiles, including Silkworm missiles, left behind during their retreat, allied officials here say.
All of the raids have been in the demilitarized zone patrolled by the United Nations, the officials said.


CHRONICLE
Five people will receive awards from the National Endowment for the Humanities, for their work in history and other subjects.


Yasir Arafat and the Beanball
Israel's conditional agreement to take part in the Mideast peace conference so tenaciously arranged by the United States was aimed like a beanball at the final holdouts, the Palestinians.
But instead of dodging the pitch, or swinging at it, Yasir Arafat seems content to just stand there and let it smack him on the skull.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir says he will meet with Palestinians -- if they are not members of the Arafat-led Palestine Liberation Organization, if they are not exiled Palestinians and if they are not Palestinians who live in East Jerusalem.
To Palestinians, this is an outrageous attempt to dictate who shall speak for them.


Cuomo Urges CUNY to Act On Professor
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today urged the City University of New York to take disciplinary action against Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., the City College professor who delivered a racially charged speech at a state-sponsored conference here last month.
Mr.
Cuomo, whose Advisory Committee on Black Affairs was one of three state agencies that sponsored the black cultural festival at which Dr.
Jeffries spoke, stopped short of calling on CUNY to dismiss the professor, as several lawmakers have done.


Sports of The Times; Cuba Moves Forward On 2 Wheels
THE first thing a visitor notices in Cuba is that there are no traffic jams.
This makes it very easy to get to the venues of the Pan American Games.
The reason there are no traffic jams is that there are very few private cars.
Because of the economic blockade imposed by the United States, the last generation of American cars is 32 years old now, and showing it.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 8


Why Is a French Frying Pan Feminine?
To the Editor:
In "The Waitron's Knife and Fork" (editorial, July 28), on the Random House Webster's College Dictionary and sexist language, you inquire: Is knife masculine and fork feminine?
Are there deeply ingrained attitudes toward the sexuality of all objects?


Home Video
It's getting harder to find a good $25 movie these days -- a new one, that is.
Prices of $90 and more for new titles do not bother video store customers who only rent films.
But for those who occasionally like to buy a hit film at a low price when it is first released on video, the supply has dried up.
With the exception of "Home Alone," which is to be released Aug. 22 at $24.98, big hits in the $25-to-$30 range are not being released the way they used to when "Pretty Woman," "Batman," "Honey, I Shrunk the Kids," "Lethal Weapon 2" and "Total Recall" came out


Leyland Sounds the Gun (a Little Early)
The Pittsburgh Pirates, their manager declared before their game with the Mets last night, are in a pennant race.
"We're in the thick of one now," Jim Leyland said.
"We have a four-team race going on here."


Bridge
American tournaments are more welcoming to foreign players than they once were.
For a long time they were barred from major events like the Spingold and Vanderbilt teams competitions.
Then they were admitted, but their participation "poisoned" their team: winning would not earn them the right to compete in the playoffs that determine American world championship representation.
Now the rule is more relaxed.
Foreign players do not poison a winning team, provided there are at least four American players, and this was significant in the Spingold Knockout competition that ended on Sunday in Las Vegas, Nev.
The captain of the winning team, Zia Mahmood of Manhattan, represents his native Pakistan internationally and is ineligible for playoffs.
But his teammates -- Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla., Eric Rodwell of West Lafayette, Ind., Seymon Deutsch of Laredo, Tex., and Michael Rosenberg of Manhattan -- will be eligible for the playoffs and will presumably add two more players.


Don't Blame Pesticides for Cancer Rise
To the Editor:
Dr.
Samuel S. Epstein and Ralph W. Moss (letter, July 16) use an article on an unexplained rise in the childhood cancer rate to try inaccurately and irresponsibly to frighten readers about the alleged dangers of pesticide residues in the food supply.
They assert that young children are much more susceptible to carcinogens than adults.
They state that fruit, vegetables, milk and other dairy products and meats are "laden with" or "contaminated with carcinogenic pesticides." These assertions would lead the reader to infer that our children are in danger of developing cancer from eating these foods and that the danger is increasing because the Environmental Protection Agency permits traces of pesticides in foods.


Cattle Prices at 3-Year Low; Soybeans Off on Rain News
Prices of live cattle futures fell to a three-year low yesterday on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange as the market continued to collapse amid ample supplies and slack demand for market-ready animals.
All live-cattle and feeder-cattle futures fell the permitted daily limit of 1.5 cents a pound.
Live cattle for delivery in August finished at 67 cents a pound, the lowest settlement of a near-term contract since Aug. 3, 1988.
August feeder cattle ended at 84.12 cents a pound.


Wedgwood Is Selected Instead of Waterford
Forced to choose between crystal and china, Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, has opted for the dishes.
Until yesterday, the agency had handled the accounts of both Waterford Crystal Inc. and Wedgwood USA Inc., which are owned by Waterford Wedgwood P.L.C.
But Waterford Wedgwood recently decided to operate its two subsidiaries as wholly separate units and, as a result, had concluded that their advertising should be assigned to different agencies.


A Way to Pump It to the Dump
GEORGE BLISS has found happiness.
And a way to beat traffic and air pollution.
His invention: the maxi-loader dump trike.


Justice Dept. Asks Speed in B.C.C.I. Inquiry
The Justice Department, stung by criticism that it was too slow to pursue allegations of wrongdoing by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, has urged Federal prosecutors to speed their investigations of the bank's possible involvement in tax fraud, money laundering and other schemes, Government officials and lawyers familiar with the case said today.
The bank, which has already pleaded guilty here to money laundering charges stemming from a 1988 indictment, has been under investigation for years in several cities.
But critics in Congress and elsewhere are pressing the Justice Department for results.
Last weekend, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh promised that indictments would be forthcoming in "four to six weeks," but he has declined to elaborate, saying only that investigations are continuing in four cities.


Anti-Scalping Law: Mixed Impact Likely
The new state law to curtail ticket scalping will help remove street hustlers from the vicinity of theaters, concert halls and sports arenas shortly before attractions are presented, but will not significantly restrain the thriving illegal resale of tickets, state legislators and spokesmen for the entertainment industry say.
"It isn't the be-all and end-all in anti-scalping legislation, but it's an important step," said State Senator Dean Skelos, Republican of Rockville Centre, L.I., a sponsor of the measure.
"The public will not be harassed as it has been."


Allies Say Iraq Is Scavenging Munitions in Kuwait


THORNBURGH IS SET TO LEAVE CABINET
Attorney General Dick Thornburgh is preparing to resign from the Cabinet and will be replaced, at least temporarily, by William P. Barr, the No. 2 official in the Justice Department, a White House spokesman said today.
Department officials said they expected Mr.
Thornburgh to announce his departure in the next few days to run for the Senate seat in Pennsylvania left vacant by the death of John Heinz four months ago.


At Sea: Tall Ships And Star Designers
A HOME is a necessity.
A boat is not.
A boat is an extravagant, complex water toy.
And of course it must be decorated.
"A yacht tends to be a display of wealth, so people tend to spend more money on a boat than on a home," said Bill Langan, chief designer at the boat design firm of Sparkman &amp; Stephens in Manhattan.


Accounts
*
Reebok International Ltd., Stoughton, Mass, to Mullen, Wenham, Mass., for its Weebok brand of children's apparel.
The incumben, Chiat/Day/Mojo, New York, which was awarded the account four months ago, will continue on other Reebok business.
Billings are less than $10 million. *
Child World Inc., Avon, Mass., a discount toy retailer, to Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners, New York.
The company, which recently changed ownership, will introduce its first broad-based advertising campaign, a spokesman said, with a budget of $10 million.


Sanford H. Bolz, 76, A Civil Rights Lawyer
Sanford Hegleman Bolz, a lawyer who as Washington counsel for the American Jewish Congress was active in civil rights cases in the 1950's, died Monday at the Washington Hospice.
He was 76 years old and lived in Washington.
He died of cancer, said his daughter Jody.


Israel Has to Do More Than Agree to Talk; Occupied Territories
To the Editor:
"Syria Approves Bush's Plan for a Mideast Conference" (front page, July 19) states of Israeli-occupied territories that the United States has "never taken a position on whether all occupied territories must be returned, or just substantial portions."
During the more than five months of negotiations for United Nations Resolution 242, numerous drafts were submitted by the parties.
On Nov. 16, 1967, Lord Caradon, the British representative, submitted what was ultimately to become the body of the final draft.
Like the present text, it called on Israel to withdraw from "territories occupied in the recent conflict." Conspicuously absent was the definite article "all" or even "the" before the word "territories."


Jesse R. Fillman, 86, An Expert on Tax Law
Jesse R. Fillman, a retired Boston lawyer who was an expert on tax law, died on Sunday at his home in Cambridge, Mass.
He was 86 years old.
He died of cancer, said his wife, the former Mary Otis Stevens.


Disabled, but Still at Home at Home
THE 42 million Americans with disabilities face an array of challenges every day, not the least of which are often in their own homes.
The problem is made worse by a dearth of information on finding accessible housing or renovating existing structures.
With that in mind, the National Easter Seal Society and the Century 21 Real Estate Corporation have collaborated on a project they call "Easy Access Housing for Easier Living." They have prepared a booklet of sample house plans and a brochure for house-hunting or home improvement with a checklist of features that ease access.


New Data on Iowa Blast Bolster Accident Theory
After 15 months of tests and analysis, Navy and independent scientists will present their findings in the next few weeks that suggest the explosion that killed 47 sailors on the battleship Iowa in April 1989 may have been an accident, not sabotage as the Navy believed.
Among the new discoveries suggesting that conclusion is the existence in Navy stockpiles of a small number of gunpowder bags that are prone to ignition under extreme pressure.
The bags are used as propellent in a battleship's 16-inch guns, and the Navy had previously said none prone to accidental ignition existed in its inventory.


A General Leads Paraguayans to Democracy
Filling his 19th-century French-style office with 20th-century Latin enthusiasm, President Andres Rodriguez tells of attending "a beautiful performance" of the Bolshoi Ballet here and of discussing sugar cane alcohol technology with President Fidel Castro of Cuba.
A night at the Bolshoi and chats with Mr.
Castro would have been considered treasonous under Mr.
Rodriguez's predecessor in the presidential palace, Gen.
Alfredo Stroessner.
General Stroessner clung to power for 35 years, long enough for Paraguayans to call him "the dinosaur" and for Paraguay's list of international friends to dwindle to Taiwan and South Africa.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE literature of youth is filled with romantic portrayals of children who run or live away from home.
Huck Finn sets off for adventure on his raft.
Pippi Longstocking lives happily with her animal friends.
Dorothy travels to a distant and magical land called Oz.
What child could pass up such wonderful opportunities?
The realities of life on the street are not the least bit romantic, but to a teen-ager who feels trapped and rejected, running away may feel like the only option.
The Department of Health and Human Services estimates that up to 1.5 million American children run away from home each year.
About 200,000 are on the streets at any one time; most are 16 years old.
"Fifty percent of the children who run away are back before the night's over," said Dr.
Mark-David Janus, a Paulist priest and a clinical psychologist at Indiana University Medical School in Indianapolis who has studied runaway youth.
"Most of the remainder," he said, "are back within two and three days."
Far more children threaten to leave home during an argument than actually try it.
Preschoolers and children in elementary school are almost always acutely aware of how dependent they are on their parents.
But even a young child's threat to run away should be taken seriously, mental health professionals say.
"Threatening to run away is often a call for attention or help," said Dr.
John A. Calicchia, a child psychologist at McLean Hospital in Boston and a psychology instructor at Harvard Medical School.
"It's a way of expressing a problem that the child is having that he or she can't say directly."
Pre-adolescents and adolescents are less reliant on their parents for their basic needs.
Their threats to leave home can be carried out more easily.
Even when they don't leave, children who make threats are giving their parents important information about how they feel and the limited options they see.
Their threats can serve as a springboard for discussing those emotions and searching for other options.
Among runaways are some, especially those who run more than once, responding to abuse by adults.
Dr.
Janus's study of chronic runaways in Toronto found that 73 percent said they had been physically beaten and 51 percent said they had been sexually abused.
Because these were chronic runaways who sought help at a shelter, those percentages are higher than for the general population of runaways.
More common for first-time runaways and those who threaten to leave are feelings that they are no longer respected or wanted.
They feel their parents are unwilling to listen to them and to acknowledge how they are changing.
"They see their families as having high expectations for them and very rigid rules, but not giving them the emotional support they need," said Dr.
Arlene McCormack, a professor of sociology at the University of Massachusetts at Lowell and a co-author, with Dr.
Janus, of "Adolescent Runaways: Causes and Consequences" (Lexington Books, 1987).
What parents may intend as protective acts, like setting rules about how late their children can stay out, these adolescents interpret as rejection.
"Remember that the child doesn't want to leave home," Dr.
Janus said.
"He or she wants the relationship to be different, but doesn't see any other solution. Running away is an impulsive, emotional solution to not seeing any other way of changing the relationship." DEALING WITH THE THREAT TO RUN AWAY
MOST of the time children threaten to run away in the middle of an argument with their parents.
It is a time when neither side is likely to be thinking clearly or looking beyond the moment.
If a child does say he wants to leave, here are some ways to analyze and approach the problem:
Take seriously, not literally, what young children say.
Almost all young children will talk about running away at some point.
Sometimes young children will use such a threat to express anger at you.
They may also be use it to test your love.
Let the child know you can see he's very upset.
Tell him that you love him even when he gets angry or sad.
Simply acknowledging his feelings will often allow him to talk about the underlying problem.
Recognize that a threat to run away is a sign of a communication problem, at the very least.
"Help your child articulate his complaints," said Dr.
Howard Liddle, a professor of counseling psychology at Temple University.
"Listen without cutting him off," Dr.
Liddle said.
"If you start with honesty and good intentions, that can bring about the same approach from your child."
Never dare your child to make good on his threat.
Remember that running away from home is an impulsive act.
"With pre-teens, say something like: 'Listen, I'm not going to let you run away. It's not safe,' " said Dr.
Bennett L. Leventhal, director of child and adolescent psychiatry at the University of Chicago.
"Don't tease them by packing their bags or telling them to leave. That's humiliating and scary."
Dr.
Mark-David Janus, a Paulist priest and clinical psychologist who works with runaways, said: "State clearly that you want your child to live at home. Also, let him know that if he leaves home, you're going to look for him."
Don't feel you have to handle the problem by yourself.
It is often helpful to have an experienced therapist act as an intermediary.
It is much easier for a teen-ager to hear criticism from an outside adult.
That therapist also becomes an advocate for the child in setting appropriate family rules that recognize both his growth and his limitations.
Look for a safety valve.
Sometimes children (and their parents) need a cooling-off period.
If a child is threatening to run away, consider arranging a place for him to run to, where he can be with a surrogate parent like an aunt or grandparent.
Don't simply let him run off to be with a friend; that suggests that you feel he no longer needs the support and protection of adults.
"If you work with your child on planning some time apart, he's less likely to see your actions as a rejection," Dr.
Janus said.


Joe Bowen, TV Executive, 56
Joe Bowen, who supervised the buying, screening and editing of theatrical feature films for CBS Entertainment, died on Sunday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 56 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said a CBS spokeswoman, Liza Rindge.


Mark Falls To Blazing U.S. Batons
Leroy Burrell and Carl Lewis led a United States team to a world record of 37.67 seconds in the 400-meter relay today, beating the French team that set the previous mark last year.
The squad of Mike Marsh, Burrell, Dennis Mitchell and Lewis took the record just three days after a Santa Monica Track Club team, featuring all but one member of today's United States team, ran 37.79 to tie the French team's mark.
Mitchell replaced Floyd Heard, who took part in Saturday's record-tying run.


Kennedy Center to Honor 7 Artists
Gregory Peck is one of seven artists who will be honored by the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts on Dec. 8 at the 14th annual Kennedy Center Honors.
Others to be honored for their contributions to the arts are Roy Acuff, Betty Comden and Adolph Green, Fayard and Harold Nicholas and Robert Shaw.


Joseph Fink, 76, Dies; Was Police Inspector
Joseph Fink, a retired deputy inspector on the New York City Police Department who in the 1960's gained a national reputation for his sensitive handling of hippies in the East Village, died on Sunday at Universal Medical Center in Pompano Beach, Fla.
He was 76 years old and lived in Pompano Beach.
He died of cancer, his son said.


Ex-Head of Peru Denies Charges in B.C.C.I. Case
Indignant, scornful and plaintive, Alan Garcia, the former President of Peru, rejected accusations today of any personal wrongdoing in his country's dealings with the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Mr.
Garcia, who returned on Monday from a month's stay in Paris and Brussels, called a news conference today to formally denounce Peruvian legislators who have accused him of profiting illegally while he was in office from mid-1985 to mid-1990.
While Mr.
Garcia was President, Peru placed more than $250 million of its reserves with the Panamanian office of B.C.C.I. in return for relatively little, investigators say, referring to a modest interest rate and line of credit.


How Fat? Burger King to Post Answers
Burger King, the nation's second-largest hamburger chain, has decided to tell its New York City customers exactly what they are getting in their meals.
Beginning next month, Burger King will prominently display large posters in its 80 New York restaurants showing the calorie content of frequently ordered meals, and the percentage they provide of the Federal Government's maximum daily recommended intake of fat and sodium.
With a quick look, patrons will learn the fat-laden truth about some Burger King stalwarts: a Whopper with cheese, french fries and a Coke, for instance, will saddle them with nearly 80 percent of the maximum recommended daily intake of fat.


Fed Rate Cut Not Yet Seen In Yields of Money Funds
The Federal Reserve's move to nudge short-term interest rates lower on Tuesday has not yet been reflected in yields of most short-term money market funds, a spokesman for IBC/ Donoghue's Money Fund Report, which monitors the major funds, said yesterday.
Lower rates will eventually show up in the funds as their underlying securities reach maturity and are replaced with ones with lower yields.


Sony Unit Is Renamed
Columbia Pictures Entertainment said yesterday that it had changed its corporate name to Sony Pictures Entertainment, reflecting its ownership by the Sony Corporation of Japan.
Sony Pictures Entertainment is the New York-based parent company of Columbia Pictures, Tri-Star Pictures and Columbia Pictures Television.


Miami Tries to Deal With Homeless


Recovery Gasps for New Orders
The Will-Burt Company, a parts maker in Orrville, Ohio, senses the beginnings of an economic recovery.
Various customers -- a nearby Volvo truck factory, for example, and AMF Bowling Inc. -- are purchasing a few more fenders, doors, bumpers and finely machined parts.
As the pace picks up, Harry E. Featherstone, Will-Burt's chief executive, finds himself with a week's supply of steel.
But he wishes the stockpile were smaller.
"I'd like to order steel daily," he said.
Such thinking helps to explain why the heralded recovery from the recession is having trouble getting off the ground.
Much depends on whether Mr.
Featherstone and thousands of other American executives conclude, more or less simultaneously, that sales are again brisk enough and sustained enough to warrant restocking.
When they do, economists say, the jump in production needed to satisfy the surge in new orders will give the economy a kick out of recession.
Not This Month


Credit Unit to Curb Role in Mailing Lists
Equifax, an Atlanta concern that is one of the nation's largest compilers of consumer credit information, said yesterday that it would curtail its business of using credit information to help create lists of consumers for companies that send out mass mailings.
The move comes when credit bureaus are under attack from consumer groups that contend their records are inaccurate and are used in ways that violate consumers' privacy.


A Decline in Crime for 15th Year Is Found in a Survey of Households
The rate of crime reported in a survey of American households dropped last year to 23.7 percent, continuing a decline that began after 1975, according to a Justice Department report.
The report, made public Wednesday by the department's Bureau of Justice Statistics said the crime rate improved in virtually all categories but still reflected wide disparities by region, wealth and race.


Banking Companies Offer Variety of New Financings
Various banking companies announced plans this week for new financings to take advantage of low interest rates.
The Mellon Bank Corporation of Pittsburgh said yesterday that it planned to issue $150 million in a new series of preferred stock through an underwriting group led by Merrill Lynch.


Injustice in Wichita
For three weeks in Wichita, Kan., this is what has greeted the terrified teen-ager, the poverty-stricken mother, the woman who could die in childbirth.
Members of Operation Rescue, a group on the fringes of the anti-abortion movement, have been blocking the doorways to three clinics.
Clogging the sidewalks.
Flinging themselves under cars.
Crawling beneath police horses.
Making it all but impossible for women to exercise a right granted them by the Supreme Court of the United States.
And now, with mischievously poor timing, the Justice Department has filed an amicus brief supporting the protesters' efforts to overturn a judge's order barring any further blocking of the clinics.
The Department says it's merely raising a jurisdictional issue and does not condone the demonstrators' goals or tactics.
But the effect of its message is to endorse the mob.


In Age of Cancer and AIDS, Therapists for the Dying
Every other Tuesday from noon to 12:50 P.M., George Valdez, a gay man with AIDS, and Gordon Murray, his psychotherapist, meet here in a sunny Victorian parlor and explore how to get ready to die.
They talk about Mr.
Valdez's 11-year-old son, born of a bygone marriage, and how to give him the skills and the memories he will need when his father is gone.


Review/Film; Assassins, Addicts And Spooks
Though "Blowback" is set in Florida, the characters in this political satire exist in that border zone where real life meets its lunatic fringe.
A government agent, an Oliver North manque, runs an Iran-contra type operation.
A Cuban emigre has the goods on the conspirators who assassinated John F. Kennedy.
A former drug addict named Nancy, born at the very moment of President Kennedy's death, becomes entangled with both men and eventually they all have something to do with Dr.
Krack, a mad, drug-producing scientist on the Government's secret payroll.


Cuba Gets Revenge Against U.S. in Team Handball
The last time they played team handball in the Pan American Games, the United States beat Cuba in a contest that has taken on epic dimensions, some of them apocryphal.
Today Cuba gained a good deal of revenge with a one-sided 25-16 victory in a first-round game.


Feeding Iraq, Prudently
For weeks the world has been grappling with the problem of how to meet the urgent humanitarian needs of Iraqi civilians without bolstering the outlaw regime of Saddam Hussein.
Now it looks as if the major powers at the U.N. have come up with an honorable solution.
A draft proposal being circulated by the five permanent members of the Security Council would allow Baghdad to resume limited sales of its oil under direct U.N. supervision.
Revenues would go into a U.N.-administered account to be used for compensating the victims of Iraqi aggression as well as buying food and medicine needed to save Iraqi civilians from starvation and epidemics.


Dykstra Enters Not Guilty Plea
Philadelphia Phillies center fielder LENNY DYKSTRA pleaded not guilty yesterday to a charge of drunken driving stemming from a May 6 auto accident that sidelined him for two months.


Quotation of the Day
"Death is very difficult. There's a lot to do -- practically, emotionally and spiritually. And you need to be as ready as you can, like natural childbirth preparation." -- Dr.
Lucy R. Waletzky, a counsellor in Chevy Chase, Md.  [ A10:3. ]


Salas's Pinch-Hit Home Run Lifts Tigers Over Blue Jays
Pinch-hitter Mark Salas stung Tom Henke with a three-run homer in the 14th inning and the Detroit Tigers beat Toronto, 4-0, tonight, salvaging the finale of a three-game series with the American League East-leading Blue Jays.
Mickey Tettleton also hit a home run as Detroit ended a losing streak at three games and pulled within five and a half games of Toronto.
The game took 5 hours 12 minutes.


Continental Bank's New York Cutback
Continental Bank N.A. will close its New York securities sales office this month as part of a consolidation, a spokeswoman said.
Ellen Barry, said four fixed-income salesmen in New York were offered jobs in Chicago, where the bank has its headquarters.
Closing the New York office will "certainly reduce overhead" and should not "affect the bank's ability to service its large East Coast institutional customers," Ms.
Barry said.
One Continental employee said that the bank's primary dealership and trading operations were profitable but that the bank's overall earnings "were still under pressure." The spokeswoman said the consolidation was not related to profitability.
She said Continental, whose parent is the Continental Bank Corporation, had closed its Paris office in the last year and moved the staff to London.


A Soggy Course Yields to Long Hitters
A punishing golf course where power is the most important requirement was conquered in the soggy first round of the P.G.A.
Championship today by a short hitter who fears more rain won't allow him to reach the greens and a long hitter so strong he wouldn't mind if the fairways were flooded.
The contrasting stylists, Kenny Knox and Ian Woosnam of Wales, each shot five-under-par 67's to lead a par-breaking assault on what was expected to be a brutally tough Crooked Stick Golf Club.


Deal's Impact For New York
The deal for Executive Life of California will have little direct impact on Executive Life of New York, which is also under state control, a top New York State official said yesterday, speaking on the condition that his name not be used.
But Marcia Alazraki, a senior insurance specialist at the New York law firm of Simpson, Thatcher, said the California deal "makes the prospects better for a deal involving the New York company." She added, "People who have been sitting back and looking at what appears to be the larger of the two problems have now seen that it can be massaged and worked through."


As the Nation Debates Abortion, A Judge Is Cast as the Moderator
On Tuesday night, and again on Wednesday morning, Judge Patrick F. Kelly did something almost unheard of for a sitting judge: He appeared on national television to lay bare an issue before his court.
But these are not typical times, either for the judge or for this Kansas city where he has spent most of his life, a city of safe streets, wheat prices broadcast on the radio and Wizard of Oz souvenirs.


N.A.A.C.P. Battle Over Thomas
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People has threatened to suspend officers of its branch in Compton, Calif., unless they rescind their endorsement of the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
On Wednesday the national office of the N.A.A.C.P., which opposes the nomination, told officials of the branch that they had until Friday at 3 P.M.
Eastern daylight time to withdraw their support for Judge Thomas.


For Children
It's easy to keep cool when you're jumping in and out of Long Island Sound, skimming the waves at the Jersey Shore or plunging into a lucid blue pool.
But if you're in New York City and it's a miserably hot day, there are some places to go and things to do, from lingering in a children's sculpture garden to watching a film about beavers, to keep one's brow from overheating. 'Taking Shape'
Paine Webber Art Gallery  1285 Avenue of the Americas (at 51st Street)  Manhattan  (212) 431-6300  Recommended ages: All ages  Through Sept. 6
The Studio in a School Association's annual spring exhibition of artwork by New York City's public school children is a display of exuberant creativity that sends bolts of color into this staid but elegant mahogany-walled lobby.
Working with professional painters, illustrators, printmakers and sculptors, 500 artworks, made by children from kindergarten through high school, demonstrate the infinite skills that can be tapped and developed when artistic abilities are explored.
One side of the gallery shows puppets (including a woman with blue hair), still lifes (Yuen Ling Wong reveals her discovery of Matissean blues), portraits, masks, quilts, landscapes and cityscapes.
On the other side are mostly animals.
A papier-mache tiger is poised in the middle of a circus hoop of fire.
Standing beside it is an unfazed green chicken.
Farther down, long-tailed monkeys are juxtaposed on a limb, and dioramas of apartment buildings, houses and skyscrapers suggest a desire for safety and permanence.
For those with children in tow, the gallery is a cool place to visit, with public restrooms and a cafeteria on the second floor, which may be reached by escalator.
The gallery is open from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. on weekdays; the cafeteria closes at 2:30.
Children's Sculpture Garden
Cathedral of St.
John the Divine  1047 Amsterdam Avenue (at 112th Street)  Manhattan  (212) 662-4481  Recommended ages: All ages
Children don't often get to call a garden their own, especially one with bronze sculptures they can touch.
As the children stand around the base of the garden's Peace Fountain, designed by the cathedral's sculptor in residence, Greg Wyatt, and unveiled in 1985, they may take the opportunity to splash themselves and their companions.
The fountain rises 40 feet with many powerful figures and images: Michael the Archangel casting out Satan, a DNA-like double helix, rotund faces of the sun and the moon.
These are gently balanced by the 120 bronze reliefs and sculptures around the base and the garden's seating area.
These small sculptures were made from models designed by children from the New York area (and by a few from Bermuda, Colorado and Europe) who competed in contests over five years.
"Joe Average and Spot," a sculpture of a leggy man sitting with his sleepy dog, seems to express just what you're supposed to do here: relax with your friends.
For 10-year-old Doniell Massey, who lives nearby, the garden is paradise found.
"I like the way the sculptures look," he said.
"Beautiful." The garden is open daily, 7 A.M. to 8 P.M., but the fountain operates round the clock. 'Beavers'
Naturemax Theater  American Museum of Natural History  Central Park West and 77th Street  Manhattan  (212) 769-5650  Recommended ages: 3 and up  Through Jan. 10
In this 30-minute film, beavers keep their cool physically and mentally.
When a beaver is chased by a brown bear, it dashes away in the nick of time.
When beavers are felling aspens and the slim trees fall in their way, they scoot out just in time.
This vivid film, shown on the theater's four-story IMAX screen, was made by Stephen Low, an IMAX film maker, and two Japanese companies.
The crew filmed a beaver family above and below the waterline.
In one incredible shot, the family huddles in its dry lodge under two feet of ice and frigid water.
The beavers' soft but slightly edgy, mournful whines reverberate through the theater.
Filmed in the Canadian Rockies in Alberta, "Beavers" is more than a strikingly photographed color documentary; it pays homage to these sturdy, pliant, paddle-tailed engineers who conduct their lives with straight and narrow dignity.
The film is shown daily at 10:30 and 11:30 A.M. and at 1:30, 3:30 and 4:30 P.M.
Admission: $5 for adults and $2.50 for children ages 2 to 12.
Strollers are allowed in the theater.
Waterfall and Mini-Park
McGraw-Hill Park  1221 West 48th Street  (212) 698-8676  Manhattan  Recommended ages: All ages
When children walk into the short glass tunnel through the waterfall here, they may feel a little uneasy.
After all, 3,000 gallons of recycled water is falling every minute, yet nobody gets wet.
Once they're out of the tunnel, they can watch the water ripple down green granite walls 20 feet high and feel the temperature around them fall about five degrees.
In the summer, the park attracts lunchers (there is an Au Bon Pain concession in the park), and also those seeking a seat in the shade on the garden-style furniture or on the bench under the arbor.
The feathery hybrid honey locusts lend a Japanese touch to this midtown spot.
In fact, the waterfall is a popular backdrop for wedding pictures, so if you stop by on a Saturday, you might see a bridal party.
The park is open from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. daily.
Public Field
Site 15  Battery Park City  Vesey Street (next to the ferry at North Cove)  Manhattan  Recommended ages: All ages
Despite its unglamorous name, this newly sodded field is actually rather classy.
With its face to the Hudson River and its back to the glossy World Financial Center, Site 15 is an unadorned acre that the Battery Park City Authority has transformed into a temporary lawn space.
The fenced-in field's proximity to the river makes it a cool spot for casual or organized activities like softball, soccer, kite flying or lazing about.
Community Board 1 issues permits for reserved sports and play.
For example, preschools can reserve part of the field regularly.
Otherwise, take a lawn chair or a blanket to sit on while your children roam about and practice handstands and cartwheels.
The field is locked when the sod is soggy after a rainfall, so call ahead to make sure it is open.
The field is open 11 A.M. to dusk Monday through Friday and 10 A.M. to dusk on the weekends.
KEEP IN MIND
SAND CASTLE BUILDING AND CONTEST, at which children will be taught sand-castle techniques, participate in a contest and receive prizes at the 10,000-square-foot man-made "TriBeCa Beach." Amazon Village, Pier 25, West Side Highway and North Moore Street, Manhattan.
Tomorrow and Sunday, 2 to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 227-2900.
"THE ALIENS HAVE LANDED," an evening stroll, conducted by the Urban Park Rangers, during which families may discover the ornamental and exotic plants growing in Silver Lake Park.
Meet on Sunday at 7 P.M. at the park, Forest Avenue and Silver Lake Park Drive, New Brighton, S.I.
Free.
Information: (718) 667-6042.
"MOTHER GOOSE AND HER STORYBOOK FRIENDS," a new musical about the Little Mermaid, Prince Charming, Old King Cole and other popular storybook characters, produced by the International Performance and Production company, at the Westbeth Theater Center, 151 Banks Street.
Today and tomorrow at 10 A.M. and 1 P.M.
Free workshops in dramatic, mime and circus skills are to be given at 11:30 A.M. and 2:30 P.M.
Tickets to the play: $10 for adults; $7.50 for children younger than 12.
Information and reservations: (212) 741-0391.
"WONDERFUL WATER LILIES," a workshop at which children ages 3 to 12 will learn about the wet world of water lilies and also meet some frogs and turtles.
Participants should bring a clear plastic two-liter bottle.
Tomorrow from 2:30 to 3:30 P.M. at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, Crown Heights section.
Admission: $5 for members; $6 for nonmembers.
Information and reservations: (718) 622-4433.
"TALES OF ELIJAH," a new book by Peninnah Schram, who is to read the story of the prophet for the Hans Christian Andersen storytelling hour, for children ages 5 and up.
Tomorrow at 11 A.M. at the Hans Christian Andersen statue, Central Park, entrance at Fifth Avenue and 72d Street, on the western side of the Conservatory Water.
Free.
Information: (800) 834-3832.
CLOWN THEATER DAY, featuring Big Apple Circus clowns, jugglers, a clown parade, vaudeville shows, a Parisian street band and acrobats.
Part of the Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival, on the plaza and in Damrosch Park.
Tomorrow, starting with the 12:30 P.M. parade and lasting until 8:15 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 875-5397.


INSIDE
Albanians Flood Into Italy
Thousands of Albanians scrambled into an Italian port seeking a better life, but the Government is determined to send them home.
Page A3.


Lawmakers End Bid to Upset Weicker Veto, Leaving State in Limbo
Legislators gave up tonight on their effort to override Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s veto of a budget without an income tax, setting the stage for a new round of deliberations on a fourth budget.
The decision was neither a victory for the Governor, who has insisted since February that the state needs a tax on wages to solve its long-term fiscal problems, nor a sign that legislators had come up with any solution to the budget stalemate.


Freed British Journalist Assumes Captors Are Seeking Hostage Deal
John McCarthy, the British reporter held hostage in Lebanon for more than five years, said today that he believed that the captors who released him were seeking a wide-ranging deal to exchange Western hostages for prisoners being held in Israel.
At a news conference here, the 34-year-old reporter said he thought the objectives were conveyed in a letter he carried for the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, from the Islamic Holy War, a pro-Iranian group.


Edberg's Wild Card
STEFAN EDBERG, disappointed with his play of late, has decided he needs more match play heading into the United States Open and yesterday accepted a wild-card entry into next week's Volvo International.


Pop/Jazz; Coltrane and Ellington: Studies in Composition
What exactly is a jazz composer?
This weekend's Classical Jazz concerts at Alice Tully Hall -- "Coltrane Serenade" tonight and "Portraits by Ellington" tomorrow and Sunday -- promise to demonstrate conclusively that there is more than one answer to that question.
Tonight, the music of John Coltrane will be interpreted by various small groups featuring, among other musicians, McCoy Tyner, Joe Henderson and Marcus Roberts.
Tomorrow and Sunday, the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra will perform some of Duke Ellington's most ambitious, and rarely heard, works.


Drug Suspensions
Florida State high jumper HOLLY KELLY and BRIAN CROUSER, a javelin thrower who placed 29th at the 1988 Olympics, were suspended yesterday by The Athletics Congress for drug-testing violations.
Kelly was given a three-month suspension -- which she already served, ending July 21 -- for testing positive for the stimulant pseudoephedrine April 21.
Crouser received a two-year suspension for failing to appear for an out-of-competition drug test the week of March 11.
(AP)


Review/Music; A Wonderland At Tanglewood
THE beginning of David Del Tredici's "Alice Symphony" hardly seemed a beginning at all.
At the work's world premiere here, at the Tanglewood Festival of Contemporary Music on Wednesday night, the oboe sounded an A and the Tanglewood Music Center Orchestra began to join in, one section at a time, as in an ordinary pre-performance tuning.
It was only when Oliver Knussen conducted a gradual fading of the sound that the audience realized it had been slyly inducted into the work itself.
Then the soprano, Phyllis Bryn-Julson -- who has been a stunning performer of the composer's works -- began to recite an excerpt from Lewis Carroll's "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland."
It wasn't like falling down a rabbit hole, but this virtuosic performance by the singer and student players did pull us into an evocative and intoxicating musical universe, born of Mr.
Del Tredici's now epic obsession with Alice.
The other works on the program -- Carolyn Yarnell's "Enemy Moon" and "Exit" (1990-91) and Andrew Imbrie's Symphony No. 1 (1966) -- though skillfully executed, paled in comparison.


Milli Vanilli Fans Get Refund Offer
Arista Records has offered to refund $3 on future purchases to anyone who bought a Milli Vanilli compact disk, $2 for a tape or long-playing album or $1 for a single.
The offer could cost the Los Angeles-based record company $25 million, said a lawyer for Arista, Irving Scher.
The proposed settlement in a Chicago court involved 1 of at least 26 lawsuits that have been filed claiming Arista defrauded Milli Vanilli fans.
The lawsuits charge Arista with implying that Rob Pilatus and Fabrice Morvan sang on the best-selling Milli Vanilli album, "Girl You Know It's True." Mr.
Pilatus and Mr.
Morvan admitted last year that they did nothing more than dance, lip-synch and pose for pictures.
The pair also returned a 1990 Best New Artist Grammy they won for the album, which was recorded by other vocalists in Germany.
The Chicago lawsuit is the first to reach a possible class-action settlement that could apply to anyone who bought 1 of the more than 10 million copies of the album.
All plaintiffs would have the option of accepting the offer, doing nothing, or continuing separate legal action against the company.
Judge Thomas O'Brien of the Cook County Circuit Court criticized the proposed settlement on Wednesday, but he did not rule out approving it.
He said he would announce a decision on the proposal on Monday.
"In my opinion, this was a rather provocative type of conduct, and to require a purchase of additional merchandise really rubs me the wrong way," Judge O'Brien said.
To obtain the refund, a customer would be required to send in the bar-code symbol from the Milli Vanilli recording along with a receipt for the purchase of a new Arista product.
The record company would then send back a check.
People who purchased tickets for Milli Vanilli concerts can send in a ticket stub with a receipt for future Arista purchases and receive a rebate of 5 percent of the ticket's cost.


Outraged CUNY Officials Weigh Action on Professor
The three top officials of the City University expressed outrage yesterday about racially charged statements made by a City College professor and said they would investigate possible disciplinary action.
Their statement came as pressure grew to act against the professor, Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., who delivered an angry attack on Jews and others at a state-sponsored black cultural festival in Albany last month.


Esprit Asks Consumers What's on Their Minds
Opinions are the slogans in a new advertising campaign for Esprit de Corp. that features the clothing company's first use of television commercials.
The campaign, for which Esprit plans to spend $10 million in its initial year, takes its opinions from thousands of postcards the San Francisco-based company has received since asking consumers in January, "If you could change the world, what would you do?"
The television spots and complementary print ads show young consumers voicing thoughts that are idealistic ("I'd reverse the status of celebrities and educators") as well as controversial ("Keep a woman's right to choose . . . unless George Bush is free to baby-sit").
"The cards were compelling; they made the campaign," Neil Kraft, the image director of Esprit who developed the ads, said yesterday during an interview in New York.
Mr.
Kraft, formerly vice president of advertising and marketing at Barneys New York, called the campaign "more evocative than provocative." The spots will begin on Aug. 19; the print ads will appear in September issues of magazines including Glamour and Vogue.


Critic's Choice/Opera; Glimmerglass's 'Fidelio'
For listeners whose passion is the symphony, there are operas and then there is "Fidelio." (There is "Das Rheingold," too, but that's another story.) To them, any promising production of Beethoven's great but intractable drama is automatically of interest.
The "Fidelio" that opens tomorrow night at 8 at the Glimmerglass Opera in Cooperstown, N.Y., holds considerable promise.
The American soprano Jeannine Altmeyer, well remembered for her Sieglinde in the Metropolitan Opera's "Walkure" in 1986, will sing the title role.
And the English director Jonathan Miller, whose Met staging of "Katya Kabanova" last season was widely acclaimed, is directing.


Iran's Premier in Stormy Time Found Slain Near Paris
Shahpur Bakhtiar, a longtime opponent of the Shah of Iran who served as his country's last Prime Minister before the Islamic revolution of 1979, was found stabbed to death at his home outside Paris today.
The body of his chief aide was found beside him.
No group took responsibility for the killings, but Iranian opposition leaders in Paris, including former President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr, immediately accused the Teheran Government of responsibility.
Mr.
Bani-Sadr said he and Mr.
Bakhtiar were on a death list recently drawn up by Iran.


Criminal Prosecutions Hurt Securities Cases
To the Editor:
As one of those whose name Robert S. Pirie suggested to handle complex securities prosecutions in "Fraud-Fighters for Wall Street" (Op-Ed, July 12), I believe he misses the real lesson to be drawn from the series of reversals of securities law prosecutions by the Second Circuit.


Socrates Butsikares, 68, an Editor For The Times Over Four Decades
Socrates K. Butsikares, who worked for four decades in a variety of editing assignments at The New York Times, died yesterday at Staten Island University Hospital.
He was 68 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Butsikares, who retired from The Times in 1987, had been news production editor in New York and managing editor of The Times's International Edition in Paris.


Only 50 Great Books of the Last 50 Years?; Besides Orwell
To the Editor:
I must take issue with Russell Baker, who argues in "Looking for Giants" (column, July 27) that books of the past "had more weight back then."


Bankruptcy Seen as Threatening the Soviet Party
Accounting details of the Communist Party's wealth and cash flow were leaked to an independent newspaper today, showing bankruptcy looming, at least on the balance sheet, while the party elite shifts increasingly toward the new private sector to shelter their resources.
"The Communist Party is on the eve of bankruptcy -- this time financial bankruptcy," the paper, Nezivismaya Gazeta, said in its report tonight.


Guess What? The Mets Aren't Dead After All
The season's latest critical game for the Mets, one full of great pitching, gambling offense and a late and alarming comeback by the Pirates, was reduced yesterday to one exquisite instant of guesswork.
Barry Bonds stood off first base and stared at John Franco.
The left-handed closer for the Mets stared back at Bonds out of the corner of his left eye.
The scoreboard, which read Mets 4, Pirates 3 and indicated there was one out in the ninth inning, stared from right field at both Bonds and Franco.


British Hostage Goes Home To Fanfare and Adjustments
After 1,942 days as a hostage, the television journalist John McCarthy returned to Britain tonight, ferried home aboard a special Royal Air Force jet, accompanied by doctors and diplomats, as a bigger story than any he had ever covered.
The nation joyfully marked his release with the peal of church bells and the pop of champagne corks, as friends and relatives celebrated.
His friend, Jill Morrell, whose tireless campaign for his freedom ranged from prodding the British Government to meeting with Yasir Arafat, said she was "ecstatic." Prime Minister John Major said he was "delighted." And Mr.
McCarthy's employers announced that his back pay amounted to $257,000.


On Stage, and Off
'Assassins' on Disk for the Ages
It was damned by most critics.
Frank Rich in The New York Times called it an anti-musical about anti-heroes that was slender and sketchy, totally disorienting and unfulfilled in its potential.
But it was praised by others.
David Richards in The Times found it audacious and disturbingly brilliant and said that no musical in the last decade had dared so much.
It is Stephen Sondheim and John Weidman's "Assassins," and it is back, preserved on compact disk and cassette tape so future generations can decide for themselves.
On Tuesday, RCA Victor will release the original-cast album of the highly unusual musical look, both serious and comic, at nine Presidential assassins, from John Wilkes Booth to John Hinckley, and at what their presence in history says about the American dream.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON DECOLONIZATION -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE AGAINST APARTHEID, INTERNATIONAL DAY OF SOLIDARITY WITH STRUGGLE OF WOMEN IN SOUTH AFRICA -- 10:30 A.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Cryogas Industries Thorofare, N.J., a manufacturer of gases, named Robert E. Madden president and chief executive. *
Credit Suisse, Zurich, named Kenneth J. Tarr president and chief investment officer of its investment management subsidiary, Credit Suisse Asset Management Inc.
It also appointed Francoise Soares-Kemp private banking team leader. *
Festival Productions Inc., New York, which produces concert events, has reorganized its senior management.
George Wein, the company's founder, will serve as chief executive.
John Schreiber has been appointed president.
Charles Bourgeois, Darlene Chan, Quint Davis, Robert Jones, John Phillips, Marie St.
Louis and Joyce Wein have been named senior vice presidents. *
First Western Financial Corp., Las Vegas, Nev., has named Anne Bacon president and chief executive of the corporation and its subsidiary, First Western Savings Association. *
Grand Metropolitan Foodservice U.S.A., Minneapolis, a subsidiary of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., named Charles Fuhrman president and chief executive. *
Lehrer McGovern Bovis Inc., New York, a construction management and consulting company, named R. Sail Van Nostrand executive vice president for the northeast region.
Also, Peter Marchetto and Anthony S. Cottone have been appointed senior vice presidents and division managers. *
Manchester Inc., New York, a career consulting firm, named Charles A. Ballard Jr. senior vice president. *
Nash Finch Co., Minneapolis, a food company, appointed Alfred N. Flaten Jr. president and chief operating officer.
He succeeds Russell N. Mammel, who retires later this year.


Pan Am Gets Rebid By United
United Airlines yesterday once again stepped into an arena jammed with bidders for some prized Pan Am assets.
Hoping to spoil the deal that Delta Air Lines has negotiated with Pan American World Airways Inc. and to edge out a competing offer from Trans World Airlines and American Airlines, United re-entered the bidding with a two-part offer worth at least $465 million that appears to be sweeter than its last proposal, worth $235 million.
Though some frills in United's latest offer are clearly intended to appeal to Pan Am's creditors and employees, there appears to be nothing new for Pan Am's management.
Many analysts suspect Pan Am's senior executives have favored a deal with Delta because it alone would seem to assure them of getting a lucrative compensation package.
Details of New Offer


Give Me That Old-Time Religion
CALL it a slow-mo revelation, but I have finally figured out why I am having such trouble getting into baseball in the 90's.
I miss George and Pete and Bart.
If the national pastime is a "popular or debased religion" (Bart wrote that), then Steinbrenner, Rose and Giamatti were its 80's father, son and holy ghost.
I especially miss them in these dog days without a single wildly compelling division race, with no absorbing characters (if Mackey Sasser, who can't let go, and Rob Dibble, who can't hold on, are not jointly possessed, then what's the story?) and no one of note roaring out of rehab to save the season.


Baseball Brawl Mars Competition at Pan American Games in Cuba


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 9


Chinatown Gang Shooting Leaves One Dead
Two members of a Chinatown gang fired on several members of a rival gang sitting on beach chairs in front of a Chinese restaurant last night, killing one man and seriously wounding two others, the police said.
The motive for the shooting just after 8 P.M. in front of the Good Taste Chinese Restaurant at 27 Monroe Street was not known early this morning.


Sports of The Times; Should U.S. Have Split For Miami?
THERE is a temptation to say I hope the United States basketball team is on the same charter airline I took from Miami last week.
That means the team will be late.
Real late.
Their charter flight is scheduled to land here at 11:15 A.M. today, well before the 6 P.M. tipoff against the Bahamas.
That could be interesting.
Even Bobby Knight never forfeited a game during his truculent rampage at the 1979 Pan American Games in Puerto Rico.


Sara Lee Plans To Buy Playtex
The Sara Lee Corporation today agreed to buy Playtex Apparel Inc. in a stock merger worth about $170 million.
It also announced higher earnings for the quarter and year.
Sara Lee, which is based in Chicago and makes foods, panty hose and other products, said it would offer four million shares for Playtex.
Playtex Apparel, based in Stamford, Conn., is best known for its brassieres sold under the Playtex, 18-Hour and Cross- Your-Heart names.
The company had sales of $480 million in the 12 months that ended June 30, Sara Lee said.
Sara Lee said that profits climbed 19.2 percent in the quarter ended June 29, to $141.1 million, or 57 cents a share, compared with $118.4 million, or 48 cents a share, in the period a year earlier.
Sales increased 3.1 percent, to $3.04 billion from $2.95 billion.
For the full fiscal year, net income was $535 million, or $2.15 a share, up 13.8 percent from $470.3 million, or $1.91 a share, in the 1990 fiscal year.
Sales rose nearly 7 percent, to $12.4 billion from $11.6 billion.
Shares of Sara Lee fell $1.375 each today, to $42.75, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Results Plus
TENNIS  Becker Beats Rain and Foe  Boris Becker beat an onrushing thunderstorm and moved to the quarterfinals of the A.T.P.
Championship in Mason, Ohio, last night by eliminating MaliVai Washington, 6-4, 6-4.
Stefan Edberg and Pete Sampras also advanced, but Ivan Lendl fell to Derrick Rostagno, 7-6, 3-6, 6-3.
Edberg defeated, Amos Mansdorf, 6-1, 6-2, and Sampras defeated Wayne Ferreira, 6-1, 6-4.
"With the lightning, maybe it wasn't the best idea that the announcer said I was serving at 6-4, 5-4 and the storm was coming in about 10 minutes," Becker said.
"The pressure was already high and it makes it even higher: hurry up, get out of the way."


James E. Cooney, Baseball Player, 96
James E. (Scoops) Cooney, who in 1927 made the last unassisted triple play in the National League, died on Wednesday in a Warwick nursing home.
The nursing home said Mr.
Cooney, who was 96 years old, had died of natural causes.
Mr.
Cooney was playing shortstop for the Chicago Cubs when he made his triple play, which came in the fourth inning of the first game of a doubleheader on May 30, 1927, at Pittsburgh.
With runners on first and second, Paul Waner hit a line drive up the middle.
Mr.
Cooney broke from his position, caught the ball, touched second for the second out and tagged the runner coming from first base for the third out.


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about Edward T. McCormick, a former president of the American Stock Exchange, misidentifed his sister.
She is Isabel Wadsworth.
It also misstated the length of his marriage, to the former Ione Reese, who survives him.
They were married for 57 years.


CHRONICLE
The rock guitarist CARLOS SANTANA pleaded no contest yesterday in a Houston court to a charge of possessing marijuana.
Judge NEEL RICHARDSON of Harris County Criminal Court gave him a six-month deferred sentence; the charges will be dismissed if he has no other drug violations.
He was ordered to make a $100 contribution to a local charity and must play a concert in Houston to benefit a drug rehabilitation center for young people.
Mr.
Santana, 44 years old, was arrested June 27 at the Houston airport when five grams of marijuana was found in his luggage.


Doctors Link Gene to Colon Cancer
Five months after they identified a gene that they thought might set off colon cancer, researchers now say another gene is almost certainly the true initiator of the disease.
The newly discovered gene sits right next door on the chromosome to the other gene, and it has all the telltale defects that the previous candidate had lacked.
"This is the gold standard we were waiting for," said Dr.
Raymond L. White of the University of Utah, who helped find both colon cancer genes.


Diner's Journal
La Caravelle's New Chef
La Caravelle, the venerable classic French restaurant at 33 West 55th Street, has introduced the first menu of its new chef, Tadashi Ono, formerly of L'Orangerie and La Petite Chaya, both in Los Angeles.
From his credentials, one might expect La Caravelle to begin grilling over vine clippings and serving only vinaigrette sauces.
Far from it.
Mr.
Ono's summer menu cleverly blends his own contemporary dishes -- poached sea scallops in citrus sauce, duck ravioli with cilantro consomme, steamed monkfish rolled in Chinese cabbage -- with traditional La Caravelle fare like grilled Dover sole with mustard sauce and pike quenelles in lobster sauce.
The dinner menu is prix fixe at $54; lunch is a la carte.
Among the best starters at a recent dinner were the peppery lobster bisque and the light duck-filled ravioli in a richly flavored sauce of duck stock enlivened with fresh cilantro.
Snails served with fennel and couscous were a nice new twist, too.
Steamed monkfish, wrapped in leaves of Chinese cabbage and served with a light ginger butter, is a winning entree, as is crisp-skinned roast duck with cranberries and grilled Dover sole with mustard sauce.
Sauteed sweetbreads came atop a mound of mashed potatoes, all enhanced with chive oil.
If the sweetbreads had been crisp, the combination would have been smashing.
Desserts are colorful and iconographic.
Some even taste good, like the chocolate mousse with a lid of bittersweet chocolate, and the apple terrine with fresh berries.
La Caravelle is clearly heading down a new, adventure-filled road.
Considering the quality of the new menu, it might be worth hitching a ride.
La Caravelle serves lunch noon to 3 P.M.
Monday to Friday; dinner 5:30 to 10:30 P.M.
Monday to Friday.
Closed Saturdays until after Labor Day.
All major credit cards accepted.
Telephone: (212) 586-4252.


Yugoslavia Agrees to More Truce Observers
Yugoslavia agreed today to accept new international observers to help monitor the fragile cease-fire that went into effect on Wednesday morning.
The agreement, unanimously approved on the first day of a meeting of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, noted that members of the 35-nation organization besides the 12 who belong to the European Community could send observers.


What Is So Rare as a Parking Space?
Ten percent of the suggestions made to the New York City Transportation Department at Mayor David Dinkins's recent invitation urged the city to develop a system for giving neighborhood residents priority space for parking their cars near their homes.
While the proposal will surely end up being more complicated than it sounds, it is still a good idea.
In some city neighborhoods, residents cruise half the night before finding a convenient place to park.
They conclude, rightly in many cases, that people from other neighborhoods, or even from other states, have pre-empted the most desirable spots.
In other neighborhoods, daytime parkers, who continue their journey to work by other means, gobble up more space.
Residents are afraid to use their cars because there may be no room to park when they return home.


New Deal for Founder Of Canandaigua Wine
In acquiring Guild Wineries and Distilleries, Marvin Sands, the founder of the Canandaigua Wine Company, added another strong brand to his portfolio, and added to his reputation as an adroit buyer.
Publicly traded, Canandaigua is still run by Mr.
Sands and his sons, Richard and Robert.
Canandaigua said yesterday it had agreed to buy all of the business assets of Guild for $55 million in cash.
Guild, a grape-growers' cooperative based in Woodbridge, Calif., is best known for Cook's champagne.
The seventh-largest winery in the country, Guild had sales for the fiscal year ended June 30 of $63 million, making the purchase price less than one year's revenue.
Wineries typically sell for 1.5 times annual sales.


Sounds Around Town
Zydeco, the Chavis Way
Boozoo Chavis, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212) 727-7788.
With his rambunctious yowl of accordion, jumpy Cajun patois and litany of "Hyaa!" and "Yee!" and "Haw!," Boozoo Chavis's zydeco party is too radical for just a studio recording, although his new album certainly does try.
"Boozoo Chavis" (Elektra Nonesuch) finds the indomitable accordionist stomping through such zydeco raves as "Oh Yae Yae," "Goin' to La Maison" and the bawdy "Keep Your Dress Tail Down," sometimes accompanied by members of his family, sometimes just by the click of the accordion's keys.
The tempos shuffle and jive, the melodies swagger; it's pure and primitive, with just a hint of down-home blues.
Live, you get the visual benefit of Mr.
Chavis's grin, fancy footwork and 10-gallon hat.
The shows are to be at 9 and 11:30 P.M. today.
Admission is $15.
Revering the Song
Jimmie Dale Gilmore, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Jimmie Dale Gilmore treats the song as religion.
His style incorporates elements of country, folk, rock and blues; what he draws from each is an essential devotion to the power of song.
His new album, "After Awhile" (Elektra Nonesuch), is sparsely produced, with just Mr.
Gilmore's thin but sinewy voice, acoustic guitar pickings and the careful embellishment of fiddle, mandolin, piano or Dobro.
He writes songs about Saturday nights, trains and blue moons, and he sings as if his heart would break if he didn't tell you about it.
The show is to be at 11 P.M. tomorrow.
Tickets are $7.


30-Year Bond Prices Drop After Auction
Investor demand for the Treasury's $12 billion of new 30-year bonds was weaker than anticipated yesterday, sending prices down modestly on long-term issues.
The slack demand, which some traders said was a reaction to the brisk rise in bond prices the past week, became apparent soon after the 1 P.M. bond auction.
By late in the day, bond prices fell slightly more than a half-point, raising the yield of the just-auctioned 8 1/8 percent bonds to 8.21 percent late in the day from an average of 8.15 percent at the auction.


A Decline in Crime for 15th Year Is Found in a Survey of Households
The rate of crime reported in a survey of American households dropped last year to 23.7 percent, continuing a decline that began after 1975, according to a Justice Department report.
The report, made public Wednesday by the department's Bureau of Justice Statistics said the crime rate improved in virtually all categories but still reflected wide disparities by region, wealth and race.


Morgan Financial Post
The Morgan Financial Corporation said J. Rob Collins had been elected chairman and president.
Mr.
Collins replaces Edmund Clark, who will become vice chairman and chief operating officer of Canada Trust, a subsidiary of CT Financial Services, in October.


Oakland Tribune May Close Unless Gannett Settles Debt
Robert C. Maynard, the owner of The Oakland Tribune, announced yesterday that he would be forced to close the California newspaper on Wednesday unless the Gannett Company, which sold him the paper in 1983, agreed to terms that would eliminate a $31.5 million debt remaining from the sale.
Mr.
Maynard said Gannett has thus far refused his offer of $2.5 million to settle the debt.
He said such a deal was essential in order for him to secure financing that would enable The Tribune to continue publishing.
The $2.5 million would come from an investor Mr.
Maynard declined to identify, who would then invest more money in the paper.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
New York State Dormitory Authority is offering $27 million in state university athletic facility revenue bonds through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co., with a maximum yield of 7.30 percent for the issue due in 2021. *
The Federal Home Loan Bank is offering $85 million of 7.65 percent notes, at par, to yield about 19 basis points above the five-year Treasury note, through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.


Shahpur Bakhtiar: Foe of Shah Hunted by Khomeini's Followers
Shahpur Bakhtiar, who was found stabbed to death in France yesterday, had caught the attention of the world for a brief 39 days as Prime Minister of Iran between the reigns of Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi and Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
Virtually unknown outside Iran before January 1979, he made headlines that month by reluctantly accepting a call by the ailing Shah to lead the country's faltering Government.
At that moment, Mr.
Bakhtiar stood in stark contrast to the imperious ruler he had steadfastly opposed and the Shiite militants who were clamoring in the streets for the Shah's ouster and death.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
United Airlines rejoined the bidding for Pan Am assets with a two-part deal worth at least $465 million.
It hopes to spoil the deal that Delta has negotiated with Pan Am and to edge out a competing offer from T.W.A. and American.  [ D1. ]
Varity is just one of hundreds of companies abandoning Canada to move south of the border in the wake of the Canada-U.S. free-trade agreement that took effect in early 1989.  [ A1. ]
The agreement to sell Executive Life's $6.4 billion junk bond portfolio for $2.7 billion appears to be fair, analysts said, and one the regulators should be happy to get.  [ D1. ]
Equifax said it would curtail its business of using credit information to help create lists of consumers for mass mailings.  [ D12. ]
The Oakland Tribune will be forced to close on Wednesday, said its owner, Robert C. Maynard, unless Gannett agrees to terms that would eliminate a $31.5 million debt.  [ D16. ]
Motown Records said it would end its long-term agreement with MCA next month and seek a new distributor.  [ D4. ] Markets
Investor demand for the Treasury's $12 billion issue of new 30-year bonds proved weaker than expected, sending prices down.  [ Page D1. ]
An early stock rally was cut short by the weakening bond market, sending the Dow down 12.75, to 3,013.86.  [ D6. ]
The dollar advanced in light trading dominated by concerns over interest rates and strife in the Middle East.  [ D13. ]
The platinum market took another downward spin, with futures prices now poised to drop below $350 an ounce for the first time in more than five years.  [ D13. ] The Economy
When enough companies restock their warehouses, having decided that sales are again brisk enough to warrant that, the resulting jump in production will give the economy a kick out of recession.
But that moment has not yet come.  [ D1. ]
Most U.S. store chains reported listless sales for July, a transitional month when summer goods are typically cleared out for back-to-school items.
Exceptions were Wal-Mart and the Gap.  [ D2. ]
Slightly fewer Americans filed new claims for unemployment benefits in the last week of July, the Labor Department said.  [ D2. ]
The owners of a giant coal-burning power plant in northern Arizona agreed to a series of expensive measures to control air pollution and reduce haze in the Grand Canyon.  [ A1. ] International
B.C.C.I.'s former chief financial officer told a Congressional panel that six years ago the bank was insolvent after suffering trading losses of $430 million but never disclosed the problems to regulators or its own directors.  [ D1. ]
In a ruling that will mean steep duties on portable Japanese word processors, the International Trade Commission determined that their sale in the U.S. below fair market value had hurt American producers.  [ D2. ] Today's Columns
Just as Robert Maxwell is planning to try to sell common stock in the U.S., there are signs that investors may be getting nervous about at least one branch of his publishing empire.
A preferred stock issue of Official Airline Guides failed to find buyers in an auction.
Floyd Norris: Market Place.  [ D1. ]
Alan Greenspan is trying to nudge down inflation by controlling the money supply, but steering the money supply has rarely been harder.
Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
Yes, Michael Jordan and Gatorade have teamed up, and Quaker Oats is wasting no time telling the world about it.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D16. ]


Restaurants
Onda
Among the scores of restaurateurs who are trying to reel in elusive patrons with the alluring bait of economy, Len Allison and Karen Hubert may be the most eccentric.
The former owners of Huberts on Park Avenue, which closed last year, moved downtown to smaller and less costly quarters, hired a bare-bones staff and opened a restaurant that defies a simple label.
What do you call a place that on one menu offers shrimp with radish pudding and Chinese sausage, goat cheese lasagna, Indonesian-style veal-shank stew, and roast chicken with lemon -- the United Nations?
They call it Onda.
The mahogany-lined rectangular dining room is as offbeat as the food.
Bronze candle sconces and little religious paintings line the walls while the Shirelles coo over the sound system.
Well-spaced tables are draped in paper, reinforcing the relaxed theme.
Servers are casually attired, taking a cue from the gregarious manager, who comes to your table wearing a plaid sport shirt, a nascent beard and a little gold fish dangling from one ear.
Hey, this place could be fun.
And it is fun if you order the right dishes, but doing that takes some investigation.
Many of the menu items have two prices, one as an appetizer, one as a main course.
This is a good idea for those who like to mix and match.
An appetizer of sauteed tenderloin of pork is pleasing, the thin slices of meat served on skewers with a spicy peanut sauce and a cooling cucumber salad.
Roasted peanuts resurface in a melange of Chinese rice-stick noodles with butterflied shrimp, tofu and bean sprouts.
It's a lively combination, on the sweet side, with good textural contrast.
The sweet tooth is sated again in the soft-shell crabs with a sweet-hot sauce of fish stock, sake, red pepper and chili pepper.
A nice communal munchie is the crisply fried baby calamari with pungent tamarind sauce.
Pastas also can be a starter or a main course.
Lasagna with sun-dried tomatoes, bound with a mortar of dense goat cheese, was too heavy and assertive.
You might instead try the pansotti, a Ligurian ravioli that is filled with spinach and enlivened with a pastelike sauce of ground walnuts and herbs.
Onda has a small but well-selected wine inventory.
Prices are very modest across the board.
You might try the fruity, dry 1988 Chinon from Domaine de la Chapellerie ($19) with succulent roasted quails that are oddly paired with a Chinatown-style egg roll filled with cabbage, carrots and Chinese greens.
Roasted chicken with a parsley puree under the skin, asparagus and lemon garnish is deftly done.
It is crisp outside and moist within, sitting in a clear lemony broth.
Another good choice is a twist on osso buco, sinewy but tender veal shank with a rich, sweetish caramelized onion sauce and toasted polenta sticks.
The indelicate Indonesian veal-shank stew, however, is overpowered by coconut milk.
The Chinese-style roasted duck is probably the best effort of all, served with bok choy and water chestnuts.
Seafood does not fare so well.
Fried red snapper Thai style with scallops and roasted sweet pepper is colorful but bland, and the highly perfumed steamed flounder with ginger and scallion has nothing over what might be served at a run-of-the-mill Cantonese restaurant.
The ingenuous summer desserts are more fun than throwing your sister into a swimming pool.
The banana splits reminded me of my teen-age pigouts on a Jersey Shore boardwalk, and the hot fudge sundae is just as excessive, sans bananas.
Chocolate rum espresso cheesecake is every bit as iniquitous as it sounds.
Lemon pound cake was crumbly dry on one tasting, better the next time.
Onda's funky international approach to budget dining may not be to everyone's taste.
But if the idea of a culinary Cook's Tour intrigues you, it can be recommended.
Andiamo
When Andiamo opened in 1987, it was the biggest thing to hit the Lincoln Center area since Luciano Pavarotti first strolled up to the footlights.
This stagy northern Italian restaurant boasted a first-rate chef, an energetic staff and a stylish loft setting.
Nearly four years later, it is still going at a relatively brisk pace.
The original chef, Frank Crispo, moved on last year and was replaced by his second, Gregory Godon.
Mr.
Godon's menu is similar in style to his predecesor's, if perhaps just a little less consistent.
Andiamo is hidden down a corridor behind a casual streetfront spot called Cafe Bel Canto, under the same ownership.
At the entrance is a soaring loft with a balcony reached by an iron staircase.
Track lights illuminate abstract paintings, and a papier-mache saloon pianist is frozen in mid-song on a wide platform at the back of the room.
Tables are generously separated, and conversation tends to float away in this soaring space.
Nonsmokers may be pleased to know that smoking is prohibited anywhere in the restaurant.
Two upbeat starters are the mussels steamed in a subtle tomato-cream broth, and the mild, beefy-tasting venison carpaccio, which is seared outside, then sliced and served with tomatoes, red onions, cucumbers and provolone.
Fried calamari, served over mixed greens and deep-fried spinach, would have been fine had they not lingered backstage too long, arriving flaccid.
One dish could not be passed up, for it sounded too outlandish: prosciutto, fresh figs and peach-flavored whipped cream with mint garnish.
After sampling it, my table of four voted 3 to 1 in favor. (I was in the majority.) While the whipped cream was superfluous, the combination wasn't bad at all: minimally sweet, with a hint of peaches.
Agnolotti filled with lobster and porcini and served in a mushroom-cream sauce sounded like a sure winner, but the filling could have been bread crumbs for all the flavor of mushrooms and lobster that came through.
The sauce was the best part.
A rich, fork-tender duck confit is served on greens and beets.
Andiamo's wine list is rich in selections from virtually all over Italy.
A good selection of American chardonnays is available, as is a sampling of red Bordeaux.
Prices are about average.
The service staff is still knowledgeable and hard-working.
Pastas are uneven.
A formidable-looking mountain of penne with pesto and sliced almonds has a snowcap of deep-fried leeks.
Underneath all this was hidden a fillet of salmon.
The whole assembly was like one of those Pentagon test missiles that do expensive swan dives into the ocean: both are made of quality parts, but when assembled they just don't fly.
Whole-wheat pappardelle came with flabby, unappetizing sweetbreads in a shiitake cream sauce, and the chef's variation on spaghetti puttanesca, with sausages and tomato, was overwhelmed by salty black and green olives.
One of the best pastas sampled was angel hair with briny clams and shrimp and scallops in a good shellfish broth tinged with saffron.
Among seafood offerings, a special of red snapper over spinach with a sauce of lobster broth was delicate and flavorful.
Sauteed halibut steak, another special, was perfectly cooked and accompanied by roasted corn and fresh peas.
Tuna encrusted with sesame seeds, fennel seeds and crushed red pepper over couscous and a sesame oil vinaigrette was overpowering; the tuna was lost amid the fireworks.
Lamb chops, served with white beans, tomato and green beans, are nicely done, as is a grilled sirloin steak with garlic, black peppercorns and roasted vegetables.
If you crave something sweet before the opera or symphony, chocolate layer cake on a chocolate-latticed plate with coconut ice cream should do the trick.
Creme brulee with raspberries is pleasing, better than the undistinguished gelati and pallid fruit sorbets.
Fried banana slices come with walnuts and Jack Daniels gelato, which is boozy but unbalanced.
Instead, try the tuile cone filled with gelatin-thickened Marsala cream and ringed with fresh fruit.
While not so harmonious as it once was, Andiamo is still worth noting when you look for dinner before or after Lincoln Center performances.
Onda *
430 Broome Street, at Crosby Street, Manhattan, (212) 925-4743.
Atmosphere: Spacious, casual room; low noise level.
Service: Informal and efficient.
Recommended dishes: Soft-shell crabs, tenderloin of pork with peanut sauce, deep-fried baby calamari, Chinese rice-stick noodles, pansotti in walnut sauce, roasted chicken with lemon, veal shank with onion sauce, roasted duck Chinese style.
Wine: Small, well-chosen list at very modest prices.
Price range: Dinner: appetizers $4.50 to $7.50, main courses: $10 to $18.
Credit cards: All major cards.
Hours: Dinner: 6 to 11 P.M.
Monday to Saturday.
Closed Sunday. (Beginning Sept. 3: Lunch: 11 A.M. to 3 P.M. Monday to Friday; Saturday and Sunday brunch: 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.; dinner: 6 to 11 P.M. daily.)
Reservations: Suggested.
Wheelchair accessibility: One step at entrance; dining on one level; restrooms one floor below (elevator available).
Andiamo *
1991 Broadway, near 67th Street, Manhattan, (212) 362-3315.
Atmosphere: High-ceilinged loft with illuminated abstract art. Moderate noise level.
Service: Professional on the whole, and courteous.
Recommended dishes: Mussels in tomato-cream broth, duck confit with greens, venison carpaccio, angel-hair pasta with seafood, red snapper with spinach and lobster broth, grilled sirloin steak, lamb chops with white beans, chocolate layer cake.
Wine: Wide-ranging and extensive Italian selection; ample American and French labels.
Average prices.
Price range: Appetizers $7 to $12, main courses $10.50 to $24.50.
Credit cards: American Express, Mastercard, Visa.
Hours: Dinner: 5:30 to 11:30 P.M.
Monday to Saturday, 5 to 10 P.M.
Sunday. (After Labor Day, Sunday brunch from 11 A.M. to 2:30 P.M.)
Reservations: Suggested.
Wheelchair accessibility: Dining on main level; wheelchair access to restroom in adjacent cafe available.
What the stars mean: (None) Poor to Satisfactory *
Good **
Very Good ***
Excellent ****
Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction primarily to food, with ambiance and service taken into consideration.
Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location (in New York City and suburbs), published in the last 18 months.
Touch-line telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 cents a minute).


New Delhi Journal; As All India Wonders, Sonia Gandhi Holds Court
Every afternoon at about 3 o'clock, the pilgrim buses begin arriving at No. 10 Janpath, a sprawling whitewashed mansion secluded behind thick, high walls and squads of soldiers with machine guns.
Dressed in simple white kurtas, or loose shirts, pajama pants and sandals, the pilgrims loiter around the guarded gate waiting for the signal to enter the sanctum sanctorum.
From the offices of the Congress Party next door, officials dressed with equal simplicity scuttle down the road toward the house.
From time to time, an Ambassador car, the roly-poly automobile that has been produced here for decades, with deeply tinted windows, disgorges a Cabinet minister who is hustled through the gate.


I. B. Singer of Poland
To the Editor:
As the representative of a new, democratic and free Poland as well as a reader, I would like to express my deep sorrow at the death of the great writer and Nobel Prize laureate Isaac Bashevis Singer.
His work is proof of the deep bonds between Polish and Jewish culture.


Robert Monzon, Audiologist, 65
Robert Monzon, an audiologist who had one of the largest hearing aid practices in New York City, died on Wednesday at his home in Upper Grand View, N.Y.
He was 65.
He died of cancer, a spokesman for the family said.


Meggett Does Everything, Except Agree With Giants
How much is Dave Meggett worth?
The Giants and Meggett -- an offensive threat as a running back, pass receiver, punt returner and kick returner -- are so far apart in contract negotiations that he might not play this year.


Canada-Mexico Game Explodes in Violence
A brawl between the baseball teams from Canada and Mexico at the Pan American Games today forced the suspension of the qualifying game between the countries and resulted in the hospitalization of a coach from each team.
Mexican officials said that a racial insult had touched off the fight, but a Canadian official said that obscenities had been exchanged but that there had been no racial remarks.
The Canadians also said that some of the Mexican players wielded bats during the incident.


It's Official: Michael Jordan Is Now Promoting Gatorade
HAVING finally confirmed one of marketing's worst-kept secrets -- that Michael Jordan would add Gatorade to his long list of product endorsements -- executives of the Quaker Oats Company, which makes Gatorade, and its advertising agency are wasting no time putting their new superstar to work.
Just hours after a news conference in Chicago yesterday morning, at which Mr.
Jordan's multiyear, multimillion-dollar agreement was announced, Bayer Bess Vanderwarker, which creates Gatorade's advertising, had a 60-second commercial on nationwide television featuring the guard of the Chicago Bulls basketball team.
"Be like Mike. Drink Gatorade" is the theme of the spot, which will also run as a commercial in movie theaters starting next Friday.
And for consumers who are not ardent television viewers, a poster-sized, double gatefold, or pull-out, print ad, showing Mr.
Jordan clutching a cup of the drink, is appearing in the latest issue of Sports Illustrated.
"We feel he is going to be such a valuable property for us, we wanted to use him right away," Peggy Dyer, vice president of Gatorade marketing at Quaker, said in a telephone interview from Chicago after the news conference, which featured Mr.
Jordan swigging from a bottle of Gatorade.
"We think he is going to have an immediate impact on our sales."
In addition to the broadcast and print ads, Ms.
Dyer said, displays decorated with likenesses of Mr.
Jordan are being rushed to grocery and convenience stores across the country.
Quaker's goal, she added, is to have the displays greet consumers as they shop today.
"Because he is respected everywhere as a leader in sports and a proven performer," William D. Smithburg, chairman and chief executive of Quaker, said in a statement, "Michael is perfect to represent Gatorade." Mr.
Jordan's appearance in Gatorade's advertising marks the first time the product has used a spokesman in the United States; overseas, athletes have served as endorsers for some time.
But of course Gatorade is far from being Mr.
Jordan's first product endorsement.
Estimates of his total annual income from his 15 or so agreements with leading marketers range from $15 million to $20 million.
Among them are McDonald's, General Motors (Chevrolet), General Mills (Wheaties) and Nike (Air Jordan).
Ron Bess, president and chief operating officer of Bayer Bess, is not daunted at sharing Mr.
Jordan's product-pitching skills with so many others.
"We want to use Michael in a way that's distinctive," he said.
"We feel Michael is an ideal fit with Gatorade, and he feels that way also."
In joining Gatorade's team, Mr.
Jordan is ending a two-year relationship with the Coca-Cola Company, from which he received an estimated $2.5 million annually to appear in advertising for Coca-Cola Classic.
Industry executives say Mr.
Jordan was willing to swap beverages because Quaker was willing to offer a multiyear contract versus Coca-Cola's one-to-two-year terms.
Mr.
Jordan's contract with Coca-Cola expired on July 31.
Advertising trade publications reported that Quaker was waiting for it to expire before announcing a deal with Mr.
Jordan.
The announcement had been anticipated since June, when those publications began reporting that Mr.
Jordan would switch to gulping Gatorade.
They described Quaker's agreement with Mr.
Jordan as being worth $18 million over 10 years; Quaker will not discuss terms.
Industry analysts call the agreement a move by Quaker to bolster its commanding lead in the country's estimated $730 million market for such beverages at a time when competitors from Coca-Cola (Powerade) to Suntory (10-K) are pressing as never before.
Packaged Facts, a New York marketing consulting firm, estimates that Gatorade commands 87 percent to 95 percent of its market.


Sexton's Psychiatrist Violated Ethics
To the Editor:
In "The Sexton Tapes" (Op-Ed, July 23), Dr.
Martin T. Orne presents a weak defense for releasing audiotapes of psychotherapy sessions of the poet Anne Sexton to her biographer.
Dr.
Orne confuses the right of privacy with the obligation for confidentiality.
Privacy is a prerogative of citizens to keep personal aspects of their lives from public view.
Confidentiality is an ethical tenet of the psychiatric profession that precludes the pyschiatrist from allowing what is said in psychotherapy to leave the consultation room.


Platinum Prices Lose $7.50; Gasoline at Summer High
The platinum market took another downward spin yesterday.
Prices of platinum futures are now poised to drop below $350 an ounce for the first time in more than five years.
Gasoline futures soared to their highest level of the summer on the New York Mercantile Exchange, lifting the energy market amid scattered reports of refinery problems.


Reviews/Art; In New Jersey, Art in Ceramic, in Textiles and Even in Light
The trompe l'oeil style in ceramics is given a contemporary twist in "Strong Tea: Richard Notkin and the Yixing Tradition," now at the Newark Museum of Art.
Over the last decade, the Oregon-based Mr.
Notkin has produced a series of ambitious craft sculptures based on the Yixing style of Chinese ceramics favored by the literati of the late Ming and Qing dynasties (1573-1911), in which naturally colored clays were used to make stoneware teapots in the form of chrysanthemums, tortoises, olives, pumpkins and the like. (Four examples of this traditional work accompany the exhibition, which was organized by the Seattle Museum of Art.)
Mr.
Notkin keeps the unglazed finish of the earlier style, but applies it to a variety of contemporary subjects.
They range from the whimsical -- cutaway sections of city streets with illusionistic water pipes as the teapots' handles and spouts, and fire hydrants or tree stumps as lids -- to the political.
One series, on the theme of nuclear power, features cooling towers as brewing vessels, stylized lightning bolts as handles and spouts, and miniature mushroom clouds as lids.


Mafia Captain Will Be Witness For Prosecution
A Lucchese crime family captain has agreed to testify for the prosecution in a major bid-rigging trial in Brooklyn and has told law enforcement officials that one, and possibly two, members of the family were killed to insure their silence, Federal prosecutors said last night.
Acting on a tip from the witness, Peter Chiodo, law enforcement officials converged on a heavily wooded area of northern New Jersey yesterday in search of the body of John Morrissey, an official with Local 580 of the Architectural and Ornamental Workers Union.
They also searched for the body of Anthony Casso, a high-ranking Lucchese figure who Mr.
Chiodo said was probably killed, too.


3 New York Agencies Announce Layoffs
Three New York advertising agencies announced staff reductions yesterday, yet more evidence that the industry's slump continues unabated.
At the Ayer New York office of Ayer Inc., about 60 people were laid off as part of a reorganization, a spokeswoman said, out of a total of 765 employees.
At Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, 18 of the 130 staff members were dismissed, a spokeswoman said.
She attributed the layoffs to the impending loss of three accounts and projects.
And Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York will lay off 17 people, a spokeswoman said, of a total of 722.
She said the move resulted from client cutbacks in advertising spending.


Rangers' Acquisition
The New York Rangers acquired veteran minor-league center DON BIGGS from the Philadelphia Flyers yesterday in exchange for future considerations.
Biggs, 26, began last season in Europe before being claimed off waivers by Rochester and playing for the American Hockey League club. (AP)


Cuba Piles Up Victories In Weight-Lifting Events
As Cuban kayakers and sprinters provided a shock for the Americans in the Pan American Games, the Cuban weight lifters made good on a prediction to obliterate the competition, the United States in particular, by putting on a stunning exhibition in the first three days of competition.
With three weight categories to go, the Cubans have won 10 of the 11 gold medals awarded in six weight categories, including a record-setting lift by Pablo Lara in the 75-kilogram category.


Free-Trade Accord Is Enticing Canadian Companies to U.S.
In 1847, Daniel Massey left New York State for Newcastle, Ontario, where he created the small farm implement company that became Massey-Ferguson Ltd., one of Canada's industrial giants.
Now the company, which changed its name five years ago to the Varity Corporation, has won Government and stockholder approval to move to the United States.
It has incorporated itself in Delaware and is moving its corporate headquarters from Toronto to Buffalo.


New Owner for Tropics
JOHN LUCAS bought the Miami Tropics yesterday and vowed to use the United States Basketball League franchise as a tool in helping players overcome drug problems.
"I see the Tropics providing a valuable vehicle both for players in the after-care program and for the vast number of talented collegiate players that are overlooked in the current N.B.A. draft," Lucas said.


Sounds Around Town
With Jazz
Cedar Walton, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Manhattan, (212) 228-6440.
One of the best piano trios in jazz will work in one of the best rooms for hearing piano trios.
Cedar Walton's band, which features David Williams, on bass, and Billy Higgins, on drums, has been working together long enough that even the slightest insinuation in, say, phrasing will be examined and mulled over by the whole group.
Shows today and tomorrow are to start at 10 P.M.
There is a $15 cover charge, and an $8 minimum.
More Intimately
Lew Tabackin, Condon's, 117 East 15th Street, Manhattan, (212) 254-0960.
Lew Tabackin is one of jazz's better tenor saxophonists, someone who moves effortlessly through swing and be-bop and more complicated harmonic mazes.
He is usually heard in the context of a big band, and this is a good opportunity to hear his fertile improvisations in a small-group setting, backed by a terrific (and pianoless) rhythm section, including Peter Washington, on bass, and Louis Nash, on drums.
Shows are to be today and tomorrow at 9 and 11 P.M. and 1 A.M. and on Sunday at 9 and 11 P.M.
There is a $15 cover charge and a two-drink minimum tonight and tomorrow night; there will be a $12 cover and a two-drink minimum on Sunday.
Where Rhythm Counts
Ed Blackwell, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at Perry Street, Manhattan, (212) 255-4037.
The best way to approach this show is just to listen to the rhythm section.
Ed Blackwell helped to invent modern jazz drumming in the late 1950's, and his sense of variation and development can be astounding; his improvisations behind soloists keep evolving.
The bassist, Mark Helias, follows the variations and thickens the sound of the drums, and together they present a wonderfully mobile and supple view of music making.
The shows today and tomorrow are to be at 9:30 and 11:30 P.M. and at 1 A.M.
There is a $15 cover charge and a $7.50 minimum.


Steinberg Conviction Upheld
The manslaughter conviction of Joel B. Steinberg in the 1987 beating death of 6-year-old Lisa Steinberg was upheld yesterday by the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
The court rejected Mr.
Steinberg's contention that he was denied a fair trial in 1989, saying his guilt "was proven beyond a reasonable doubt." He is serving 8 1/3 to 25 years in prison.


Death-Penalty Ruling May Alter Courts
In a ruling it said would be likely to change how death-penalty cases are handled, the New Jersey Supreme Court today overturned the death penalty given Richard E. Biegenwald for the murder in 1982 of a young Camden woman.
In a 4-to-3 vote, the court ruled that the judge in the Biegenwald case should have told prospective jurors about Mr.
Biegenwald's two previous murder convictions to weed out those who might have felt unable to judge him objectively.


Economic Scene; The Fed's Worry Over Money
PEOPLE often talk about monetary policy as if Alan Greenspan were punching buttons on the electronic control panel of a Boeing 747.
In truth, however, the Federal Reserve chairman is doing something more akin to guiding a hang-glider by shifting body weight -- skilled improvisation at the mercy of the elements.
Mr.
Greenspan is trying to nudge down inflation and keep the recovery going by controlling the money supply.
But steering the nation's money supply has rarely been harder.
And even gauging its present course is tricky.


At the Bar; Can a Suspect in a Hit-Run Case Be Identified by His Bald Spot? That's for a Jury to Decide.
"A man's kiss is like his signature," Mae West once observed.
But can this be true of his bald spot as well?
That, essentially, is the question faced recently by a retired judge, Benjamin Altman, when he sat as a judicial hearing officer in Brooklyn Criminal Court.
We flash back to October, when Joan Margarella and her 13-year-old daughter Tara were shopping in the Borough Park section of Brooklyn.
Mrs.
Margarella parked her car on 44th Street between 12th and 13th Avenues, only to realize after she had walked away that the flashers were still on.
She returned to her car and was reaching in to turn off the lights when a brown Chevrolet drove by and hit the open door, injuring Tara, who was standing nearby.


Carter Discusses B.C.C.I.
Former President Jimmy Carter, whose charities received more than $8 million from the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, told ABC News today that he was "shocked" about the unfolding scandal.
Mr.
Carter, who has not been accused of wrongdoing, grew close to the bank's founder, Aga Hassan Abedi, as he received assistance for his charitable work and for the Carter Center, an organization that sponsors activities related to foreign affairs and social issues.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 552 money market mutual funds increased by $5.00 billion, to $458.57 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 203 institutional funds increased by $4.01 billion, to $133.57 billion.
The assets of the 259 general-purpose funds were up by $880.2 million, to $176.94 billion.


Israel Says It Would Exchange 375 Lebanese for Its Soldiers
Israel said today that it would free all prisoners it captured in Lebanon if the captors of seven Israeli soldiers missing there since 1982 release those who are still alive.
But Uri Lubrani, the Defense Ministry official in charge of Israeli activities in Lebanon, said in a radio interview after the release of John McCarthy, a British journalist who had been held hostage in Lebanon, that "unfortunately we do not now have any indication that this process includes our soldiers."


Review/Film; With Double the Violence, Van Damme Plays Twins
The martial-arts movie star Jean-Claude Van Damme has never had to act very much, even though he has starred in five money-making action films with such titles as "Bloodsport" and "Kickboxer." Being a karate-kicking fool is apparently enough.
In his latest movie, "Double Impact," he plays twins.
Let's just say he doesn't rival Jeremy Irons's double role in "Dead Ringers," though Mr.
Van Damme's identical brothers are easier to tell apart than the Doublemint twins.
One has slicked-back hair, one doesn't, which saves a lot of acting right there.


Reprieve for New York's Peace Corps
To Wajana Vallecillo, the City Volunteer Corps was a way to get a high school diploma "so my son, Michael, won't be ashamed of me."
A mother at 16 years old, Ms.
Vallecillo, now 20, recently completed a stint as a volunteer at the Chinatown Day Care Center, getting up each day at 5 to take her son to nursery school before taking several subway trains to the center.
After her year's service with the corps, she hopes to go on to college and a career in the medical field.


Dollar Rises on Concerns Over Mideast and Rates
The dollar advanced today in light trading dominated by concerns over interest rates and strife in the Middle East.
Analysts said there was little news to influence currency trading, and most investors were adjusting their holdings in advance of today's release of producer price figures for July.


In Face of Inquiries, Dryfoos Drops Re-election Effort
Robert J. Dryfoos, one of the most powerful members of the New York City Council, announced yesterday that he was dropping his bid for re-election in the face of city and Federal investigations of his taxes and campaign finances.
In a statement released by a spokesman, Mr.
Dryfoos, who represents the East Side of Manhattan and heads two important Council committees, said he would finish out his term, which expires at the end of the year, but would withdraw his candidacy so he can battle the allegations, which he described as "inaccurate and unfounded."


Armina Marshall's Role in Regional Theater
To the Editor:
Your July 22 obituary article on Armina Marshall, while describing her long and distinguished association with the Theater Guild, failed to include her lasting legacy to regional summer theatergoers.
In 1931, she and her husband, Lawrence Langner, founded the Westport Country Playhouse in a picturesque old barn that once housed a Connecticut tannery.
The playhouse soon became the flagship of summer theaters, spurring the start of similar seasonal enterprises in New England and throughout the country.


Traffic Alert
Dominican Day Parade: Madison Avenue will be closed Sunday between 39th and 56th Streets from noon to 4 P.M.


Reviews/Art; In Connecticut, a Conceptualist's Nonconceptual Collection
There is surely no other art collection of a contemporary artist even remotely like Sol LeWitt's.
This 63-year-old pioneer of Conceptual Art, whose open gridlike architectural-sculptures suggest anti-storage bins -- that is to say, wall-less storage bins in which nothing can be stored -- is in fact a great accumulator of all kinds of art, by all kinds of artists, from all over Europe and the United States.
The 160 works by around 100 artists in "Open Mind: The LeWitt Collection," at the Wadsworth Atheneum, could have been assembled only by someone of immense generosity and restlessness, someone who had lived in constant movement and yet been so sure of himself that he had remained fundamentally in one place.


People
*
Ogilvy &amp; Mather, New York, promoted seven executives to senior vice presidents: assistant media director, Mark Belton; senior art director, Saskia Mossel; associate creative director, Laurie Pollock; group director, Gwenn Sobel; planning director, David Traktman; creative director, Graham Turner, and creative director, Mary Ann Zeman. *
Jeri Moore has been named executive vice president at DDB Needham Worldwide, Chicago.
She continues as director of the Delta Group marketing and media research unit. *
Frank P. Barrows 3d has been promoted to senior vice president and associate creative director at Laurence, Charles, Free &amp; Lawson Inc., New York, from vice president. *
Steve Goldberg has been named president of the publishing division of Touch Tone Access, Parsippany, N.J., a telemarketing firm.
He had previously been vice president and publisher of Audio magazine, New York. *
C.
Stuart Arnold has been named United States advertising sales director for Fortune magazine, from international sales manager.
He succeeds John Jay, who is now regional advertising sales vice president for the parent Time Inc.
Magazine Company.


Movie Houses: The Oases Of Summer
HOLLYWOOD may save its most prestigious motion pictures for Christmastime release, but New Yorkers know better: the best time to go to the movies is summertime.
It has always been so.
Does anyone out there remember those frosty-lettered "Delightfully Air Cooled" banners that hung limply from theater marquees in what seems like only a few summers ago?
Or that delicious icy blast when you stepped out of the sun and into a movie lobby for the first time?
No school.
Wonderful movies.
Summertime.
Summers come and summers go.
A movie is now $7.50 in New York, more if you reserve a seat by phone, and the screens of box-office computers dispense all sorts of information at a glance.
But the mecca for local filmgoers is still Manhattan, where you can catch "Terminator 2" in addition to such off-beat fare as "La Femme Nikita" and "The Famine Within." And let's not forget Deanna Durbin revivals, Billy Wilder retrospectives and Fantasy-Horror-Science Fiction Festivals.


TV Weekend; Jews Return to Visit Wartime Refuge
20/20 Hidden Jewish Children Of the Holocaust  Produced by Abby Rockmore; Victor Neufeld, executive producer; Stone Phillips, correspondent.
At 10 tonight on ABC.
Tonight's moving edition of "20/20," at 10 on Channel 7, focuses on two of the thousands of Jewish children whose parents found refuge for them among non-Jews before they themselves were taken to German concentration camps.
Renee Osten, who now lives in New York City, returns to the Roman Catholic convent in Toulouse, France, where she spent the last two years of World War II and meets again one of the nuns who risked their lives for Renee and other Jewish girls.
Henri Weinstock, who now lives in Vermont, embraces the Belgian schoolteacher who rescued him and scores of other Jewish boys.


Paley Apartment Items Are to Be Auctioned
The contents of William S. Paley's Fifth Avenue apartment, other than his collection of 19th- and 20th-century art, are to be auctioned on Oct. 4 in New York City, Sotheby's announced yesterday.
The 300 pieces of French furniture, tribal art, Oriental art and precious objects from the estate of Mr.
Paley, who died in October, were estimated by Sotheby's to bring about $2 million.


Accounts
*
Boyd's, Philadelphia, a men's clothing store, to Ciociola &amp; Company, New York.
Billings were not disclosed.
The agency said that the two other finalists in the review were Deutsch Inc., New York, and Ketchum Advertising, Philadelphia.
The account had previously been handled by Bergelt Litchfield, New York. *
The mid-Atlantic marketing region of the Kroger Company supermarket chain to Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Chicago.
Billings were not disclosed.
The agency had previously handled the $20 million national advertising account for Kroger, which recently divided its account into 10 regional marketing areas, each handling its own advertising. *
Miami Lakes Inn and Golf Resort to Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine, Orlando, Fla., for a campaign to rename and reposition the resort as Don Shula's Hotel and Golf Club.
Mr.
Shula, the head coach of the Miami Dolphins, is an owner of the property.
Billings were not disclosed.


Reviews/Art; On Long Island, Photos, Portraits, Pollock and Stereotyping
For vacationing art lovers in need of a visual fix, exhibitions are in unusual abundance on Long Island this weekend.
They're so plentiful, in fact, that seeing all of them would probably rule out other forms of recreation, unless you count driving as leisure-time fun.
The shows are found from Roslyn in the west to East Hampton.
Their subjects include the early paintings of the Abstract Expressionist Mark Rothko, on view at the Nassau County Museum of Art in Roslyn, and a group of vibrant portraits that Alice Neel made while living in Spanish Harlem in the 1950's, at the Dia Center for the Arts in Bridgehampton.
For those who feel that the summer of '91 is the time to assess American narrative art from the 80's, there are two diverse, if rather confused, theme shows on this topic, one at the Nassau County Museum, the other at the Parrish Art Museum in Southampton.
And for those intrigued by the way everyday objects reflect the society that produces them, a lively and illuminating show at the Margaret Melville Blackwell History Museum in Stony Brook tackles the subject of ethnic stereotyping in children's toys.
Sandwiched between these exhibitions, geographically, are a brief look at recent abstract art based on nature at the Heckscher Museum in Huntington, a survey of contemporary art by American Indians in Stony Brook, and a small show of Hans Namuth's photographs of Jackson Pollock and Lee Krasner, which may be seen at the site where the pictures were taken on a summer's day 41 years ago: the Pollock-Krasner House in East Hampton.
Roslyn
Although it is sequestered in a hallway at the Nassau County Museum, "Mark Rothko: The Spirit of Myth" is among the strongest shows this weekend, and one of the most extensive displays of early Rothko seen in the New York City area in a while.
All 24 works have been lent by the National Gallery of Art from a large gift given to it by the Rothko Foundation in 1986.
The show's title is well chosen, because Rothko often looked for inspiration in the classical past.
Despite sideways glances at Picasso and de Chirico, his gaze is nearly direct in paintings like an untitled work from 1941 in which a Greek head acquires multiple profiles and a friezelike body.
Yet even in an urban scene like "Subway," from the artist's 1930's brush with Social Realism, tall narrow figures and repeating pillars convey a gravity and grace that alternately evoke a Greek play and a modern ballet inspired by one.
A sense of unfolding drama is also prominent in the ethereal Surrealist images from the late 1940's that preceded Rothko's final abstract style.
These canvases, the most plentiful in the exhibition, are dominated by translucent linear forms that bob and pirouette like totemic jellyfish before aqueous bands of color.
In the end, even the somewhat claustrophobic installation is effective, encouraging close encounters with the extraordinary sorbet tones of Rothko's early period and his gentle yet free-wheeling way with the paintbrush (and at times its handle).
His palette brings to mind a worldly mix of precedents -- the Italian quattrocento, Balthus and Milton Avery -- and underscores that from start to finish he was foremost a consummate and inventive colorist.
A final gallery displaying a few of the artist's classic 50's and 60's abstractions, in which his dramas become purely chromatic, gives this mini-retrospective an expansive finale.
"American Narrative Painting and Sculpture," the exhibition that receives the majority of the gallery space at the Nassau County Museum, is substantially lighter fare.
The nearly 45 paintings and sculptures are all from the collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Their primary effect is to reacquaint one with the museum's always startling devotion to mediocre artists -- often academic realists -- whose efforts hardly merit the attention of such a major art institution.
Mark Tansey's wry, history-tinted brand of photo-realism makes a credible case for a realist revival, but it receives no backup here.
Instead, the strongest figurative works are by artists who mix liberal amounts of the naive or primitive in their styles: Dona Nelson, Alison Saar, Rafael Ferrer, Red Grooms and Roger Brown.
The inclusion of abstract works by Carol Hepper, Melissa Meyer, Mel Kendrick, Bill Jensen, Kevin Larmon and Roberto Juarez expands the show's premise so completely that any 1980's artist could have been in it, provided his work had been acquired by the Metropolitan, of course.
But their presence makes the important point that 80's abstraction, in both its hints of imagery and its formal complexity, was full of narrative implications.
Southampton
The 1980's were not short on either romance or irony, so the list of candidates for an exhibition titled "Romance and Irony in Recent American Art" is long.
But Julian Schnabel, to cite one of the better exemplars of the period's romanticism, is not in this exhibition at the Parrish Museum of Art in Southampton, nor are Jeff Koons and sundry other ironists, including those sometimes masters of nostalgia, the collaborative team of David McDermott and Peter McGough.
Instead, a consistent realist air and a preponderance of dark or grisaille surfaces prevail, nearly to the point of monotony.
A more accurate title might have been "Romance and Irony in Recent American Landscape Painting and Photography."
Basically, this exhibition taps into one of the more conservative strains in the smorgasbord of 80's art: the revival of Romantic landscape painting, replete with ultra-finicky surfaces.
Joan Nelson, April Gornik and Mark Innerst are here, for example.
But it also features this tendency's opposite number: a variety of deadpan photographic and photo-based imagery by Barbara Ess, Oliver Wasow, Troy Brauntuch, Edward Ruscha and, once more, Mr.
Tansey. (Ms. Ess's photographs, made with a primitive pinhole camera, have a haphazard, almost anarchic energy that is especially refreshing in this rather fastidious gathering.) The show's strength lies in the way it makes one appreciate the way some artists have braided the romantic and the ironic together into seamless ambiguities.
But what lies between these extremes is genuinely third-rate: the sinister scenes of John Hull, the nostalgic Victoriana of Thomas Woodruff, the dimly lighted figures of Willi Lenski and much else.
History, art history that is, reared its ferocious head in the 80's, and many young artists seem to have been struck blind, or simply unoriginal, by the sight.
Huntington
Meanwhile, a little farther west once more, the Heckscher Museum is taking stock of another 1980's development, the influence of natural, or biomorphic, form on abstract art.
This small exhibition of five painters and three sculptors, titled "Vital Forces: Nature in Contemporary Abstraction," is personable, but also largely generic.
The evocations of precedent in Arthur Dove, Marsden Hartley, Arshile Gorky and William Baziotes made by the show's curator, Anna C. Noll, in a brochure, seem overly familiar.
The 80's artists who helped lend this tendency credibility, among them Carroll Dunham, Terry Winters and Bill Jensen, are absent, although their presence is often felt.
Gregory Amenoff has lately turned to abstractions that have some of Mr.
Jensen's bristling forms, as do the more condensed, naturalistic abstractions of Ellen Wiener; Willy Heeks's clotted shapes and tangled drips of paint seem to fuse some of the formal strategies of Mr.
Winters and Mr.
Dunham.
Nonetheless, every artist here is guided by a convincing desire to blend the intimations of nature with the material possibilities of painting, drawing or sculpture; there's a sense of physical experiment throughout.
Especially in an untitled 1988 work, Michael Tetherow's languid pourings of paint on unprimed canvas have an ethereal liquidity that is both delicately controlled and as random as a pond's surface.
Elisa D'Arrigo's large, funnel-like floor sculpture, "Voice," simultaneously evokes a horn, a shell and a woven basket, with its pinkish-white plaster interior being its most impressive characteristic.
Peter Brown, Petah Coyne, Michael Kessler and Janis Provisor are also represented in the exhibition.
Stony Brook
Two different but equally intriguing, equally imperfect exhibitions at the five-museum grouping known as the Museums at Stony Brook manifest the current art-world concern -- some might say obsession -- with multi-culturalism.
"Our Land/Ourselves: American Indian Contemporary Artists" was organized by Jaune Quick-to-See-Smith, herself an artist, for the University Art Gallery at the State University at Albany, and will travel to eight more stops, mostly other museums within the SUNY system, during the next two years.
The show includes 2 or 3 works on paper by 30 artists from many American Indian tribal groups.
All are clearly versed in contemporary art; their biographies refer to bachelor's and master's degrees acquired at art schools around the country.
On the wall, the vocabularies of Conceptual art, various forms of abstraction and figuration and recent photographic work speak for themselves.
Many of the artists deal with their Indian heritage, some overtly, others in ways that are harder to read and at times invisible, but the quality of the work does not divide along these lines.
Ernie Pepion's touching pastel drawing "Artist and Assistants" is a self-portrait in which the artist sits outdoors in a wheelchair making a painting using a buffalo design while a buffalo, a bird and a dog look on.
G.
Peter Jemison's watercolor "All Indians Don't Live West of the Mississippi" is a political cartoon whose real power derives from the blunt way the artist lays on paint and from his sense of color.
At the same time, the intense little black-and-white monoprints of P. Y. Minthorn, which would have looked just fine in the "Vital Forces" exhibition at the Heckscher, could have been made by any artist who feels connected to nature.
The scratched lines, trackings and suggestions of crosses that are also bodies take on a somewhat different meaning when the artist's ethnic background is known, but it is not a significant difference.
The same goes for the colorful abstract patterns of Conrad G. House's "Paseo del Norte" and the starlike tracery of Harry Fonseca's mixed-media drawing "Nocturne." The diversity of the art in this exhibition, the sense of different voices saying different things, is impressive and normal; the unevenness of the work on view is also normal, as the preceding reviews should indicate.
For the time being, exhibitions that isolate artists according to ethnic backgrounds or gender are necessary to the genuine diversification within the art world, but one looks forward to their obsolescence.
"Ethnic Images in Toys and Games," at the Margaret Melville Blackwell History Museum, scratches the surface of a large and timely subject, and is in some ways a good complement to "Our Land/Ourselves." A traveling exhibition organized by the Balch Institute for Ethnic Studies in Philadelphia, the show traces changing social attitudes toward different racial and ethnic groups as reflected in toys and games from the last 100 years.
It is an often startling catalogue of mindless and not so mindless prejudice directed at an array of American minorities -- blacks, Chinese, Irish, Mexicans and Indians -- confirming that bigotry can easily begin at home.
Some of the more virulent examples include "The Comical Game of Mary-Ann," a board game that features an inept Irish servant with apelike features, the mechanical "Jolly Nigger Bank" and another mechanical toy named "The New Game of Ah Sin the Heathen Chinee," all from the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
But the exhibition's treatment of its subject, like the subject itself, is subtle and complex.
It shows how some toys are elitist, rather then explicitly derogatory, in the way they idealize white Americans -- the blond boy on the cover of "The Boy Toymaker" kit from the 1930's, for example, or, more recently, the original blond Barbie Doll.
And it includes toys whose characterizations, while not negative, are perhaps limiting and simplistic: the Italian Mario Brothers of Nintendo fame, for example.
The exhibition does chronicle attempts to correct stereotypes and instill ethnic pride.
Hence visitors may contrast an array of black pickaninny and mammy dolls with the "Bye-Lo" doll, a realistic infant produced in 1923 in two versions, one black, one white, or view a 1989 game called "Kosherland."
The show's didactic nature is countered by the careful and balanced text panels and by the addition of dolls and games from the museum's own collection.
Bridgehampton
In a sense, Alice Neel's penetrating and dignified images of black and Hispanic people, made in the 1950's when she lived in Spanish Harlem, are a welcome experience after the chronicle of intolerance of the "Ethnic Toy" exhibition.
Neel, who died in 1984 at the age of 84, had no social mission.
As this exhibition at the Dia Center for the Arts in Bridgehampton confirms, she was simply painting the people around her, whom she knew and liked and whose faces interested her.
In some ways, Neel at her best combined the skills of a portrait photographer with those of an abstract painter.
She was highly sensitive to individual personality; her faces always seem real without being absolutely realistic.
But she reveled in paint for its own sake and in the ways it could give skin, furniture and fabric alike an intensified life on canvas.
In "Man in Plaid Shirt," a reclining male fixes us with a steady gaze, while his shirt quietly runs riot like a miniature landscape.
A similar sense of life infuses the green, yellow and blue diamond-pattern shirt worn by the sitter in "Call Me Joe." But again this colorful escapade is bracketed by the force of personality: a grave face, a hand holding a cigarette.
This is a great little show.
It gives a glimpse of one of the strongest phases of Neel's career, emphasizing once more that she ranks as one of this century's best portrait painters.
East Hampton
This exhibition, at the Pollock-Krasner House and Study Center on the eastern fringe of East Hampton, pays tribute to the photographer Hans Namuth, who died last year at the age of 75.
Mr.
Namuth is especially well known for his photographs of Jackson Pollock at work, dripping paint onto canvas.
These images are crucial to an understanding of how the artist formed his extraordinary paintings, and heighten one's sense of their implicit rhythm and choreography.
The photographs also contribute to the Pollock myth, portraying him as lean and hungry-looking, in dark T-shirt and jeans -- the closest thing in American art to James Dean.
While this exhibition includes several images of Pollock painting, it also offers a series of pictures taken of Jackson Pollock and the painter Lee Krasner, his wife, throughout a summer day in 1950.
Perhaps the most affecting aspect of the show is simply the unusual experience of encountering these images in the house -- in fact in the very corner of the living room -- where they were taken.


Girl, 14, Contradicts Sex-Abuse Account
A 14-year-old Manhattan girl who accused her adoptive father, Kodzo Dobosu, of sexually abusing her later denied ever having told the police and prosecutors of such abuse, the girl's caseworker testified yesterday.
But in the same conversation, the girl said her father would not abuse her again if she was allowed to go home to her brothers and sisters, whom she missed, the caseworker said.


Run at Citibank In Hong Kong
Depositors rushed to Citibank branches in Hong Kong yesterday to withdraw funds in a reaction tied to the worldwide shutdown of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International and negative comments about Citicorp by Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan.
Yesterday's run, which occurred at 9 of Citibank's 27 branches in the British crown colony, followed one in Pakistan on Sunday, which was linked to an erroneous newspaper report that Citicorp, the parent of Citibank, had filed for bankruptcy protection.


At the Movies
The itinerary for Randal Kleiser's career looks a little like this: Alaska, Fiji, fantasy and the 17th century.
That's because Mr.
Kleiser -- whose films include "Grease," "The Blue Lagoon," "Flight of the Navigator" and "Big Top Pee-wee" -- is a man of many projects.
Last year, while he was directing "White Fang" on location in Alaska, Mr.
Kleiser was also serving as executive producer of "Return to the Blue Lagoon," which was filmed in the Fiji Islands.
This summer, he is directing "Honey, I Blew Up the Baby," a sequel to the 1989 hit "Honey, I Shrunk the Kids." And before long he hopes to direct "The Laughing Man," based on Victor Hugo's novel "The Man Who Laughs," which is set in England in the 1680's.
Mr.
Kleiser said talk about developing a sequel to "The Blue Lagoon" began not long after that film, based on the Henry De Vere Stacpole novel about two castaway children on a tropical isle, was released in 1980 with Brooke Shields and Christopher Atkins as its stars.
"We devised a sequel that kept the two leads alive and took them to Boston," Mr.
Kleiser said.
"But we could never solve the logic of two teen-agers in Boston finding their way back to the island. So we went through a lot of different screenplays trying to make that work.
"We put it on the shelf for a few years and finally looked at the original 'Blue Lagoon Omnibus,' which was a series of three novels written by Stacpole. And his second novel, 'The Garden of God,' began where 'The Blue Lagoon' left off, and the baby of the two characters survived and the parents died of eating poisonous berries. So we used that as our jumping-off point for doing a whole new sequel that followed the adventures of that child."
Back in 1980, the idea was for Mr.
Kleiser to direct the sequel.
But life marches on.
Mr.
Kleiser said he had been involved in choosing William A. Graham as director of the sequel, in casting, and in editing and postproduction.
When "White Fang," based on a Jack London story about a boy, a wolf-dog and a gold mine, was finished, Mr.
Kleiser paid a visit to Fiji.
"It was like a nostalgia trip," he said after discovering that many members of the first film's Australian crew were at work on the sequel.
"It was like a homecoming. It was like reliving an adventure."
In "Honey, I Blew Up the Baby," he said, "the inventor played by Rick Moranis accidentally reverses the ray machine that is being developed and enlarges his 2 1/2-year-old child to the size of Godzilla. And it gets loose in Las Vegas.
"This is a real big-budget special-effects movie, and I have always loved special effects since I got involved with them in 'Flight of the Navigator,' " he said.
Mr.
Kleiser said that when filming of "Honey, I Blew Up the Baby" is finished in September, with release expected around Memorial Day, he hopes to have the financial backing to make "The Laughing Man," a project brought to him by Howard Kazanjian, a former University of Southern California Film School classmate who produced "The Rookie" and "Return of the Jedi."
"It's a wonderful story," Mr.
Kleiser said "A boy who's an heir to a huge fortune is sold to gypsies and mutilated to become a beggar: They carve a smile on his face. He has this extraordinary set of adventures that only Victor Hugo can come up with."
It is, Mr. Kleiser said, "a project I really feel passionate about."


Study Says Fees Are Often Higher When Doctor Has Stake in Clinic
Doctors' ownership of laboratories, diagnostic imaging centers and physical therapy clinics tends to increase the use and cost of such services without improving access to care for poor people or residents of rural areas, a Florida state agency reported today.
A study done by the agency also found that more than 45 percent of the doctors practicing in Florida, 8,500 of 18,250 doctors, have invested in joint ventures to which they can refer patients.


Senate Rebuffs White House On Prosecutor Post in Miami
The Senate has returned to the White House the nomination of Dexter Lehtinen to be the United States attorney in Miami.
The action, taken last week before Congress recessed for its August vacation, is tantamount to rejecting the nomination without a vote.


Review/Theater; Growing Up With Faith That Miracles Happen
The wonderful thing about children is that they believe everything is possible.
What makes Lynda Barry's first play a happy occasion is that she captures the innocent abandon of childhood with the wit of a mature writer, but without letting go of the uninhibited child still lurking deep within herself.
Ms.
Barry's uneven but highly promising comedy, "The Good Times Are Killing Me," is about Edna Arkins, a pre-adolescent girl of the mid-1960's who believes, for the duration of elementary school anyway, that miracles like movie stardom and racial harmony are to be had for the asking, no matter what obstacles parents might place in the way.
Ms.
Barry, a syndicated cartoonist ("Ernie Pook's Comeek"), is just as free-spirited as her heroine in her first effort at writing for the stage.
Like Edna, Ms.
Barry at her best would rather hop, skip and jump than walk a straight dramatic line between any two points.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League


UTILITIES TO TAKE STEPS TO CUT HAZE AT GRAND CANYON
After two decades of court battles and regulatory skirmishes, the owners of a giant coal-burning power plant in northern Arizona agreed today to a series of expensive measures to control air pollution and reduce haze in the Grand Canyon by the end of the decade.
The agreement, between the owners and two environmental groups, is almost certain to end one of the angriest and most visible environmental struggles in the American West.
In recent years, thick haze had turned the Grand Canyon from a breath-taking natural wonder to a sad tableau of spreading industrial pollution and Government inaction.
On many days, particularly in the winter, the haze is so thick that visitors standing on one rim can barely see the other side.


Ya Gotta Half-Believe May Be the Motto for the Mets
Like chicken soup for what ails you, two victories over the Pittsburgh Pirates were the perfect medicine for a struggling Mets team.
"I was very excited at the end of the game," an obviously relieved and smiling Bud Harrelson said after yesterday's game as he sat on the desk in his Shea Stadium office.
"My heart was palpitating. I think we're going back to exciting baseball here, which is something we needed. We feel we're back to being competitive. We felt sorry for ourselves for seven games. Now we're going back to playing baseball the way we can play."


Corrections
A front-page article on Wednesday about the military's plans for cutbacks, and the possible impact on black service members, misidentified John W. Shannon and referred incorrectly to his rank at retirement and his service with Gen.
Colin Powell.
Mr.
Shannon is the Under Secretary of the Army; the Secretary is Michael P. W. Stone.
Mr.
Shannon retired from the Army as a colonel, not a lieutenant colonel.
During the 1950's he served in the same brigade as General Powell, but not in the same unit of the brigade.
The article also referred incorrectly to the Army service of Prof.
Charles C. Moskos of Northwestern University.
He was an enlisted man, not an officer.


CHRONICLE
ALISON LELAND, the widow of United States Representative Mickey Leland, filed suit against an aircraft company and an Ethiopian Government agency on Tuesday, two years after her husband's death in a plane crash in Ethiopia.
The suit, filed in State District Court in Houston, seeks damages for negligence from the de Havilland Aircraft Company; the Boeing Company, its corporate parent; the Canadian Government, the former owner of de Havilland, and the Relief and Rehabilitation Air Service, an Ethiopian agency.


With Postal Rates Uncertain, 2 New Stamps Are Delayed
Two new stamps scheduled to be printed this year have been put off until 1992 because of uncertainty over postage rates, the Postal Service said today.
The issuance of a 75-cent stamp honoring former Chief Justice Earl Warren, planned for this fall, was postponed to next March 19.
A 29-cent stamp that was to be released Nov. 1, recalling the World Columbian Exposition, has been delayed indefinitely.


Sox Lower Broom, Merrill Raises Voice
The doors to the visitors' clubhouse at Comiskey Park were closed, but it did not matter.
The angry words seeped through anyway and were not advisable for those under 18.
Stump Merrill was screaming and the words sounded mean.
They also sounded appropriate.
The manager berated his team for sluggish play today after the Yankees lost once again to the White Sox, 4-1.
New York was easily swept in three games by Chicago, has lost 11 of its last 13 and 14 of its last 18 and Merrill has finally lost his patience.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about United Nations Security Council decisions on Iraq misstated the Iraqi delegate's whereabouts during the deliberations.
The delegate, Abdul Amir A. al-Anbari, was in a lounge within the Council chambers and stormed out after getting a copy of a draft resolution; he did not sit in on the closed meeting of the five permanent Council members.


Cubs' Dibble Protest
The Chicago Cubs are drafting a protest to National League president BILL WHITE for not suspending as well as fining Cincinnati pitcher ROB DIBBLE for deliberately throwing a ball at the legs of the Cubs' DOUG DASCENZOas he ran to first base.
White announced Wednesday that he had fined Dibble an undisclosed sum for the incident at Wrigley Field last month.


Malcolm X: Firestorm Over a Film Script
Rap performers use Malcolm X's words like drumbeats.
College students carry copies of his autobiography around like bibles.
Street vendors in Harlem hawk T-shirts with his name and face in 14 different styles.
But as the martyred black nationalist leader's popularity grows 26 years after his assassination, an intense debate is stirring over what exactly Malcolm X's legacy is or should be.


Giants Greet Morris With Friendly Insults
Carl Banks and Johnie Cooks are 6-foot-4-inch linebackers for the Giants.
Joe Morris, their former teammate, is a 5-foot-7-inch running back for the Cleveland Browns.
When Morris was a Giant, teammates inundated him with "short" jokes.
Today, when the Giants and the Browns practiced together at the Browns' training camp here, the tormenters were reunited with their old target.
When Morris was within earshot, Banks and Cooks held a quiz show:


Hartford To Trenton: Fine Art On the Road
ALL year round, the museums of Westchester County, New Jersey, Connecticut and Long Island present substantial and ambitious exhibitions that are too often overshadowed by the glare from New York City's institutions.
It is only in summer, when much of the art world flees Manhattan for the cooler, if not always calmer, environs of beach and countryside, that these suburban places shine.
This season their offerings encompass an eclectic range of materials, sources, subjects and approaches reflecting the diversity of the contemporary art scene.
A few unexpected themes emerge.
Works by American Indians are on view in Newark and Stony Brook, L.I.
In Trenton and Yonkers are photographs of great jazz musicians.
And in Purchase, N.Y., and Hartford, the artist Sol LeWitt is celebrated as collector.


Ex-Premier of Iran Is Slain
Shahpur Bakhtiar, an ex-Prime Minister who has lived in exile since 1979, was found slain outside Paris.
Some experts blamed terrorists who oppose Iran's efforts to mend ties with the West.
Page A6.


A Professor Flaunts His Bias
Racial hatred is deplorable, whatever its source.
When it comes from a teacher, as in the ugly case of Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. of New York's City College, it is particularly troubling.
In a long, sometimes irrational diatribe last month, Dr.
Jeffries, chairman of the college's African-American Studies department, blamed Jews for the plight of many blacks and spewed anti-Semitic venom over his audience.
Speaking at the Empire State Black Arts and Cultural Festival in Albany, he also attacked whites in general and Italians for good measure.


Fitfully, the Rotation of the Earth Is Slowing
As the world turns, its rotational speed is slowing down by an average of 1.4 milliseconds each century.
But now scientists have determined that the deceleration is occurring somewhat fitfully.
The slowing causes the Moon's orbit to expand slightly and a day on Earth to grow ever so much longer.


Our Towns
When John Mazzarella goes to work as a hot dog vendor here, he checks to make sure he has everything he needs.
The franks, the buns, the condiments, the sodas, the stopwatch.
The stopwatch?
He has to bring it along because, like the 13 other licensed sidewalk vendors of Saratoga Springs, Mr.
Mazzarella is engaged in something of a pushcart war with the merchants along the tony downtown blocks of Broadway in this famed resort town.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge receipt of or return articles unless they are accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


Market Place; Investors Deal a Costly Blow to Maxwell
Just as Robert Maxwell is planning to try to sell common stock in the United States, there are signs that investors may be getting nervous about at least one branch of his far-flung publishing empire.
A preferred stock issue of Official Airline Guides Inc., a subsidiary of the Maxwell Communication Corporation, failed to find buyers in an auction last week.
As a result, the company will pay an extraordinarily high interest rate on the issue, and some stockholders who want to sell are being forced to hold on to it.


Tax Delinquencies in New York Rising Again
Property-tax delinquencies in New York City are rising again, as they did during the 1970's, when the city last underwent an economic crisis.
But city officials do not expect a recurrence of the wave of the abandonments that destroyed neighborhoods across the South Bronx the last time around.
Many of the new delinquencies are in commercial properties in Manhattan, including a number of buildings owned by some of New York's leading real-estate families.


8 Mafia Members Convicted of Racketeering
Eight New England organized crime figures were convicted today of racketeering in a case Federal prosecutors boasted would break the back of the Patriarca crime family, which the authorities say has controlled the loan-sharking and gambling in New England since the 1940's.
The verdict came on the 15th day of jury deliberations.


BRITISH HOSTAGE IN BEIRUT FREED, BUT TERRORISTS VOW KILLINGS IF MORE ARE LET GO
A pro-Iranian militant group in Lebanon today released John McCarthy, a British citizen who had been held captive for five years.
As diplomatic efforts to gain the release of other hostages were intensifying in many capitals, the 34-year-old television journalist brought with him a letter from his captors to the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar.
He said he thought it contained the captors' proposals for freeing the 11 remaining Western hostages in Lebanon in exchange for prisoners being held in Israel.


Books of The Times; They Sounded Black on the Radio
The Adventures of Amos 'n' Andy  A Social History of an American Phenomenon  By Melvin Patrick Ely  Illustrated. 322 pages.
The Free Press. $22.95


Review/Film; Martin Short as Another Bumbler
Martin Short seems to be on a mission: to save "Pure Luck" from itself.
When he looks at the camera, his eyes always seem about to cross, as if he's ready to burst into his Jerry Lewis impression.
When he dances, he almost leaps into his overenthusiastic nerd character, Ed Grimley.
He walks through a burned-out jungle village and yells, "Anybody home?" as if he were in the suburbs.
It's as if he were frantically trying to stay in character as an accident-prone accountant and at the same time inject some comic surprise into this pure-formula film.
Against the odds, he makes "Pure Luck" always painless and sometimes genuinely amusing.
Martin Short can do anything, it seems, except find the right movies to star in.


Firm Called Dominated By Capasso
Carl A. Capasso, who was convicted of tax evasion and barred from work for New York City, made a camouflaged comeback by using a front company to obtain $2 million in city contracts, officials say.
The Department of Environmental Protection said that the company, H.H.M.
Associates, was recently disqualified from another $5.3 million in contracts on the ground that it is apparently "under the control and domination of Mr. Capasso."


Review/Film; No, Danny Couldn't Have Been A Contender
"Crossing the Line," David Leland's new English film, begins as a small politically aware melodrama about an unemployed (and unemployable) Scottish coal miner who is forced by circumstances to become a bare-knuckle boxer.
The film ends, though, long before it's over, largely because its high-mindedness is less dramatic than anesthetizing.
Not since the screen adaptation of Clifford Odets's "Golden Boy" has there been a film about Good and Evil in which an inarticulate character talked so knowingly about principle.
"If you can't fight for the right things," says Danny Scoular (Liam Neeson), the miner, "keep your hands in your pockets."
Mr.
Neeson is a big soft-spoken man with a face that seems to have been carved from magically malleable rock.
He is an impressive screen presence.
His Danny might well seem heroic if he were allowed to speak dialogue that sounded more spontaneous and less morally instructive.
There also is a good story buried within Don McPherson's screenplay, adapted from William McIlvanney's 1985 novel, "The Big Man." Danny is a casualty of the bitter coal strike, which according to an opening screen credit resulted in the closing of 90 percent of all the mines in Scotland by 1989.
As the film opens, Danny not only has no work, but he also cannot find any because he has a prison record: he attacked a policeman during the strike.
He is an easy mark when he is approached by a mysterious Mr.
Mason (Ian Bannen), who is looking for a contender to fight an important big-money bare-knuckle bout in Glasgow.
In bare-knuckle fighting, which is both brutal and illegal, the contenders keep going until one of them drops, sometimes forever.
It's apparently very popular in the Glasgow underworld where Mr.
Mason is a powerful bookmaker.
When Danny accepts the offer (he wants to prove himself a man again), his proper middle-class wife, Beth (Joanne Whalley-Kilmer), walks out, taking their two children with her.
Most of "Crossing the Line" is about Danny's training for the fight and about the consequences of the outcome.
Though the big fight in any boxing film is usually a sure-fire attention grabber, no matter how bad the rest of the movie is, the one in "Crossing the Line" somehow manages to be uninvolving.
Mr.
Leland's approach to the material is exemplified by his fondness for lofty overhead shots, whether the characters are seen in a life-and-death bare-knuckle bout or simply getting in and out of automobiles.
It could be that he means to distance the audience from the sentimental aspects of the material, but there is also the feeling that he is condescending to it.
"Crossing the Line" means to be a wicked commentary on the state of Britain under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and, in particular, on her handling of the coal strike.
Yet the movie, while pretending to be horrified by Danny's fate, is also clearly enchanted by the pictorial possibilities it offers.
The movie is pretty.
Much of the climactic fight is photographed in such lovely slow-motion that the blood and the sweat look phony, which, in turn, suggests that everything else is suspect.
"Crossing the Line" is a far cry from the gritty, idiomatic "This Sporting Life," "Saturday Night and Sunday Morning" and the other English working-class movies that made the 1960's memorable.
Not helping matters is a busy, seemingly omnipresent sound track score by Ennio Morricone.
Beginning with Mr.
Neeson, every member of the cast is as good as the circumstances allow.
. . .
"Crossing the Line," which has been rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian), has some vulgar language and violence.
Crossing the Line
Directed by David Leland; written by Don McPherson, based on William McIlvanney's novel "The Big Man"; director of photography, Ian Wilson; edited by George Akers; music by Ennio Morricone; production designer, Caroline Amies; produced by Stephen Woolley; released by Miramax Films.
Running time: 93 minutes.
This film is rated R. Danny Scoular . . .
Liam Neeson Beth Scoular . . .
Joanne Whalley-Kilmer Matt Mason . . .
Ian Bannen Frankie . . .
Billy Connolly Gordon . . .
Hugh Grant


First Half of 1991 Disappointing for WPP
WPP Group P.L.C., London, yesterday released an earnings report for the first half of 1991 that it called extremely disappointing because of the the recession and the Persian Gulf war.
As a result, said the company, which owns advertising agencies including J. Walter Thompson and Ogilvy &amp; Mather, it did not achieve its budget goals for the period.
The company said earnings were nil for the period, compared with a profit of $1.40 for each American depository share for the period a year earlier.
The company's pretax profits fell 65 percent, to $28.95 million from $83.32 million.
Revenues declined 7 percent, to $1.053 billion from $1.133 billion.


Miscellany
*
After a hearing and a review, the Federal General Accounting Office has denied a protest by Earle Palmer Brown Advertising that charged the Marine Corps with unfair judging when it awarded its five-year, $50-million advertising account to J. Walter Thompson, Atlanta.


Reviews/Art; What There Is to See And Where to See It
Here are the addresses and hours for the exhibitions reviewed.
Admission is free unless otherwise noted.
Long Island
"A DAY WITH JACKSON AND LEE: PHOTOGRAPHS BY HANS NAMUTH," (through Oct. 31).
Pollock-Krasner House and Study Center, 830 Fireplace Road, East Hampton, (516) 324-4929.
Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. by appointment.
Admission: $5.


The Spoken Word
SLIDE SHOW AND WALKING TOUR, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the neighborhood, Sunday at noon, to be followed at 2 P.M. with "House of Heritage," a slide presentation on the history of the Tenement Museum.
Walking tour fee, $12 ($11 for the elderly; $6 for students); lecture: $2.
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"American Life in American Art," by Carl Palusci, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "John Baldessari," by Mr.
Palusci, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
Free with $5 museum admission ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
LECTURES AND GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
All free with $6 museum admission ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3764.


Two Kids Go for Two Points


Only 50 Great Books of the Last 50 Years?
To the Editor:
Russell Baker is wrong to despair in "Looking for Giants" (column, July 27) about the caliber of books written in the last 50 years.
The biggest challenge in the Port Washington, L.I., library project he discusses -- asking 50 experts to survey books written since 1942 that have "profoundly affected the thoughts and actions of humankind" -- will be in paring down the list.


Retailers Say July Sales Were Generally Listless
With the notable exception of Wal-Mart Stores Inc., the industry leader, most United States store chains yesterday reported listless sales for July, a transitional month when summer goods typically are cleared out for back-to-school items.
Other than Wal-Mart and the specialty retailer the Gap Inc., sales were "pretty meager," said Walter Loeb, a New York-based industry consultant.


Review/Film; A Soap Writer Stuck in His Soap
In "Delirious," John Candy plays Jack Gable, a television writer who is hit by a truck -- or is it a trunk?
In Jack's new situation, this is the sort of distinction about which he has to be very, very careful.
Once he has been knocked unconscious, Jack leaves the world of ordinary scriptwriting and wakes up inside the very soap opera he has created.
"You say you're a writer?" asks someone who was formerly one of Jack's inventions and is now one of his new friends.
"Well, then write your way out."
"Delirious" is the playful story of Jack's efforts to do exactly that, and to do it in as self-serving a manner as possible.
At first, he is dismayed to find himself in Ashford Falls, the sweet-looking town he formerly thought of as nothing more than a few studio sets. ("When did we build this?" he asks, surveying a hospital room that is actually attached to a whole hospital. "We're going to go way over budget!") But once he determines that the citizens of Ashford Falls will follow any directions he chooses to write for them, Jack begins to see the fun in this particular form of escapism.


Lightning Kills Spectator
Thomas Weaver, who was killed by lightning while walking through the parking lot at the Crooked Stick Golf Club this afternoon, was the second spectator this year to die in a lightning strike at a major golf championship.
Officials at the P.G.A.
Championship here said that the 39-year-old Weaver, who lived in Fishers, Ind., had just left the course and was near his car in a parking lot near the 15th fairway when he was struck at about 3 P.M.
Central time.
Witnesses said Weaver was holding an umbrella over his head when he was struck.


Sexton's Psychiatrist Violated Ethics; An Exception
To the Editor:
As a psychiatrist, psychotherapist and psychoanalyst I have read about the biography of Anne Sexton with great interest.


Koreas Closer to Joining U.N.
North and South Korea cleared the last major hurdle today in their decades-long efforts to join the United Nations when the Security Council unanimously approved their applications for separate membership.
The Security Council had also been scheduled today to consider the applications of the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands, but the items were taken off the calendar.


Rev. John Collins, 91, Biblical Scholar, Dies
The Rev.
John J. Collins, a Jesuit priest and a biblical scholar for more than 50 years, died yesterday at the health center at the Campion Center in Weston, Mass.
He was 91 years old and lived at the Jesuit residence at Campion.
He died of complications from a stroke, a spokesman for the Jesuits said.


Italy Moves to Stem Wave of Albanians
Another huge wave of Albanian migrants washed onto Italy's Adriatic shores on Thursday seeking an economic haven, but instead finding edgy police officers and a hard-line Government determined to send them back home.
The police opened fire in clashes with the emigres on Thursday night.
The latest in a recent series of exoduses from the impoverished Balkan country involved several ships, with the largest group, estimated at 10,000 people, forcing their way into the port of Bari, on the heel of the Italian boot.


Sony Said to Plan Offerings
The Sony Corporation is said to be considering public stock offerings in in both its United States and Japanese entertainment operations in an effort to reduce its debt burden.
The move could raise as much as $3 billon.
Sony would neither confirm nor deny the reports yesterday.
But two Wall Street executives who said they had talked with Sony management said the company had been considering such moves for several months.
Both spoke on condition that they not be identified.


Sam Goody, Who Started Chain Of Record Stores, Is Dead at 87
Sam Goody, a toy-store owner who turned a hugely profitable sideline -- selling scratchy, breakable 78-r.p.m. records -- into one of the world's largest record stores, died yesterday at St.
John's Hospital in Far Rockaway, Queens.
He was 87 years old and lived in Woodmere, L.I.
He died of heart failure, said his son, Howard.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-8
A British hostage has been released.
But hope for more releases were set back after a group kidnapped a French medical worker in Beirut and threatened to kill him if more hostages are set free.
Page A1
Britain joyfully marked the return of the hostage, John McCarthy, a television reporter, as landed home in a special Royal Air Force jet.
But there were already inklings of the difficult adjustments he may now face.
A1
Mr.
McCarthy was carrying a letter from his captors, Islamic Holy War.
He indicated that it sought a wide-ranging deal to release hostages for prisoners being held in Israel.
A8
Israel says it would exchange 375 Lebanese for its soldiers A8
An opponent of the Shah of Iran, Shahpur Bakhtiar, was stabbed to death at his home near Paris.
No one took responsibility for killing Mr.
Bakhtiar, who was his nation's Prime Minister in 1979.
A6
Shapur Bakhtiar: Foe of Shah hunted by Khomeini followers A6
Canadian businesses are moving to the United States in the wake of the free-trade agreement that took effect in early 1989.
Their "bottom-line decision" is based on cheaper wages, taxes and real estate.
A1
Finances of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union were leaked to the press, showing bankruptcy looming, at least on paper.
And the party elite is shifting to the new private sector to shelter resources.
A3
Another wave of Albanian migrants washed onto Italy's Adriatic shores seeking an economic haven but finding edgy police officers opening fire and a hard-line Government determined to send them home.
A3
More monitors of the Yugoslav truce were agreed to by the Government.
The country said that any members of a 35-nation European security group could send representatives to observe the fragile cease-fire.
A5
North and South Korea move closer to joining the U.N.  A4
New Delhi Journal: Sonia Gandhi keeps India guessing A4  National A10-17
Steps to cut haze in the Grand Canyon were agreed to by the owners of a giant coal-burning power plant in Arizona.
The agreement came after two decades of court battles and regulatory skirmishes.
A1
Doctors' ownership of laboratories, diagnostic imaging centers and physical therapy clinics tends to increase the use and cost without improving access for poor people or rural residents, a study found.
A1
A new book on how to commit suicide that is intended for terminally ill patients turned up No. 1 in the hardcover advice category in the New York Times best seller list.
A1
Therapy is becoming a part of dying for more terminally ill people, and more mental health professionals are devoting their practices to the growing population of people dying young because of AIDS and cancer.
A10
The gene that initiates colon cancer has been identified to a near certainty, researchers said, five months after identifying another gene that they thought was the first to go amiss at the start of the illness.
A16
Earth's slowing takes on fits and starts A16
A judge in Wichita went on television to explain his decision to send marshals to keep the peace at the city's troubled abortion clinics.
The move was extraordinary, but these are extraordinary times there.
A12
N.A.A.C.P. assails members for backing Thomas A10
Philadelphia Journal: Poor teen- agers learn how to get a job A10
A rise in anti-gay violence in Houston prompted the police department to send officers into a downtown neighborhood dressed as potential victims, with results that have startled gay leaders calling for protection.
A12
Household survey finds decline in crime A12
A former top executive at B.C.C.I. told a Congressional panel that the bank was insolvent after suffering losses of $430 million six years ago, but never disclosed the problems to directors or regulators.
D1  Regional B1-4
The rise in property-tax delinquency in New York City is not expected to produce the wave of abandonments that destroyed neighborhoods in the 1970's.
The increase now is in Manhattan commercial property.
A1
A powerful City Council member, Robert J. Dryfoos of Manhattan, announced that he was dropping his bid for re-election in the face of city and Federal investigations of his taxes and campaign finances.
B1
A signal on increased budget relief to New York City came from the chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, who promised $1 billion if the city drafted a plan to solve lingering financial problems.
B3
A new round of talks on Connecticut will begin after legislators gave up on their efforts to override Governor Weicker's veto of a budget without an income tax.
The decision was hailed as a victory for the Governor.
B1
CUNY officials expressed outrage about racially charged statements made by a City College professor and said they would investigate possible disciplinary action.
B3
A man barred from getting city work, Carl A. Capasso, made a camouflaged comeback by using a front company to obtain $2 million in city contracts for sewer repairs, city officials said.
B1
Crime family captain agrees to testify in bid-rigging trial B3
A Spike Lee film about Malcolm X has sparked an intense protest by people who fear he will exploit the Black Muslim's life.
The controversy reflects a broader debate over what his legacy is or should be.
B1
The second death sentence of a man in New Jersey convicted in a 1982 murder was overturned by the State Supreme Court, in a ruling it said would be likely to change the way death-penalty cases are handled.
B2
An urban version of the Peace Corps, called the City Volunteer Corps in New York City, provides volunteers for government and community groups.
Volunteers can continue their studies and earn scholarships.
B3  Business Digest D1  Weekend
Movie houses as summer oases C1
For Children C18
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
"The Good Times Are Killing Me" C3
Film: At the Movies C12
"Double Impact" C8
"Crossing the Line" C11 Music: A Del Tredici premiere C1
Coltrane and Ellington, composers C4
Dance: The Kim-Feld partnership C3
Art: Variety on Long Island C22
Pre-1917 Russian works C22
LeWitt collection in Connecticut C23
Restaurants C20
Word and Image: TV Weekend C26
Amos 'n' Andy C25  Law Page B7
California lawyer must take refresher courses
Eight convicted of racketeering in New England mafia trial  Obituaries B6
Socrates K. Butsikares, an editor for The New York Times
Sam Goody, record store owner
Richard C. Hess, graphic designer Sports B8-13
Baseball: Mets beat Pirates again B9
Tigers defeat Blue Jays in 14 B10
Yanks are beaten and berated B11
Mets have a chance, maybe B11
Columns: Vecsey on Pan Am Games B9
Lipsyte on baseball B11
Football: Jets' theme is "On the Road Again" B12
Giants greet old friend B12
Will Meggett play this year?  B12
Golf: Soggy course yields at P.G.A.  B9
Horse Racing: Saratoga Notebook B13
Pan American Games: Brawl at ball game B13
Cuba gets revenge in team handball B13  Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A26
Injustice in Wichita
Feeding Iraq, prudently
As rare as a parking space
A professor flaunts his bias
Letters A26
Anthony lewis: Governing by hypocrisy A27
Peter Knobler: Hell on Upper Broadway A27
Steven Emerson: Don't appease Iran A27


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.70
5.60
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.38
7.41
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.42
5.44
7.29
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.83
7.79
8.52
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.22
8.18
8.76
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.17
9.10
9.86
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.05
7.05
7.45
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Cover-Up by B.C.C.I. Is Outlined
The former chief financial officer of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International told a Congressional panel today that the bank became insolvent after suffering trading losses of $430 million in 1985, but never disclosed the problems to regulators or its own directors.
Masihur Rahman said that the bank's financial condition was covered up with a $150 million cash infusion from a B.C.C.I.-controlled entity in the Cayman Islands called the International Credit and Investment Company.
Mr.
Rahman said it was this entity, I.C.I.C., that ran what regulators have been calling the "bank within a bank" that became the center of B.C.C.I.'s multibillion-dollar financial fraud.


Houston Police Set Trap to Quell Tide of Violence Against Homosexuals
To quell a tide of violence directed against homosexuals, Houston police officers have taken to the streets of a downtown neighborhood dressed as potential victims, with results that have startled even gay leaders who for years have called for increased protection.
Since the decoy program, thought to be the first of its kind in the country, was begun last Friday in the Montrose neighborhood, an area long troubled by "gay bashing" incidents, 3 undercover officers have been attacked, and 13 people have been arrested.


Philadelphia Journal; Poor Teen-Agers Learn How to Get a Job Done
Dancing around a conference room and banging on tables, Thom Page then leaped onto a chair, sweat cascading off his face.
"I didn't hear you," he demanded.
"Say it."
The 23 people, mostly teen-agers, who were slouched behind conference tables, finally sat up and shouted back, "I AM BEAUTIFUL!" as their embarrassment gave way to pleasure.
For a half-hour the room thundered with self-affirmation.


Rohatyn Flexible on M.A.C. Aid If New York Gets Long-Term Plan
Felix G. Rohatyn, the chairman of the state's Municipal Assistance Corporation, yesterday signaled a new willingness to provide $1 billion in budget relief for New York City over the next four years if the city can come up with a plan to solve its lingering financial problems.
"This could help the city stabilize its tax structure, make sure that services continue and that business stays here," Mr.
Rohatyn said at a meeting of the corporation in Manhattan at which he sketched out a detailed aid plan.


Human Rights Abuses Continue in Peru
To the Editor:
You report Aug. 1 that the Administration has determined Peru deserves $94 million in military and economic aid because it has improved its performance on human rights.
I know one woman who would disagree.


Japan Word Processors Will Face Steep Duties
In a ruling that will mean steep duties on portable Japanese word processors, the International Trade Commission determined today that their sale in the United States at below fair market value had hurt American producers.
As a result of today's decision, the Commerce Department will automatically assess anti-dumping duties of 58.71 percent on imports of the processors.
The department had already determined that the processors were being dumped in the American market, or sold below fair market value.


Reviews/Art; In Westchester County, Items From Daily Life in Pre-1917 Russia
"Russian Graphic Design Before the Revolution: 1880-1917," at the Neuberger Museum of Art at the State University College at Purchase, N.Y., is the latest exhibition to make use of the extensive, but until recently inaccessible, resources of Soviet museums, libraries and archives.
It consists of ephemera: more than 100 prints, invitations and even candy wrappers documenting the extent to which the cultural vitality of turn-of-the-century Russian drama, painting, architecture and literature spilled over into the popular arts.
When the avant-gardists after the revolution turned their energies toward the creation of posters, leaflets and other items aimed at a mass audience, they clearly had a foundation on which to build.
The show is conspicuously mute about the accomplishments of the avant-garde before the revolution, except for a selection of patriotic prints that Lubok Today, a publishing house established at the outset of World War I, commissioned in 1914 from Kasimir Malevich.
His brightly colored, wryly folkish images of giant Russians felling puny Germans echoed the manner of his paintings from the same time.
The prints stand at a stylistic crossroads, on the one hand borrowing from the Russian Style artists who relied on folk art and icon painting, and on the other hand exploring a vocabulary of bold forms that would soon evolve into pure abstraction.
Mostly, "Russian Graphic Design" focuses on the achievements of anonymous or forgotten designers whose talents were spent hawking items like Treugolnik galoshes and Siou biscuits, or contriving, for imperial functions, menus as elaborate as the meals.
The show is divided into sections dealing with Russian Style, Art Nouveau, Diaghilev's World of Art group, and commercial and political designs.
There are a number of striking images, in addition to the Malevich prints.
A dramatic poster for the 1910 Odessa Exhibition of Industrial Design is as notable for the simulation of gold mosaic tiles and the decorative motif of interlocking gears as for the subtly colored image of two laborers hammering at an anvil.
An undated poster in black, yellow, red and white, extolling the virtues of George Borman Cocoa, has a kind of modernist crispness and simplicity.
A menu designed in 1883 by Victor Vasnetsov for a dinner in honor of the coronations of Alexander III and Maria Fedorovna makes clear why Vasnetsov was one of the most popular artists of his era.
The sumptuousness and extreme clarity of his art, steeped as it was in national folklore, spoke to a broad cross-section of the populace.
But the pleasures of "Russian Graphic Design" stem ultimately from the glimpses provided of everyday life among the Russian bourgeoisie.
If there is a touch of poignance in this display of menus and soap packages, it derives from the knowledge that the culture that produced those items would be wiped out with the revolution.
An audience in the United States may take for granted such symbols of prosperity as the ornate Art Nouveau toffee wrappers and the poster advertising I. L. Ding's confections, but in the Soviet Union they can only be reminders of a lost heritage.
"Russian Graphic Design" has been organized by the American Federation of Arts in collaboration with the Soviet Ministry of Culture and the V. I. Lenin State Library of the U.S.S.R., from whose archives the works were selected.
The show, which is accompanied by a fully illustrated book, is scheduled to travel to the Mead Art Museum in Amherst, Mass., in September, and from there to Germany, opening in Munich in December and Frankfurt in April.
Also at the Neuberger Museum of Art is "Selections of New Art From Europe," 10 works by artists including Susana Solano, Edward Allington and Bill Woodrow.
Most of the works are on loan to the museum from the collection of the artist Sol LeWitt.
Ms.
Solano's "Caritat No. 2" (1987), in steel and wood, is not one of her most affecting sculptures, but it raises issues of geometry, entrapment, silence and texture that are central to the work of this important young Spanish artist.
"We Are Time" (1985), by Mr.
Allington, who is English, brings to mind the sculptures of Richard Deacon and Tony Cragg.
Constructed of painted stucco and plaster made to look like aged, varnished wood, the piece resembles a giant top attached to, and held upright by, a large decorative scroll.
It is poised between abstraction and representation, between the potential for movement in the form of the top and the tendency toward immobility in the form of the hulking scroll.
Mr.
Woodrow's "Current II" (1984) consists of several telephone relay boxes aligned on the floor, suggesting the body of a long, thin bug.
Extending from the boxes like legs are strips of metal that attach to odd items -- a thong or a metal bird -- which become the bug's feet.
This English artist has made something at once amusing and unmistakably threatening.
Yonkers
The Hudson River Museum of Westchester in Yonkers has on view "Portraits From the Golden Age of Jazz," several dozen photographs taken in the 1940's by William Gottlieb, at one time jazz columnist for The Washington Post and later an editor at Downbeat magazine.
Mr.
Gottlieb captured the physical essence of many of these musicians: the clownlike face of the trumpeter Joseph Manone, the melancholia of the drummer Dave Tough, the panache of the pianist Willie (The Lion) Smith.
Just the shot of the drummer Buddy Rich in a leopard-print bathrobe is worth admission to the museum.
Mr.
Gottlieb is refreshingly frank in his comments accompanying the photographs.
He describes Benny Goodman, for instance, as "cold, insensitive, thoughtless," and the picture of the great clarinetist in crisply pressed, monogrammed shirt, his face expressionless and eyes fixed on his instrument, underscores the point.
The museum is also exhibiting a number of recent acquisitions.
Among them is a charming and tiny landscape of cows along a riverbank, signed Theodore Rousseau, and a vigorous cityscape by Paul Weingarten called "East River Bridge" (1985).
Mr.
Weingarten's works are hard to place stylistically, recalling Fauvism in coloration and conception, Social Realism in their emphasis on urban landmarks, and neo-Expressionism in the ways paint is vigorously, thickly applied to canvas.
Katonah
"Sticks and Stones" at the Katonah Museum of Art is an ambitious and stimulating exhibition.
It includes 28 works by 10 contemporary artists who have very different predilections but share an interest in natural materials.
The show touches on several topics.
By bringing together the works of divergent sculptors like Alan Sonfist and Robert Lobe, it highlights an increasing concern among artists for the fragility of nature and the environment.
By including Patrick Dougherty, James Turrell and Kim Jones, it underlines the challenge to the notion of artworks as precious objects.
And at a time when so much sculpture seems machine-made or derived, it provides reminders -- with sculptures by artists like Giuseppe Penone, Mel Kendrick and Michelle Stuart -- of an alternative strain that emphasizes the handmade and carved.
Mountainville
The strength of "Enclosures and Encounters: Architectural Aspects of Recent Sculpture" at the Storm King Art Center in Mountainville is in encompassing a gamut of approaches to its subject.
On one end of the spectrum is Alice Aycock's "Low Building With Dirt Roof," a primitive shelter hunkered down in the landscape.
On the other end are the bus shelters of Dennis Adams, with their Constructivist-derived designs and politically charged photographs and text panels, conceptually wedded to the city streets.
Between these pre-industrial and intensely urban extremes are the works of artists like Siah Armajani, Donna Dennis, Dan Graham and Lauren Ewing.
The show makes clear that no space is neutral.
Architecture creates enclosures that inevitably carry metaphorical and symbolic weight.


Chief Financial Officer Appointed by Maxtor
The Maxtor Corporation, the struggling disk-drive maker based in San Jose, Calif., yesterday named David S. Dury senior vice president, chief financial officer and treasurer.
Mr.
Dury, who is now executive vice president and chief financial officer with the software maker Boole &amp; Babbage, will officially join Maxtor on Aug. 16.
Mr.
Dury, who is 43 years old, succeeds David M. Kowalski, who in May was named chief financial officer of Maxoptics, a joint venture between Maxtor and Kubota Ltd.
Mr.
Kowalski has continued to serve as chief financial officer for Maxtor in the interim.


Abroad at Home; Governing By Hypocrisy
"My position on wetlands is straightforward," George Bush said in his 1988 campaign.
"All existing wetlands, no matter how small, should be preserved."
When he became President, Mr.
Bush appeared to carry out that promise.
The Environmental Protection Agency and three other Federal agencies issued regulations protecting about 100 million acres of marsh, tidal zones and other moist lands from destructive development.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
BMW, Munich, Germany, has taken a 50 percent stake in Charles W. Pelly Designworks Inc., Los Angeles.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Corning Inc., Corning, N.Y., was chosen by Mitsubishi Electric Industrial Co., Tokyo, to make a 60,000-pound mirror glass for the Japan National Large Telescope, to be built in Hawaii.
Corning said the mirror would take six years to make. *
Dillard Department Stores Inc., Little Rock, Ark., completed the purchase of eight Maison Blanche department stores, mostly in Florida. *
First Federal Savings Bank La Crosse-Madison, Wis., signed a letter of intent to acquire the Fort Atkinson, Wis., office of Federated Bank S.S.B., Milwaukee, subject to Government approval. *
Foster Wheeler Corp., Clinton, N.J., an oil-services concern, entered a letter of intent with the Saudi Arabian Marketing and Refining Co. to manage the upgrading of its refineries. *
Heritage Financial Services Inc., Blue Island, Ill., a bank-holding concern, entered into a letter of intent to acquire the Lemont, Ill., branch of Lemont Savings Association subject to Government approval. *
Honda Motor Co., Tokyo, plans to begin making 4,000 Accords a year by early next year at a new plant near Bangkok, Thailand. *
LA Entertainment Inc. acquired Marutaka Co., Osaka, Japan, for five million shares of its common stock and the issuance of convertible preferred shares. *
Lenox Inc., Lawrenceville, N.J., a gift and luggage maker and subsidiary of Brown-Forman Corp., acquired the assets of Wings Luggage Inc.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Logicon Inc., Torrance, Calif., an electronics concern, was awarded a five-year, $38.5 million Army contract to provide support services to the Control and Communications Agency of the Joint Tactical Command at Reston, Va., and Fort Monmouth, N.J. *
PWA Corp., Calgary, Alberta, an international airline, completed an agreement to sell two Airbus A310-300 aircraft to Polaris Aircraft Leasing Corp., San Francisco. *
Wallace Computer Services Inc., Hillside, Ill., completed acquiring MGI Industries, New York, a direct-mail services concern known as Colorforms, and affiliated companies.


Duncan Disabled
Cincinnati Reds second baseman MARIANO DUNCAN, who was injured while swinging at a pitch against Los Angeles Wednesday night, has been placed on the 15-day disabled list with pulled muscles in his right side.


Dow Loses 12.75 to Close At 3,013.86
An early rally in stocks was cut short by a weakening bond market yesterday, sending the Dow Jones industrial average down 12.75 points, to 3,013.86.
The Treasury's 30-year bond auction, the last leg of the its quarterly refunding, was disappointing.
The average yield was 8.21 percent late in the day, slightly higher than had been expected, with demand below expectations.
That erased signs of a rally in the financial markets.


CHRONICLE
AXL ROSE, the lead singer of Guns 'n' Roses, was charged with assault and property damage on Wednesday, after a melee during a concert by the heavy metal group last month in Clayton, Mo.
The misdemeanor charges, filed by ROBERT McCULLOCH, a St.
Louis County prosecutor, carry a combined penalty of up to four and a half years in jail and $4,500 in fines, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
About 40 concertgoers and 25 police officers were hurt in the July 2 disturbance.
Witnesses said it began when Mr.
Rose leaped from the stage to snatch a camera from a fan, then stormed off, abruptly ending the show.
Mr.
Rose has said that he jumped into the crowd to stop a fight and that the band was told to leave.
He blamed the theater's security force for the disturbance, which caused damage to the theater estimated at $300,000.


Black Progress Found, But Poverty Continues
More black Americans than ever moved into the upper middle class in the 1980's, but one-third remained locked in deprivation, a private demographic study said today.
And despite a doubling of the proportion of affluent blacks -- those with family incomes of $50,000 or more -- blacks remain the most isolated minority in the United States, according to the report by the Population Reference Bureau, a nonprofit educational group that reports on population trends.


Tulane Penalized In Tennis Scandal
Tulane University will be on probation for two years because of rules violations by a former head tennis coach, the National Collegiate Athletic Association said today.
The violations involved improper payments to a student athlete and to two part-time assistant tennis coaches.


Richard C. Hess, 57; Artist Was Creator Of Paint by Numbers
Richard C. Hess, a prize-winning graphic designer, illustrator and painter who began his career by creating pictures for the paint-by-the-numbers kits in the 1950's, died Monday at Charlotte Hungerford Hospital in Torrington, Conn.
He was 57 years old and lived in Norfolk, Conn.
He died of complications from septic shock syndrome, his son Mark said.


Infant Pacifiers Recalled
The Evenflo Product Company of Ravenna, Ohio, is recalling all of its infant pacifiers decorated with images of Donald Duck, Daisy Duck, Mickey Mouse or Minnie Mouse because of a choking hazard, Federal regulators said Wednesday.
The danger occurs when, in some instances, the characters separate from the pacifier, the Consumer Product Safety Commission said.
Evenflo has informed all distributors, wholesalers and retailers of the recall, the agency said.


It's Back to the Basics At the Hall of Fame
Cot Campbell stood before a formidable audience of 1,000 leaders of thoroughbred racing in a striped tent alongside the Racing Hall of Fame today, and said, "Simplifying what this is all about, this is about how to get a large 1,000-pound animal from Point A to Point B, and to do it faster than some other large animal."
Campbell, the president of Dogwood Stable and the owner of Summer Squall, simplified the issue at the right time at the right place.
He was the keynote speaker at the annual induction ceremonies for the Hall of Fame, and he was flanked by the heavy hitters.


The Jets' Theme Song: 'On the Road Again'
As they do every week, the Jets are traveling for their next game.
This time they take off Friday for St.
Louis, which doesn't even have an N.F.L. team anymore.
But the Jets are a club always going somewhere.
Even their home games at Giants Stadium are across two rivers and a state line.


Backstage Partners: Ballet's Kim and Feld
A ballet partnership usually refers to a finely matched ballerina and male cavalier.
But there is no better description for the 18-year collaboration of Willa Kim, the Tony Award-winning Broadway costume designer, and Eliot Feld, whose dance company performs this weekend at the Joyce Theater in its traditional summer "preview season."
Six of the nine ballets to be performed during the season, which runs through Aug. 17, have costumes designed by Ms.
Kim.
Three of those ballets -- "Clave" and "Evoe," which will be seen tonight and tomorrow afternoon, and "Endsong," to be seen tomorrow night -- are new, and each presented a special challenge.


Study Says Fees Are Often Higher When Doctor Has Stake in Clinic
Doctors' ownership of laboratories, diagnostic imaging centers and physical therapy clinics tends to increase the use and cost of such services without improving access to care for poor people or residents of rural areas, a Florida state agency reported today.
A study done by the agency also found that more than 45 percent of the doctors practicing in Florida, 8,500 of 18,250 doctors, have invested in joint ventures to which they can refer patients.


How-To Book on Suicide Is Atop Best-Seller List
A new book advising terminally ill people how to commit suicide has surged to No. 1 in the hard-cover advice category on The New York Times Best Sellers list to be published on Aug. 18.
The list was compiled last night.
The book is "Final Exit" by Derek Humphry, who is executive director of the Hemlock Society, an organization in Eugene, Ore., that gives advice on how to commit suicide.


Corrections
A television review on Wednesday about "Fox News at 7" misidentified a new game show to be broadcast on Channel 4 at 7 P.M.
Monday to Friday beginning Sept. 9.
It is "Love Connection," not "Rough Connections."


700 Stones Overturned At Cemetery
In a ghoulish act of vandalism, hundreds of tombstones in a Queens cemetery were overturned early yesterday in what the police described as a senseless rampage at the 141-year-old graveyard.
After rocking each tombstone loose at its base, the unidentified vandals pushed row upon row of them face down, crushing flowers and mementos left by family members, many of whom rushed to the cemetery yesterday to check the gravesites.
More than 700 tombstones were overturned, the police said.


Cuomo Is Still Comfortable on the Fence
Visiting this Cape Cod community, which evokes memories of Democratic Presidencies past, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he had a "commitment" to continue serving New Yorkers as Governor.
Mr.
Cuomo's comments appeared to put a damper on the gathering here of the United States Conference of Mayors, whose head, Mayor Raymond L. Flynn of Boston, had predicted that the Governor would use the event to indicate a willingness to run for President.


98 Are Arrested as Abortion Foes Defy Judge and Block Clinic
After three days of uneasy calm, the bitter struggle here over abortion broke out again today as scores of abortion opponents rushed the gates of a clinic and defied a Federal court order against blocking the entry.
For two hours, hymn-singing protesters rushed the iron gate or threw themselves in the path of cars carrying patients to the Women's Health Care Services, one of this city's three abortion clinics that have been under seige for a month from a militant anti-abortion group, Operation Rescue.


Italy Starts to Turn Back Albanian Wave
With baton charges, small handouts but no greater charity, the Italian authorities turned back a wave of refugees from Albania today, ordering thousands who fled here Thursday to return home on military flights and requisitioned ferries.
The Albanians resisted the order.
Penniless, shirtless and even bootless, the refugees forced their way into this southern port on Thursday aboard a commandeered freighter, inspired by dreams of Western riches and more prosaic visions of food denied them in their impoverished Balkan homeland across the Adriatic Sea.


A Deluge of Doubleheaders
There was too much rain, an eternity of waiting, an aggravated back problem and two measly, unofficial innings.
And now the Yankees face three doubleheaders in four days.
Last night's Yankees-Tigers doubleheader rainout stretched out over nearly six hours.
The Yankees and Tigers waited from the scheduled start of 4:35 P.M. until 8:16, when the doubleheader plan was thrown out and a single game was substituted.
Both teams then took the field before about 5,000 persistent fans, but 40 minutes later another downpour struck and the tarpaulin was rolled back out.
After another rain delay of more than an hour, the game was called.


Little Bonds for the Big City
Among the 60-odd New Yorkers who bent Mayor David Dinkins's ear this week with ideas for making the city work better was James Lebenthal, the innovative bond dealer, with a way to get more people involved.
His suggestion: issue bonds small enough for the ordinary saver.
East Brunswick, N.J., does it.
So do Virginia Beach Va., and the utilities commission in Orlando, Fla.
As the Mayor quickly agreed, there is good reason for New York to do it too.


ATTORNEY GENERAL MAKES IT OFFICIAL
Attorney General Dick Thornburgh submitted his long-expected resignation today to run for the Senate, all but ending an often fractious three-year stewardship of the Justice Department.
In a letter to President Bush, Mr.
Thornburgh said he would leave the Cabinet next Thursday to begin his campaign for the Senate seat left vacant by the death of Senator John Heinz, Republican of Pennsylvania, who was killed in an airplane crash on April 4.


Cattle Prices Rise Sharply; Analysts Disagree on Trend
Cattle futures prices snapped back from three-year lows yesterday, and while analysts agreed that the rebound was overdue, they were divided on whether the market's downward trend was reversed.
The contracts for October and December deliveries of live cattle and for winter deliveries of feeder cattle rose the permitted daily limit of 1.5 cents a pound on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange after three straight days of sharp, across-the-board declines.


Debbie Doom's Speed Powers U.S. Past Cuba
The United States women's softball team has decimated its opponents at the Pan American Games, winning seven games by a cumulative score of 42-0.
And one player, with one overpowering pitch, has been the talk of the competition.
In her first two starts, Debbie Doom has pitched consecutive perfect games.


A Revamping at Alcoa As Pressures Mount
Alcoa, the world's largest aluminum producer, said yesterday that it was broadly reorganizing itself for the second time in five years in a continuing battle against the industry's problems of low prices and deep price discounting.
The changes at the Aluminum Company of America will eliminate two layers of management and give more autonomy to the company's 25 worldwide business units, covering everything from smelting to bottle cap production.
Industry experts said the moves were clearly the latest efforts by Alcoa's chief executive, Paul H. O'Neill, to change the corporate culture of the Pittsburgh-based company.
But they were mixed on how effective his actions would be.


Short-Term Rates Slip; 30-Year Yields Up
Short-term interest rates fell slightly yesterday following a Government report of a decline in producer prices in July.
But the good news on the inflation front was of little benefit to the long-term market, where interest rates rose a notch as securities dealers, still burdened with a heavy supply of new 30-year Treasury bonds, pushed prices down.
Among Treasury notes auctioned earlier this week, securities dealers said investor demand had been strong, and the supply of unsold notes was not burdensome.
The 6 7/8 percent issue due in three years was offered at 100 3/32, up 5/32 to yield 6.84 percent, well below the 6.92 percent average yield at Tuesday's auction.


France Vows to Press for Release of Newly Taken Hostage
France pledged today to work for the release of a French medical worker kidnapped in Beirut on Thursday, but it is reluctant to seek Iranian help in the case until it has clarified the killing of an exiled Iranian opposition leader here this week.
The last of six French hostages in Lebanon was freed last year thanks to Iranian mediation.
That improvement in relations between Paris and Teheran has been threatened by the killing of a former Iranian Prime Minister, Shahpur Bakhtiar, and his chief aide.


Hostetler, Simms Gird For Round 2
Round Two of the Giants' quarterback battle will be fought Saturday night when the Super Bowl champions oppose the rebuilding Browns at Cleveland Stadium.
Jeff Hostetler will start the game at quarterback for the Giants, with Phil Simms relieving.
In the second half, Simms will start, followed by Hostetler.
Mike Perez will do the cleanup work.


White House Rebuffed on Miami Prosecutor
The Senate has returned to the White House the nomination of Dexter Lehtinen to be the United States Attorney in Miami.
The action, taken last week before Congress recessed for its August vacation, is tantamount to rejecting the nomination without a vote.


Time to End the Hostage Ordeal
The pealing church bells in Britain that welcomed the release of the hostage John McCarthy sounded the only clear note in an otherwise sordidly inconclusive business.
Mr.
McCarthy, a British journalist, was grabbed by Lebanese Shiite militants five years ago because his appearance marked him as a foreigner.
He was kept captive, along with six Americans and five other Westerners, as live bait to extort concessions from the United States, Israel and Europe.
The gratuitous tormenting of foreign noncombatants and their families is enraging.
Some respond to this abominable game with bluster, denouncing Iran -- the presumed puppetmaster of Lebanese gangs -- and urging reprisals.
This may relieve frustration, but it does little to liberate hostages or deter further hostage-taking.
On Thursday, in Beirut, a French relief worker was seized hours after Mr.
McCarthy's release.


Fast Break To Miami, Victory In Havana
Refreshed from its visit to the land of the Big Mac, the globe-trotting United States basketball team hopped off its chartered jet from Miami today in plenty of time to fulfill its obligations on the court.
Tonight, the team roared to an 18-0 lead before beating the Bahamas, 116-58, in the Pan American Games.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-4
Israel came under growing pressure to help break the hostage stalemate by unilaterally freeing Arab and Lebanese prisoners it holds.
Britain called the move "an opportunity not to be missed." Page 1


About Hannibal's Color, No One Really Knows; The Mahdi and Gordon
To the Editor:
Contrary to Prof.
Sidney Halpern (letter, July 20), Mohammed Ahmad, the Sudanese Mahdi (died 1885), was not "primarily involved" in perpetuating and profiting from the East African slave trade.
The Mahdi's mission, as he explained in his voluminous letters and proclamations, was to create a worldwide Islamic dominion before the Last Day.
To that end, he displayed astute political judgment, as well as a genuine concern for the well-being and unity of his followers, many of them non-Arab Sudanese.
The Mahdi's mission began and ended with the liberation of the Sudan from 60 years of Turkish-Egyptian rule.
Sudanese slavery did not grow appreciably in his time.


Cutting Corners on Road, America Takes a Vacation
David and Susan Haggerty did not go on vacation last year, but this summer the Phillipsburg, N.J., couple rented a bungalow near St.
Petersburg, Fla., to spend a week at the beach.
They and their two young daughters visited Sea World in Orlando and Busch Gardens in Tampa, but they also took steps to economize:
Instead of sleeping in motels on the way down and back, they camped, with a tent and sleeping bags.
And instead of eating out each night, Mrs.
Haggerty cooked many of their meals.


What's Best After Exercise, A Sports Drink or Just Water?
A new scientific study has reignited debate over the value of so-called sports drinks, beverages like Gatorade that replace the body's fluids and minerals after exercise.
The report, issued in June by the Army's Institute of Environmental Medicine in Natick, Mass., said that if people exercise moderately and eat a balanced diet, they have nothing to gain by drinking sports drinks instead of water.


Dawson Slaps Laredo Slider and Mets Go South
The pitch is called the Laredo slider, and it's a weapon with several effects.
The first is to surprise the man at the plate, the second is to embarrass him.
David Cone, with a 2-1 lead on the scoreboard and with men on second and third and two out in the third inning, decided to deploy the Laredo against Andre Dawson yesterday.
He was ahead, 0-2, in the count and determined to throw a pitch that was not a strike.


CHRONICLE
YITZHAK SHAMIR, Israel's Prime Minister, has received the Man of the Year Award from Muscle Training Illustrated.
DAN LURIE, a former body builder and the magazine's publisher, said yesterday, "We picked him because he had the strength to stay out of the Persian Gulf war."
He presented the award to the surprised Mr.
Shamir in Jerusalem last month, giving him a plaque and a mock-up magazine cover with Mr.
Shamir's face on a body builder's body.


One Round Is All Bowe Needs
ATLANTIC CITY, Aug. 9 -- Riddick Bowe's punching power tonight derailed the Atlantic City Express, as Bruce Seldon is known.
Bowe, an undefeated heavyweight, knocked out Seldon in 1 minute 48 seconds of the first round of a scheduled 10-round bout at the Convention Center here.


Stop the Nuclear Threat at the Source
For the fourth time since the gulf war, a pack of sleuthhounds from the United Nations is in Iraq trying to sniff out Saddam Hussein's remaining cache of nuclear treasure.
Previous U.N. teams discovered that Iraq was only a few years from building a nuclear arsenal and had managed to hide bomb factories from international inspectors before the war.
Unless atomic detection improves, America's next conflict with a regional power could be nuclear.
"Inspecting Iraq has been like peeling an onion," says one U.N. official.
The first layer, Iraq's weapons-grade fuel, has been removed from Iraq's control or is trapped under rubble.
The next layer, the equipment needed to make the fuel, has been largely destroyed or buried by the Iraqi Army.
The army wanted to erase clues to a deeper layer -- the machines and factories needed to make the fuel-making equipment.
The U.N. now has a chance to destroy this in Iraq, but is unable to destroy it in any other country that is quietly making the bomb.
Therein lies the problem.


Observer; The Unsuitable Suit
Lately I have felt bad about my suits.
Come to think of it, of course, I have almost always felt bad about my suits.
They never seemed to fit quite right.
They were always the wrong color.
The cut was out of style.
The trousers had cuffs when fashion magazines were issuing bulletins that Cary Grant never wore cuffs.
What was worse, my cuffed trousers ballooned comically in the seat.
I never really solved these problems.
I did, though, put them in the closet.
That is, I pretty much quit wearing suits.
I just left them in the closet gathering dust and slowly growing into shapes dictated by clothes hangers.


Review/Theater; A Dropout's Show Biz Aspirations
There seems to be a growing epidemic among professional men who are suffering from delusions that the idiosyncrasies of their vocations are just the stuff for hilarious comedies.
In less than a year, Off Broadway has been subjected to the theatrical aspirations of a stockbroker ("Money Talks") and an accountant ("Selling Off").
Now Marc J. Bielski, a doctor, has brought the medical profession into it with "My Son the Doctor," a singularly silly new play at the Irish Arts Center.
The vanity of such literary ambitions aside, perhaps a more alarming aspect of these efforts is that they take the most vapid television sitcoms as a model of attainment.
One can almost envision the would-be playwrights, watching a couple of episodes of their favorite shows on the tube and deciding, "Hey, I can do that" before starting a draft of a pilot on the back of their TV Guide.


Producer Prices Fell 0.2% in July
Prices almost always behave better after recessions.
The Government's latest inflation report shows that they are doing so now.
Producer prices dropped two-tenths of 1 percent in July, the fourth decline since February.
"There's not much inflationary pressure in the economy," said David Wyss, an economist at DRI/McGraw-Hill.


CHRONICLE
PAUL SIMON, pop singer, is now Paul Simon, children's book writer.
His first book, "At the Zoo," is to be published by Doubleday to coincide with his free Central Park Concert on Thursday.
The Central Park Zoo inspired the book, which is based on Mr.
Simon's hit song of the same title.


Suzanne Brady Is a Bride
Suzanne Lane Brady, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Brady of Port Washington, L.I., was married there last evening to Anthony Michael Cipriano Jr., a son of Flora Cipriano of Brooklyn and the late Mr.
Cipriano.
The Rev.
Fruto Rosales performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Fatima Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, 23 years old, and the bridegroom, 27, are graduates of the School of Visual Arts.
Her father is a lawyer in Port Washington.
The bridegroom is an animator for Walt Disney Productions in Orlando, Fla.


Patents; A Desk That Ends Computer-Age Clutter
Sadeg M. Faris is waging war against what he calls "office environment pollution," the tangled cltter of telephones, computers and straggling cords that occupy much of the desktop space in today's offices.
"There is desktop everything," complained the inventor, a Libyan-born computer scientist and entrepreneur who lives in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
"You have a desktop fax, a desktop printer, desktop computer, desktop phone."


Iberia to Get Viasa Stake
A consortium led by the Spanish state airline Iberia said today that it would pay $145.5 million for a controlling stake in Viasa, the Venezuelan state-owned carrier.
In the first big sale of a state asset to a foreign buyer, Gerver Torres, the chairman of state holding company Fondo de Inversiones de Venezuela, said Iberia would acquire a 60 percent stake in the money-losing airline in partnership with Venezuela's Banco Provincial group.


Religion Notes
'Irregular' Ordinations
Last year Roman Catholic officials in Czechoslovakia acknowledged that a number of married men had been ordained as priests during the Communist suppression of the church.
Now more information has emerged about the clandestine ordinations, some of it startling.


Electronic Robin Hood in Bronx Offers Cable TV, Minus Franchise
In the last year or so, a small cable television company in the South Bronx quietly wired 1,200 homes and apartments for HBO, MTV, Cinemax and all the other programs on its 40-channel system.
The only problem, city officials say, is that all of those hookups were illegal: the company, Urban Cable Systems, never had a franchise for them.
It sent out bills every month, like other cable companies, but city officials maintain that it was a cable company like no other.
It never bothered with city permits to dig trenches in the streets, snake cables through city-owned lampposts and run wires up the sides of buildings like the Bronx Criminal Courthouse.
City officials say the company just went out and did the digging, snaking and running.


Fayette Journal; Bittersweet Legacy For Victim of AIDS
When a young man dying of AIDS wanted to talk, the people of Fayette, Mo., listened.
He asked to meet with local teen-agers so that he might impress on them the very real risks of the incurable disease about to claim his own life.
And he wanted those students to spread the word to as many others as possible.
He said he wanted to "give something back" to the world he would soon leave.
And the townspeople made that final wish come true.
With a population of 3,000, Fayette is a town with slow-moving traffic trickling through the broad streets framing the village square, where a gazebo in the shadow of the courthouse is the site of summer band concerts and ice cream socials.


Bridge
When an international tournament was played in Prague in April, the curtain-raising event was the Freedom Swiss Teams, in which players were encouraged to form squads straddling national boundaries.
The most cosmopolitan group was a women's foursome: Daniela von Arnim, a member of the German team that later won the Prague Cup; her former partner in winning the European Championship, Sabine Zenkel, now living in Chicago; Audrey Holden of Greenwich, Conn.; and her great-niece, Countess Alexandra Seilern, American-born and living in Vienna.


United Airlines Has Labor Pact
The United Airlines subsidiary of the UAL Corporation and the Association of Flight Attendants said today that they had reached a tentative labor agreement affecting about 16,000 of the airline's employees.
The agreement was reached at 2:30 P.M., after 30 hours of bargaining, the two said in a joint statement.


Hawaiians to Claim Remains
A group of native Hawaiians will receive 135 skeletal remains of ancestors at a ceremony on Saturday at the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History.
The Hawaiians have said the bones would be buried on Kauai.
A 1989 law specifies that the museum return remains to native American tribal groups that prove ancestral claims.


Crack May Be Cracking
Tantalizing hints have begun to appear that the worst of the crack epidemic is waning.
A few unexpected bright spots, for example, now illuminate New York City's social landscape: fewer children are going into foster care; crime reports are going down and so are hospital emergencies.
There's a hopeful trend here for the country: Finally, crack cocaine use seems to be declining.
It's a trend that opens promising opportunities for long-neglected drug treatment programs to shrink the remaining pool of hard-core addicts, if only Government would respond.


Mandela Lists Demands
Nelson Mandela, the president of the African National Congress, today offered details of his organization's demand that an interim government not based on race be created to guide South Africa through its transition to eventual majority rule.
The congress has previously insisted upon the creation of an interim government.
But it moved the call to the forefront of its negotiating agenda after revelations last month that Mr. de Klerk's white minority government secretly channeled money to the rival black political movement Inkatha.


Cleared by Mental Experts, Man Kills 5
A man was admitted to a state psychiatric hospital after threatening to kill himself over his separation from his wife.
But the 23-year-old man, Richard Law, was sent home after hospital officials decided he was no danger to society.
On Thursday, a day after leaving Big Spring State Hospital, Mr.
Law bought a .38-caliber pistol.
An hour later, he used it to kill his estranged wife, his stepdaughter, his two sons and himself.


Herbert Levine, 75, Manufacturer of High-Fashion Women's Shoes
Herbert Levine, a leading manufacturer of high-fashion women's shoes for nearly three decades, died on Thursday at his summer home in Westhampton Beach, L.I.
He was 75 years old and also had a home in Manhattan.
Mr.
Levine ran the business he founded with his wife, Beth, in 1948, two years after their marriage, and left the designing to her.
They called the company Herbert Levine, she recalled yesterday, because "the name sounded like a shoemaker."


Increase in Bridge Upkeep Is Planned
Beneath the 79th Street bridge on the Gowanus Expressway in Brooklyn, workmen wearing bright orange vests recently demonstrated a well-known solution to New York City's bridge crisis: they connected a hose to an 8,000-gallon water truck and washed the underside of the bridge, removing dozens of pounds of debris that would have led to widespread corrosion.
For decades, engineers have warned that deferring the maintenance and cleaning of bridges would cause the structures to deteriorate rapidly and eventually cost taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars in emergency repairs and major reconstruction.


U.S. Says Its Fire Killed 20 Americans in the Gulf
After a painstaking review, the military has concluded that about 15 percent of the American forces killed or wounded in the Persian Gulf war were victims of American fire.
Allied fire accounted for less than 2 percent of American casualties in World War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War, according to an Army study.
Pentagon officials said, however, that the whole nature of war had changed drastically since then, and cautioned against drawing comparisons between those conflicts and the 43-day war waged in the desert with much more sophisticated weapons.


Harrelson Reveals a Change of Heart
Manager Bud Harrelson, saying that the team's pair of triumphs over the Pirates had lifted his personal depression, said he still very much wanted to return next season as manager of the Mets.
Harrelson earlier in the week, with the Mets having lost seven straight and his performance as manager questioned loudly in the news media and more quietly by the organization, had said the strain of it all made him wonder if he even cared to be signed to a new contract after the season.


Pete Rose's Deserts
To the Editor:
Louis Jay Herman asserts that Pete Rose's statistics do not qualify him for election to baseball's Hall of Fame (letter, July 27).


2 Ad Agencies Post Declines
Two large publicly held international advertising agencies reported lower second-quarter earnings yesterday, in keeping with generally weak industry results because of the recession.
Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications of Chicago said its net income for the three months ending June 30 fell 10.3 percent, to $6.7 million, or 64 cents a share, from $7.5 million, or 73 cents a share, a year earlier.
Revenues were flat at $84.7 million.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  A Present for Gilbert


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 10


N.A.A.C.P. Averts Internal Showdown on Thomas
In an effort to avert a collision over the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People today allowed members in Compton, Calif., to support him so long as the endorsement was not the local branch's official position.
Under the arrangement worked out between officials from the N.A.A.C.P. national office and the head of the Compton branch, the California chapter agreed that its endorsement was to be considered a non-binding expression of sentiment of the individuals who approved it and not official branch policy.


In Bronx Trial, Another Threat Involving Arson
A prosecution witness testified yesterday that the defendant in the Happy Land murder trial told him that he had once "decided to set fire" to a Cuban paint factory in a dispute with his boss.
The witness, Dr.
Jose Valciukis, a neuropsychologist, said that the defendant, Julio Gonzalez, had told him that he and a co-worker had decided to set fire to the plant after a dispute over a paycheck.


James B. Irwin, 61, Ex-Astronaut; Founded Religious Organization
James B. Irwin, an astronaut who walked on the moon in 1971 and later founded an evangelical religious organization, died Thursday night at Valley View Hospital in Glenwood Springs, Colo.
He was 61 years old and lived in Colorado Springs.
A spokeswoman for Mr.
Irwin in Colorado Springs, Nancy Metz, said he had died of a heart attack.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article and a picture caption on Thursday about the Happy Land Social Club fire in the Bronx misidentified the defendant in the case.
He is Julio Gonzalez.


U.S. Clears Settlement by Drexel
A settlement between Drexel Burnham Lambert and its creditors was approved yesterday by a Federal district judge, insuring that the once-powerful investment house will emerge from bankruptcy next year, but only as a shadow of its former self.
At a daylong hearing, lawyers for various creditors and for former Drexel employees raised a host of objections to the settlement plan in which Drexel will distribute about $2.1 billion to tens of thousands of creditors and claimants.


Lawyers in Smith Case Seek Woman's Mental Records
Defense lawyers in the William K. Smith case asked today to see the medical history and "all relevant records of psychological or psychiatric treatment" of the woman who has accused Mr.
Smith of raping her.
The defense lawyers asserted that "severe pre-existing emotional problems" had led her to make up the accusation.
In a motion filed with Judge Mary E. Lupo in West Palm Beach, Fla., before a scheduled afternoon hearing, Mr.
Smith's lawyers said they had found "strong and compelling evidence" indicating that the 29-year-old Florida woman "is mentally or emotionally unstable and that due to this instability her allegations are spurious."


2 Killed as Apartheid Supporters Battle Police at de Klerk Speech
Hundreds of policemen and white protesters battled with guns and tear gas today when pro-apartheid militants tried to stop President F. W. de Klerk from speaking.
At least 2 people were killed and 54 wounded.
Pitched battles raged through the main street of this conservative town as members of the Afrikaner Resistance Movement tried to fight their way into the hall where President de Klerk was giving a speech.
It was the worst outbreak of violence between white right-wingers and security forces.


Two Indicted in Miami in a Case Tied to B.C.C.I.
The Justice Department yesterday announced an indictment involving what it said was an illegal scheme linked to the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
But the indictment did not name the bank, and lawyers familiar with the investigation said the charges were too little and too late.
A Jordanian businessman and his accountant were indicted in Miami on charges of tax evasion stemming from a coffee-smuggling scheme that court documents show was financed by B.C.C.I.


Fifth of 13 Students Sentenced In U. of Virginia Drug Raid
The fifth of 13 students arrested in a disputed drug raid this spring at the University of Virginia pleaded guilty yesterday in Federal District Court in Charlottesville, Va., to distributing narcotics, and was sentenced to 13 months in prison.
As in earlier cases stemming from the raid, in which only a few small packages of drugs were seized, the judge expressed concern about the severity of the sentence but said Federal sentencing guidelines left him no room for judicial maneuvering.


Computer Bulletin Board Trips Up Parent Magazine
In the world of on-line computer services, Compuserve is finding that the ability of its members to respond instantly to information by modem can mean instant embarrassment.
Compuserve Magazine, a publication containing articles about products related to the Compuserve information service, unknowingly printed a fraudulent article about cruising on the Amazon in its August issue.
The magazine's editor discovered the problem when a Compuserve member used one of the service's electronic bulletin boards -- where members can post notices and hold discussions over telephone lines by modem -- to point out that the cruise had never taken place.


Patents; Expanding The Uses of '900' Services
Pay-per-call "900"-number telephone services have proliferated, offering callers live or recorded voices that provide everything from stock quotes and news headlines to titillating conversations about sex.
This week, a fledgling California company patented technology for a cheap pocket-sized device intended to let these services transmit pages of written data -- for example, hourly updates of horse-racing results from around the country; daily statistics on every baseball player in the National League, or a list of every house for sale in a community.
Developed by Dynamic Broadcasting Network Inc. of Santa Monica, Calif., and expected to cost $50 to $75, the device is intended to let people tap into electronic data bases without a computer or a modem.
To use it, a person would plug it into a telephone and then dial the "900" number.
The device then automatically orders the information service to transmit a particular package of material, and it stores the material upon arrival.


CHRONICLE
ERIC DOUGLAS, the 33-year-old son of KIRK DOUGLAS, was charged Thursday with assaulting a police officer.
Lieut.
JAMES E. SMITH of the Beverly Hills, Calif., Police Department said yesterday that the police responded to a disturbance, in a Wilshire Boulevard office building, between Mr.
Douglas and another man whom Lieutenant Smith could not identify.
Neither pressed charges, but when Mr.
Douglas was leaving the building he met Officer MICHAEL CARRA, whom he knew.
Officer Carra was aboard a helicopter with Kirk Douglas when a plane collided with it on Feb. 13.
Two people died and others, including Mr.
Douglas, were injured.


Elizabeth Walt Baker Kelly, Former Dean, 83
Elizabeth Walt Baker Kelly, a retired dean of women at Middlebury College in Middlebury Vt., died Thursday morning at Burlington Medical Center.
She was 83 years old and lived in Middlebury.
A spokesman for the college said she died of cancer.


Meica M. O'Mara Is Wed in France
Meica Murray O'Mara, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John O'Mara of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday in Guethary, France, to Miguel de Beistegui, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Juan de Beistegui of Paris.
The Rev.
Michel Lewkowicz, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of Guethary.
The bride, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in French literature from New York University.
She was a member of the New York Junior Assembly in 1983.
Her father is the chairman of the executive commmittee of Quality Care Systems, a New York company that specializes in controlling health-care costs.


Schwarzkopf Bids Farewell to Central Command


Study Finds Gains for Black Middle Class
More black Americans than ever moved into the upper middle class in the 1980's, but one-third remained locked in deprivation, a private demographic study says.
And despite a doubling of the proportion of affluent blacks -- those with family incomes of $50,000 or more -- blacks remain the most isolated minority in the United States, according to the report, issued Thursday by the Population Reference Bureau, a nonprofit educational group that studies population trends.


Public &amp; Private; Hidden Agendas
At first glance there is something terribly confusing about what is going on in the life of Patrick F. Kelly, a Federal judge in Wichita, Kan., who may be wondering why he didn't go to dental school.
Judge Kelly has forbidden members of Operation Rescue, the anti-abortion search-and-destroy group, to block access to abortion clinics in town.
In return, his jurisprudence has been attacked by his own government and his life has been threatened.
One man reportedly left a message on the judge's home answering machine, describing how his body would be dismembered after he was killed.


INSIDE
A Drop in Inflation  Prices at the producer level fell two-tenths of 1 per cent in July, the fourth decline since February.
Page 33.


Using Asthma Inhalers, But Correctly
In the wake of a new study that found that the overuse of asthma drugs might be hazardous, physicians are urging patients not to stop using them but to use them correctly.
The Canadian study, sponsored by Boehringer Ingelheim, a German drug company that makes the drugs, called beta-2 agonists, found that excessive use increased risks of a fatal asthma attack.
But the study said more research is needed to determine if the drug, sold in inhalers, causes the attacks.


Letter: On Turkey; Making Progress on Human Rights
To the Editor:
Your July 20 editorial criticizing Turkey's human rights record barely touched upon the progress that has been made regarding human rights in Turkey over the last several years.


Police Officer Is Suspended After Tampering Indictment
A New York City police officer was suspended yesterday after being indicted on charges of hampering a murder investigation and tampering with a witness, the police said.
According to the police account, the indicted officer, Victor Little, 25 years old, was out with friends on Dec. 30, 1990, when a dispute erupted between his friends and Cleveland Harris, 34, of 122-05 Flatlands Avenue in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn.
Mr.
Harris was shot to death in the dispute.


Canadians to Review Brawl
As Pan American Games officials considered a protest by the Canadian baseball team, Canada's sports minister said today that he would review Thursday's bench-clearing brawl between the Canadian and Mexican teams.
"I've asked my officials to look into the situation in order to determine the facts and exactly what happened," Pierre Cadieux, the sports minister, said in Toronto.


Daly Goes From Long Shot to Leader at the P.G.A.
The marriage of one of the longest courses ever played and the longest hitter in the game was the highlight of the second round of the P.G.A.
Championship today as young John Daly bulled his way to a one-shot lead.
Hitting monstrous drives that often carried more than 300 yards down Crooked Stick Golf Club's soggy fairways, the 25-year-old Daly shot a five-under-par 67 which, combined with a first-round 69, gave him the 36-hole lead with a total of eight-under-par 136.


John Lucas Buys Miami Tropics
John Lucas bought the Miami Tropics on Thursday and vowed to use the United States Basketball League franchise as a tool in helping players overcome drug problems.
"I see the Tropics providing a valuable vehicle both for players in the after-care program and for the vast number of talented collegiate players that are overlooked in the current N.B.A. draft," Lucas said.


U.S. Rules Out Fourth Trial And Drops GAF Charges
Prosecutors decided yesterday to forgo a fourth trial and drop stock manipulation charges against the GAF Corporation and a top executive, marking another setback in the Government's pursuit of Wall Street crime.
The move ended a strange chapter in the 1980's securities fraud scandal.
GAF, a chemical and building materials manufacturer based in Wayne, N.J., and its vice chairman, James T. Sherwin, were tried three times.
The case ended twice in mistrials before a jury conviction, but an appeals court overturned the verdict in March.


About Hannibal's Color, No One Really Knows; Myth and History
To the Editor:
Sidney Halpern (letter, July 20) ascribes the founding of Carthage to "Dido-Elissa, sister of King Pygmalion and great-niece of Jezebel, the wife of Ahab, King of Israel," and refers to what Silius Italicus wrote of the religious practices of Carthaginians in Spain.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Consul Restaurant Corp., Minneapolis, a franchisee of the Mexican restaurant chain Chi-Chi's, named William D. Etter chief executive in addition to his posts as president and chief operating officer.
Larry K. Boe has been appointed chairman. *
Equitable Capital Management Corp., New York, a subsidiary of Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, named Kathleen A. Corbet senior vice president.


Italy Begins to Return Albanian Refugees


CHRONICLE
ROGER MOORE, the British actor who portrayed the superspy James Bond, has a new assignment for the United Nations Children's Fund.
At the United Nations yesterday, Unicef named Mr.
Moore its special representative for the film arts.


Your Taxes; States Collecting For Many Causes
Once the Federal Government introduced its political campaign checkoff, which since 1967 has allowed taxpayers to designate $1 of their taxes for Presidential races, it was perhaps inevitable that tight budgets and interest-group activism would combine to make the idea almost irresistible to states.
With North Dakota the last to fall into line, each of the 40 states with a broad-based personal income tax now has at least one checkoff box.
In all, there are 125 programs, or an average of more than three for each state, according to a survey by the Federation of Tax Administrators.
Most of the state checkoffs are taxpayer donations, rather than a diversion of tax money.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.61
5.71
7.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.32
5.37
7.40
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.38
5.41
7.29
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.80
7.83
8.54
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.22
8.23
8.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.15
9.17
9.88
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.05
7.05
7.45
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


SALOMON BROTHERS ADMITS VIOLATIONS AT TREASURY SALES
Salomon Brothers, one of the dominant buyers of Government securities, yesterday suspended the two executives in charge of trading these issues and admitted to violating Government rules.
The violations, a big embarrassment for this prominent Wall Street firm, include exceeding the 35 percent limit on the portion of a Treasury issue any one buyer can purchase, and using the names of customers without authorization.


Bernard Reines, Writer, 84
Bernard Reines, an author and playwright, died Tuesday at home.
He was 84 years old and lived in New York City.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Frances.


Delta in Bid To Pan Am Creditors
Addressing a skeptical group of Pan Am creditors, Delta Air Lines offered yesterday to put up $200 million to help Pan Am reorganize around its Latin American division as part of a two-step package that it said would be worth at least $904 million to the creditors.
The development came one day after United Airlines re-entered the bidding for Pan Am with a $465 million proposal.
Trans World Airlines offered to sweeten the pot by assuming hundreds of millions of dollars of liabilities, and Northwest Airlines renewed its offer to buy Pan Am's Detroit-London routes.


Tests Set for Strange
CURTIS STRANGE, a two-time United States Open champion, is planning to undergo medical tests after experiencing dizziness and persistent headaches the past few weeks, a newspaper reported yesterday.
The Richmond Times-Dispatch said Strange would be examined next week at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.


While Groups Dicker, South Africans Wait
As preparations continue for the 22d New York City Marathon in November, the New York Road Runners Club has heard from dozens of leading South African runners who want to compete in the race.
"It's been like a cattle market," said Fred Lebow, the club president, referring to inquiries from agents representing some of the athletes.


With Postal Rates Uncertain, 2 New Stamps Are Delayed
Two new stamps scheduled to be printed this year have been put off until 1992 because of uncertainty over postage rates, the Postal Service says.
The issuance of a 75-cent stamp honoring former Chief Justice Earl Warren, planned for this fall, was postponed to next March 19.
A 29-cent stamp that was to be released Nov. 1, recalling the World Columbian Exposition, has been delayed indefinitely.


Continental Bank
Continental Bank N.A., said that the 90 staff memvbers employed in its New York office would continue to provide corporate banking, structured finance and debt trading services.
On Thursday Continental said that it was discontinuing securities sales in New York and transferring the four salespeople in the department to Chicago.


Review/Music; Stacking the Deck for the Mature Mozart
In its quest to celebrate Mozart's music this year, Lincoln Center seems also to have been exploring the various ways by which the greatness of these works can be made apparent most effectively.
One particularly sneaky strategy, explored in the first half of a Mostly Mozart concert at Avery Fisher Hall on Monday evening, is to offer two entirely expendable pieces of early 19th-century fluff as preludes to one of Mozart's mature string quartets.
The innocuous openers were a Flute and Harp Sonata by Louis Spohr and Rossini's Andante and Variations for the same instruments.
Marielle Nordmann, the harpist, clearly had more at stake in these pieces than Jean-Pierre Rampal, the flutist.
Ms.
Nordmann played her harp lines as a nuanced web of sound with an appealing dynamic shape that highlighted each work's few interesting harmonic turns.
Mr.
Rampal played as if he were on automatic pilot, producing an attractive enough tone but doing little to make the pieces seem more substantial than they were.


Panic and Run at Hong Kong Bank
Thousands of depositors, panicked by rumors, lined up today in the steamy August heat to withdraw their money from the venerable Standard Chartered Bank, one of two banks that issue Hong Kong currency.
Today's run followed a two-day panic at Citibank Hong Kong and left government officials -- whose reassurances have been ignored and even derided -- angry, embarrassed and suspicious.


About Hannibal's Color, No One Really Knows
To the Editor:
Re "Hannibal of Carthage Was No More Black Than King David" by Sidney Halpern (letter, July 20):


Cards Beat Smiley's People As Pirates' Lead Is Cut to 4
Bryn Smith gave up three hits over seven and one-third innings for his 100th major-league victory and the St.
Louis Cardinals prolonged Pittsburgh's slide with a 5-1 victory over the Pirates tonight.
Pittsburgh, which was 60-34 on July 27, has lost 11 of its last 13 games -- including 4 of 5 to St.
Louis over the last two weekends -- to fall to 62-45.


Rose Returns To Riverfront
Banned for life from any official position in baseball, Pete Rose returned to Riverfront Stadium as a fan on Thursday.
Rose's appearance at the Reds' afternoon game against the Dodgers marked the first time the former Cincinnati Reds star and manager had watched a game at the stadium since he was banned in August 1989.


Clinical Trials Demonstrated the Safety of Liquid Anesthetic
To the Editor:
"Records Indicate Company Ignored Warning on Drug" (front page, July 4) inaccurately and unfairly characterizes research and development decisions concerning the clinical testing of the Hoffman-La Roche anesthesia product Versed (midazolam/Roche).
It also may unnecessarily raise questions about the safety and effectiveness of this medically important product.
Despite numerous communications by company to reporter before publication, the article contains these glaring errors:


Quotation of the Day
"People are traveling, but they're pinching pennies. This year they're just squeezing money." -- Alan Schafer, founder of a tourist attraction in South Carolina.  [ 25:3. ]


Weicker Signs Spending Measure
With the Senate and House unable to override Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s third budget veto, Mr.
Weicker today signed the state's fourth temporary spending measure for the fiscal year that began July 1.
He said his budget director, William J. Cibes, "even now is working on some new ideas relative to a budget," and expressed confidence that a budget agreement could be reached before the new temporary measure expires at midnight on Aug. 18.


PRESSURE MOUNTS ON ISRAEL TO FREE ITS ARAB CAPTIVES
With hopes for the release of other Western hostages in Lebanon clouded by the kidnapping of a French medical worker, Israel came under pressure today to help break the stalemate by unilaterally freeing Arab and Lebanese prisoners.
Officials of the British Foreign Ministry publicly urged Israel today to release some of the more than 300 mostly Shiite prisoners held by Israel and its allies in south Lebanon.


Alvin Ailey Company To Present 2 Premieres
Two world premieres, one an untitled work by Judith Jamison and the other, "Dance at the Gym," by Donald Byrd, will highlight the winter season for the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater, which will begin on Dec. 4 at City Center.
The work by Ms.
Jamison, who is the artistic director of the Ailey troupe, features a score by the rock musician Nona Hendryx.


Lawyers in Smith Case Seek Woman's Mental Records
Defense lawyers in the William K. Smith case asked today to see the medical history and "all relevant records of psychological or psychiatric treatment" of the woman who has accused Mr.
Smith of raping her.
The defense lawyers asserted that "severe pre-existing emotional problems" had led her to make up the accusation.
In a motion filed with Judge Mary E. Lupo in West Palm Beach, Fla., before a scheduled afternoon hearing, Mr.
Smith's lawyers said they had found "strong and compelling evidence" indicating that the 29-year-old Florida woman "is mentally or emotionally unstable and that due to this instability her allegations are spurious."


Sports of The Times; The Team That Had The Blahs
In Shakespeare, we read that the first thing we do is, let's kill the lawyers.
In baseball, we know that the first thing we do is, let's fire the manager.
We learned this primarily from Steinbrenner.
Now the idea is, if the Mets are to succeed the manager must be booted.
But didn't the Mets just fire a manager last year?


Guidance for Doctors Carrying AIDS
Pressed by Federal health officials, panels of doctors and dentists are determining which procedures should not be performed by health workers infected with the AIDS virus.
Preliminary signs are that the task will not be easy.
At a meeting on Wednesday with representatives of 20 medical, surgical, dental and public health groups, the head of the Federal Centers for Disease Control set Nov. 15 as the deadline for developing the list of procedures.


About New York
In a flat voice, Veronica Kennedy said her brother died of a heroin overdose when she was 19 years old.
She had a breakdown she thought she could hide by drinking.
Then she found a boyfriend who drank even more and fathered her son.
"It took like three months for him to throw me out of the house with the baby," she said.


Dow Falls 17.66, to Below 3,000 Again
The Dow Jones industrial average fell below the 3,000 level yesterday for the second time this week, closing at 2,996.20, down 17.66 points.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was relatively low at 144.07 million shares, down from 163.9 million on Thursday.
Declining issues outpaced advancing ones by 868 to 695.


Police Seeking Suspects in 3 Brooklyn Shootings
New York City detectives believe that two recent shootings during seemingly random robberies in Brooklyn were the work of two men, who are still at large and "armed and dangerous." Two of the victims were killed and one seriously wounded.
The slain victims were a retired New York police sergeant on his way to work and a Brooklyn resident shot a few doors from his home.
A third victim, who survived, is a Methodist minister who was kidnapped and had his car stolen by the suspects.


Gray, Boston Reliever, Is Getting Treatment
Red Sox relief pitcher JEFF GRAY, suffering from a neurological problem, has entered the Braintree (Mass.) Rehabilitation Center.
Gray, 28 years old, was discharged Thursday from Boston's Beth Israel Hospital.
He underwent tests there to determine why he suddenly felt dizzy in the locker room and suffered slurred speech and weakness in his right arm and leg after a July 30 pregame workout.


Charles (Cookie) Cook, 77, Tap Dancer and Teacher
Charles (Cookie) Cook, a member of the vaudeville tap-dance act Cook and Brown and a popular tap-dance teacher, died on Thursday at the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York City.
He was 77 years old.
He died of kidney failure, said Susan Goldbetter, his personal manager.


Graham B. Ford, Publisher, 87
Graham B. Ford, founder of The New York Construction News and its publisher for 31 years, died on Monday at the Bayview Nursing Home in Beaufort, S.C.
He was 87 years old and had lived in Mountain Lakes, N.J., and in Manhattan for many years.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Chase Adds 2 Banks To Enter Connecticut
The Chase Manhattan Corporation yesterday became the first of the big New York banking companies to expand into the Connecticut market, as it acquired Citytrust, a Bridgeport-based bank, and Farmers and Mechanics Bank in Middletown.
Both Citytrust and Farmers and Mechanics were declared insolvent and closed by regulators yesterday, and will reopen at their regular hours today and Monday as branches of the new Chase Manhattan Bank of Connecticut.
There will be no change in the Federal deposit insurance coverage at the banks.


No, Not Maas Transit; Take Mass Transit
The rain poured down yesterday on Yankee Stadium as Kevin Maas rubbed his neck in the clubhouse.
Here was a day in the life of a baseball player that would garner no glory.
It had started for Maas at his Hackensack, N.J., home, when the Yankees' designated hitter climbed into his trusty Thunderbird and headed for a scheduled doubleheader against Detroit.
First, there was traffic on Route 80.
Then, on the lower level of the George Washington Bridge, Maas said, an elderly woman rammed her Chrysler into the rear of his car.


AIDS Tests Find No Link To L.I. Dentist
After preliminary tests on 567 patients of a Long Island dentist who died of AIDS-related pneumonia, state officials said yesterday that they had found no evidence that he had infected any patients.
But they said they were still seeking the records of the dentist, Dr.
Philip M. Feldman, so they could test the rest of his patients, perhaps as many as 1,000.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Murray Heilweil, a retired vice president of Hasbro Industries, omitted a survivor.
He is a son, Marc Heilweil of Atlanta.


Review/Film; A Castoff Mutt With a Bag of Tricks
Bingo, the title character of Matthew Robbins's new comedy, is a reddish-colored mutt who can ride a skateboard, give artificial respiration, dial 911 and bark the square root of nine.
Yet he is sometimes hopelessly dim.
Early in the film he fails to perform a simple circus trick, prompting his furious master to try to shoot him.
The master's wife steps in.
"Get out of here," she screams at Bingo.
"Find a happy family." Bingo runs out and returns with a photograph of a family that's having fun.
"Not playful happy," says the wife, who is now as impatient as her husband, "fulfilling happy."


Too Good for Its Own Good? Bronx School Backs Quality
Crammed into a church basement with few windows and no yard, the Bronx New School became the envy of its school district.
Parents and teachers plastered mouse holes and painted walls.
Administrators got grants to pay for extra staff members.
The 85 students, picked by lottery, came from suburbanish Riverdale and the inner reaches of the South Bronx.
Attendance was nearly perfect.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 2 about tensions between some Milwaukee residents and the police misstated the duration of Philip Arreola's service as Police Chief.
He has been in office almost two years, not three.


Astros Will Stay Put
Baseball commissioner FAY VINCENT said the Houston Astros would be sold and in all likelihood would not be moved from the city.
"There are people who are interested in buying the team and keeping it here," Vincent said Thursday in Houston.
"Be patient. The process will take place, and the sale will be made. And when it is, the team will remain in Houston."


Europe Security Unit Backs Call for Talks On Yugoslavia Crisis
The 35-nation Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe ended a two-day meeting on Yugoslavia today by endorsing the pledge of the national Government to begin peace talks by Thursday.
A statement adopted by consensus says there is an "urgent necessity" for negotiations "immediately."


Family Sues to Claim Profits Based on Milwaukee Killings
The family of a man the authorities say was slain by a mass killer here filed suit today to claim profits from movies or books based on the case.
Tom Jacobson, the lawyer who filed the lawsuit for the family of Ernest Miller, 24 years old, said the suit was based on a Wisconsin law that lets crime victims sue to collect money from books or movies based on the lives of their assailants.


China and Japan on Path to Better Ties
As the money flows in and the grand invitations go out, relations between China and Japan are about to reach a two-year flourish, a virtual return to normality, with the three-day visit of Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu beginning on Saturday.
Mr.
Kaifu will be the first leader of a major industrialized country to visit China since the army crackdown on the democracy movement left at least hundreds dead and thousands wounded two years ago.


4 Dancers Promoted
American Ballet Theater has announced the promotion of four dancers effective Nov. 1.
The dancers are Kathleen Moore and Gil Boggs, who have been promoted to principals, and Shawn Black and Gabrielle Brown, who will become soloists.


Enough of Cunningham; Coslet Wants to See Jets
As all coaches do with preseason games, Bruce Coslet will be using tonight's game against the Kansas City Chiefs at Busch Stadium in St.
Louis to evaluate players for the Jets' final roster.
He's just hoping that the team gives him more to see this time than it did in the first preseason game, against the Eagles last week.
Philadelphia put together two 14-play first-half drives, which consumed 16 minutes 52 seconds.
Randall Cunningham completed 8 of 10 passes for 95 yards and one touchdown in those drives.
Meanwhile, the Jets' came up with only two scoring drives, in the first and third quarters, and lost the game, 24-10.


Toxic Foam in Newark Water
Residents and workers near Newark International Airport and the Port of Newark were warned not to drink the water for part of the day today, after toxic foam for fighting fires leaked into the water system.


Lawyers in Smith Case Seek Woman's Mental Records
Defense lawyers in the William K. Smith case asked today to see the medical history and "all relevant records of psychological or psychiatric treatment" of the woman who has accused Mr.
Smith of raping her.
The defense lawyers asserted that "severe pre-existing emotional problems" had led her to make up the accusation.
In a motion filed with Judge Mary E. Lupo in West Palm Beach, Fla., before a scheduled afternoon hearing, Mr.
Smith's lawyers said they had found "strong and compelling evidence" indicating that the 29-year-old Florida woman "is mentally or emotionally unstable and that due to this instability her allegations are spurious."


U.S. Can Stop Salvadoran Death Squads
To the Editor:
"Salvadoran Government Strives for Peace" by Gen.
Rafael H. Larios (letter, July 13), blaming the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front for the bloodshed in El Salvador, professes concern for "any further loss of life." If the General were truly concerned over loss of life, he might press his Government to hold a trial in the killing of six Jesuit priests murdered in November 1989, with their housekeeper and her daughter.


James E. Cooney, Baseball Player, 96
James E. (Scoops) Cooney, who in 1927 made the last unassisted triple play in the National League, died on Wednesday in a Warwick nursing home.
The nursing home said Mr.
Cooney, who was 96 years old, had died of natural causes.
Mr.
Cooney was playing shortstop for the Chicago Cubs when he made his triple play, which came in the fourth inning of the first game of a double-header on May 30, 1927, at Pittsburgh.
With runners on first and second, Paul Waner hit a line drive up the middle.
Mr.
Cooney broke from his position, caught the ball, touched second for the second out and tagged the runner coming from first base for the third out.


Patents; Efforts to Promote Sight Through Artificial Eye
Researchers at the National Institutes of Health obtained a patent this week on a method for simulating nerve impulses to the brain that might someday allow people to see through an artificial eye or feel through an artificial limb.
"I have to say, right up front, that we don't know whether this works or not," said Barry J. Richmond, a neurologist at the National Institute of Mental Health and one of the inventors.
But the patent is based on new insights about the coding patterns employed by cells in the nervous system, called neurons, that fire electrical pulses to the brain in response to light, sound and other stimuli.


Review/Music; Star Is Put to Modest Use In an All-Mozart Program
The Mostly Mozart Festival deployed one star soloist and several lesser lights in an unusually varied all-Mozart program on Wednesday evening (repeated from Tuesday) at Avery Fisher Hall.
But in general, it was the lesser lights that made the more vivid impressions.
The star, the flutist Jean-Pierre Rampal, was put to surprisingly modest use, collaborating with Marielle Nordmann, the French harpist, in Mozart's Concerto in C for Flute and Harp (and, in the preconcert recital, a Duet in E flat by Francesco Petrini).
Betraying no attempt to steal a scene, Ms.
Nordmann dominated attention subtly with her lovely, fluid playing, strong yet supple.
Mr.
Rampal played well for the most part, but his tone showed little of his customary luster, and his sustained notes were not always well centered.


A.T. &amp;T. and NCR Set Stock Offer
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company and the NCR Corporation said they had filed registration statements for new shares of stock they would issue to consummate the phone company's purchase of the computer maker.
The offering of new NCR stock will allow A.T.&amp;T. to receive a favorable accounting treatment for the merger, called a pooling of interests.
Without this, A.T.&amp;T.'s future earnings would be hurt by the merger.
Federal securities regulations prohibit a merger from being considered a pooling of interests if the company being bought had repurchased some of its stock in the two years before the merger agreement.
NCR had repurchased some of its stock from time to time.
To undo this, it will offer 6.3 million new shares of stock to replace those it had repurchased in the two years before the merger agreement was reached May 6.
The NCR shares will not be issued until just before the merger becomes effective.
The new shares will automatically be converted into the new A.T.&amp;T. shares as a consequence of the $7.4 billion stock-swap merger.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Salomon Brothers suspended two top traders in Treasury securities and admitted to violating Government rules by purchasing more than the 35 percent of an issue allowed any one buyer and by using customers' names without authorization.
Both actions could be used to "squeeze" the market, forcing up prices.  [ Page 1. ]


Top Runners Named
Steeplechaser MARK CROGHAN of Ohio State and distance runner SONIA O'SULLIVAN of Villanova were named winners of the 1991 Jumbo Elliott Award as the top male and female collegians in track and field.
Croghan won the National Collegiate Athletic Association outdoor 3,000-meter steeplechase, and last July at a meet in Rome he ran the second fastest American time in the 3,000, finishing in 8 minutes 10.69 seconds, which was the fastest in the world this season.


Review/Music; Authenticity: No More a Goal in Itself
There once was a time when the musical movement bearing the boastful name of "authenticity" was almost avant-garde, boldly challenging our performance culture's preoccupation with the 19th century.
Not only was the repertory of Romanticism rejected in favor of Palestrina motets and Baroque trio sonatas, so were its emphases on large ensembles, arching melodies, soloistic extravagances, egoistic conductors -- all the elements of standard concert life.
Now, of course, the authenticity movement has become mainstream itself, offering little more than the promise of novelty to the same culture it once sought to overturn.
It has even adopted the repertory it once rejected -- the symphonic tradition of Beethoven, Berlioz, Mendelssohn and Schubert.
The only assertion made is that this time the music is going to be done right, with the correct instrumentation, the correct tempi, the correct phrasing.


William P. Steven, Newspaper Executive, 82
William P. Steven, a former executive at newspapers in Minneapolis, Houston and Chicago, died Tuesday at the age of 82.
A native of Eau Claire, Wis., Mr.
Steven started his career at the Tulsa Tribune in Oklahoma in 1930, moving up to managing editor in 1937.
During World War II, he worked in the press division of the Office of Censorship in Washington.


Wild Horses Up For Adoption


BRIEFS
*
Aetna Life and Casualty Co., Hartford, said that as part of a nationwide cost-cutting effort, it will move its White Plains and Rochester offices to Syracuse early next year. *
Cellular Communications Inc., New York, and Pactel Corp., Walnut Creek, Calif., said they had formed a joint venture to combine their Ohio and Michigan cellular telephone systems.
Pactel, a subsidiary of Pacific Telesis Group, San Francisco,, bought 5 percent of C.C.I.'s stock for about $87 million.


4 Concerts by American Symphony
The New York premiere of Hans Rott's Symphony in E and the Carnegie Hall orchestral debut of Kyoko Takezawa, a violinist, are among the highlights of the 1991-92 American Symphony Orchestra season.
The season opens on Nov. 17 with the orchestra's music director, Catherine Comet, conducting Bernstein's Divertimento for Orchestra, Stravinsky's "Firebird Suite," Chausson's "Poeme" and Ravel's "Tzigane." The Japanese-born Ms.
Takezawa is to be the soloist in the Chausson and the Ravel.


Freeze on Assets of B.C.C.I. Is Extended Another Week
A Federal bankruptcy judge in New York yesterday extended an order freezing assets in the United States of the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
The decision by Judge James Garrity came over objections from state and Federal regulators involved in liquidating the bank's assets.
They also argued that the freeze could interfere with their investigations of B.C.C.I.


Guidepost
Medical Data to Go Medical identification, emergency information cards and full medical records are available in portable form.
They are especially important for people with medical conditions like diabetes or for people who are allergic to some medications.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher; Gold Prices Also Advance
The dollar finished higher yesterday against most major currencies in light trading despite new evidence of moderating inflation that suggested interest rates may be headed lower.
Gold prices were also higher.
Gold for current delivery in New York rose $1.20 an ounce, to $358.40, on the Commodity Exchange.
And the Republic National Bank in New York quoted an after-hours bid for gold at $358.50 an ounce, up $2 from late Thursday.


Moscow Journal; Charity Begins With the New Opposition Parties
Pavel Shelaputin was avidly spooning up the fare at the new Christian Democratic Union soup kitchen, where a new strain of this city's ever insurgent, endlessly schismatic political opposition movement has decided to go easy on the talk and heavy on the dole.
Savoring the gift, the 88-year-old man made it sound as if he had missed the Revolution until this moment of dipping into his bowl of steaming bean soup.
It was valuable and novel for having been extended as charity in this tough city by one of the scores of political movements competing, and hardly unifying, for a way to stand out with the voters.


Nynex Insider-Trading Suit
A former executive of a subsidiary of the Nynex Corporation has been accused by the Securities and Exchange Commission of making illegal stock trades with confidential information about a Nynex takeover.
A civil lawsuit filed Thursday said Albert M. Harris, 55 years old, made nearly $40,000 in illegal profits.
Mr.
Harris, of Towson, Md., was identified as the former president of Disc Inc., a subsidiary of Nynex, the regional phone company for New York and New England.


Magic's Olympic Plan
Michael might not be interested in the Olympics but Magic is, and MAGIC JOHNSON hasn't given up on enticing MICHAEL JORDAN off the golf course and onto the court for the United States basketball team in Barcelona, Spain, next summer.
"I'm working on him," Johnson said.
"I even told him I'd give him a million dollars if he'd do it. But so far he hasn't changed his mind." (AP)


Boy's Choir of Harlem Rehearsing For Benefit Concert


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the explosion aboard the battleship Iowa that killed 47 sailors misstated the dates when independent scientists first questioned the Navy's conclusion that the blast was a deliberate act and when the Navy reopened its technical investigation.
The events occurred in May 1990, not June 1990.


Corrections
An article on the Law page on Aug. 2 about Gerald P. Boyle, defense lawyer in the murder case of Jeffrey L. Dahmer, misidentified a television program on which Mr.
Boyle appeared for an interview.
It was "CBS This Morning."


Review/Dance; Comic Work Has Four Act as One
It was like watching a tide pull steadily out to sea when the Iso Dance Theater performed on Thursday night at the Damrosch Park bandshell, presented by the Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival.
The evening got off to a good, punchy start, then dwindled irretrievably into sophomoric hijinks.
The opening piece, "Psycho Killer," made witty use of Iso's gift for high-energy, acrobatic movement and comic mime.
The quartet, choreographed by the company founders, Daniel Ezralow, Jamey Hampton, Ashley Roland and Morleigh Steinberg, and set to music by The Talking Heads, was an inventive exercise in blithe perambulation for two men and two women whose arms were linked and whose legs were tied together.
It was performed by Jack Gallagher, Mr.
Hampton, Sheila Lehner and Ms.
Roland.


Home Prices Sag, but Not Enough for Many
As home prices dropped on Long Island, Thomas and Patricia Nolan of Farmingdale scoured the real estate ads for a house in their price range.
They are still looking.
Prices are lower, but not low enough for them to be able to get together a down payment and get out of the apartment they are renting.


Really Doing Something About That Damp or Wet Basement
Chronically damp or wet basements are a common problem.
According to statistics published by the American Society of Home Inspectors, a nonprofit professional association, about 60 percent of the houses in the United States have moisture problems.
There is no foolproof cure, but homeowners who learn the causes and the remedies can probably have repairs made that are both effective and economical.


About Hannibal's Color, no One Really Knows; Denying Recognition
To the Editor:
Sidney Halpern's July 20 letter overlooks the racial mixture that made up the Carthaginians.
Carthage (originally Khart Haddas) was made up not only of the Phoenicians who colonized that part of North Africa now called Tunisia but also of the indigenous black Africans who were already there.


Scott Is Racing the Clock For a Ticket to Tokyo
Steve Scott has run faster than 3 minutes 37 seconds in 1,500-meter races more often than he can remember.
But because he hasn't matched that time since last year, he is in danger of failing to qualify for the United States team that will compete later this month in the world track and field championships in Tokyo.
Scott, the American record-holder in the mile, is the most prominent of several American athletes who satisfied one requirement for making the Tokyo team, finishing among the top three at the national championships two months ago on Randalls Island, but not the other, matching an international qualifying standard.


Decade of Rep. Smith: Fluke to Tactician
When Christopher H. Smith came to Washington a decade ago as a 27-year-old Representative, he was widely considered a political fluke, an anti-abortion zealot who lucked into his seat when the incumbent was indicted in the Abscam scandals.
"I learned very early on what I am, who I am and it's not unsettled by that type of cheap shot," said Representative Smith, who has beaten the odds in repeatedly winning re-election in his heavily Democratic New Jersey district.
"Most politicians have had some break."


Dr. Herbert Holt, 79; Taught Clergy Therapy
Dr.
Herbert Holt, a psychiatrist who pioneered in training members of the clergy in psychotherapy and psychoanalysis, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital.
He was 79 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of complications of leukemia, said his daughter, Renata Holt of New York.


Jays Obtain Maldonado
The Milwaukee Brewers traded outfielder CANDY MALDONADO to the Toronto Blue Jays yesterday for a minor league pitcher and a player to be named.
Maldonado, 30, missed more than two months earlier this season with a broken bone in his right foot.
In 34 games, he has batted .207 with five homers and 20 runs batted in.
The Brewers will receive 24-year-old ROB WISHNEVSKI, a right-hander with a 6-8 record and 2.94 earned run average in 31 games, 10 starts, at Class AA Knoxville of the Southern League. (AP)


Moving Money In a Matter Of Minutes
When Joan Eshkenazi, a Forest Hills artist, wanted to send $1,000 fast to her daughter Lara, who was studying in France last spring, she called Western Union and used its money transfer service.
Later in the day, Lara went to an agency in Paris that handles the transfers and picked up the money in francs.
"They came through for me without any runaround," Mrs. Eshkenazi said.


A Top Officer Leaves Westinghouse Credit
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said yesterday that the top financial officer of its troubled credit subsidiary, which took a nearly $1 billion charge against earnings last year, had resigned to pursue other interests, including a possible post with the parent company.
The executive, Laurence A. Chapman, 41 years old, resigned from the Westinghouse Credit Corporation at his own initiative, a spokesman said.
The resignation was effective immediately.
Mr.
Chapman had been in the post since mid-1988, the spokesman said.


Bush Announces Proposal for Wetlands
President Bush today announced a new proposal for managing the nation's wetlands and set off an immediate debate between the Administration and environmentalists who criticized it.
The first outlines of the program were disclosed last week, when the White House made public its new definition of a wetland, saying it would mean millions of acres of such ground would be opened to development while the most sensitive areas would still be protected.


Head of Atco Records Has Long Ties to Music
Atco Records, a division of the Atlantic Recording Group of Time Warner Inc., has named as its president Harry Palmer, who has been executive vice president and general manager.
Mr. Palmer, 49, finds his new position somewhat of a dream come true.
"I am very proud of getting to be president of this company because of its history," he said in a telephone interview yesterday.
"I've always admired the company from the outside because as a kid I bought their records and I always admired their artists."


Chief Gates Is Ordered to Let Recruiters Attend Gay Event
The civilian board that oversees the Los Angeles Police Department ordered Chief Daryl F. Gates today to allow two homosexual officers to appear in uniform as they recruit prospective officers at a gay community event this weekend.
The order, issued by the Police Commission, overrode the resistance of Chief Gates, who has objected to the recruitment of officers on the basis of their sexual orientation.


Aiming Beyond Looking and Feeling Good
One-handed push-ups are not for everyone.
More than 23 million people take aerobics classes around the country, and many have enough trouble using both hands for push-ups.
But an elite group of competitive aerobic athletes integrate one-handed push-ups into their routines: a sign of strength a cut or two above even the most diehard aerobic fiends.
And the numbers of competitive aerobic athletes are growing.
There are two national championships, the Reebok National Aerobic Championship and the Sundance Aerobics and Fitness Challenge, and both are introducing categories for first-time competitors.
The Reebok northeast regionals began yesterday and end tomorrow at the Woodbridge (N.J.) Mall, and the Sundance New York Metro regional takes place today and tomorrow at the Trump Regency Hotel in Atlantic City.


Bloodthirsty Doings At the Flower Shop
IN the snappy musical "Little Shop of Horrors," 1313 Skid Row is an address of double bad luck.
As detailed in this lighthearted tongue-in-cheek show at the Bayway Arts Center in East Islip through Aug. 24, not only is the address in the seediest section of town, but it is also the home of Mushnik's Flower Shop.
No one on Skid Row has enough money for food or rent, much less for flowers, and Mr.
Mushnik and his assistants, Seymour and Audrey, could garner as many customers selling weeds as they do selling roses.
Customers are such a rare sight that Mr.
Mushnik is ready to throw in his trowel and call it quits.


Rouson Gets New Job and a Poke in the Eye
For Lee Rouson, the timing could not have been worse.
For six rewarding yet frustrating years, he played running back for the Giants, but never as a starter.
Now beginning his first season with the Cleveland Browns, he was playing a new position (tight end) and was the projected starter.


What the U.S. Can Do in Peru
The Bush Administration has good reasons for helping to train and equip the Peruvian armed forces and police to combat drug traffickers and the leftist guerrillas who protect their trade.
Sending 50 U.S. military personnel to assist an army notorious for human rights abuse does not mean that Washington is sliding toward another Vietnam, or even another El Salvador.
But to avoid being dangerously drawn into another country's political conflicts, policy makers will have to keep the limited nature of their mission clearly in mind: to help a democratically elected government implement its drug-control strategy and fend off guerrillas who get in the way.


The Cultivated Gardener; A New Ardor for Hostas, Once Spurned
I used to think hostas were boring.
Foliage plants.
How dull.
Big green leaves.
Or little gold ones (a sickly yellow, really).
And why get so excited about variegated leaves?
Green with gold margins.
Green with white margins.
Gold with green.
I associated them with the sad little shade plants sold in some stores.
The ones people in dark houses have to buy.
Then I discovered Hosta sieboldiana and changed my tune.
Its ribbed, heart-shaped leaves, a foot wide and a soft blue-green, looked so sheltering and cool, I wanted to crawl under them and take a little nap.
Here was a plant with as much character as a tree.
Its white flowers, clustered on short stems that barely rose above the leaves, were entirely forgettable.
But so what?
Leaves are it.


Conquering Disease, but Then What?
A CHANCE TO LIVE
By June Goodfield.
Illustrated. 241 pp.
New York:  Macmillan Publishing Company. $22.95.


Second Generation
Sometime in November, Arlette Schweitzer of Aberdeen, S.D., will give birth to her daughter's children.
The case of Mrs.
Schweitzer, who is carrying twins produced from her daughter's laboratory-fertilized eggs, has added to the debate over the ethics of surrogacy, with some experts suggesting that difficult family tensions might arise.
But for the 42-year-old Mrs.
Schweitzer and her 22-year-old daughter, Christa Uchytil, it is simply a matter of love.
Mrs.
Uchytil, who was born without a uterus, said the prospect of having children genetically her own -- her husband, Kevin, provided the sperm -- was a dream come true.
She and her mother foresee a normal child-parent-grandparent relationship.
"When I envision those babies being born," said Mrs.
Schweitzer, "I envision Christa and Kevin just swooping them up."


Catherine Stahl Is to Be Married
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald A. Stahl of Rochester have announced the engagement of their daughter Catherine Amy Stahl to Stephen Paul Glenning, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Glenning of Albany.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Stahl and Mr.
Glenning both graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Miss Stahl, 24 years old, is a financial manager for Keffer Capital Management in New York.
Her father is the president of Rochester Lumber in Rochester.


Quotation of the Day
"What you have is a bazaar down there, a world of drugs, weapons, con men and ripoffs. Miami has an atmosphere that lends itself to that type of thing. Because of its location and culture, it's a big market with a lot of international flavor." -- Donald De Fago, a munitions specialist at the United States Custom Service's division of strategic investigations.  [ 24:1. ]


Medical Careers And Parenthood
The article "Barriers Remain for Women in Medicine" (July 14), which emphasizes the need to provide time off for women during preganancy and while caring for infants and children, raises another important issue deserving consideration.
Forty years of pediatric practice convinces me that many fathers wish to participate in the care of their infants and children.
Many men who assume nurturing responsibilities do so with ease and often enjoy the role far more than they had anticipated.


She Is Henry James, Only Taller
THE DARK SISTER
By Rebecca Goldstein. 272 pp. New York: Viking. $19.95.


Cornell, Ivy Foes On National TV
Cornell's football games against Ivy League opponents will be televised nationally this fall, Athletic Director Laing Kennedy announced on Friday.
The telecasts, made possible by corporate sponsorships and private contributions, will be seen on SportsChannel America in conjunction with the Cornell Sports Television Network, and will be produced by Trans World International, he said.


Talking; Roof Rules Regulating Residential Havens
NEW YORK CITY apartment dwellers can be passionate about preserving the right to spend leisure hours on the roof during the warmer months.
The best roofs -- adorned with plantings and planking and carrying the more gracious title of sundeck -- tend to have been created in the larger, postwar buildings.
Such structures already provided the stronger support needed for such an amenity, reports Andrea Bunis, president of ABR Management of Manhattan.


Jury Convicts 10 Members of Notorious Gang
The Federal trial of 13 members of the Chicago-based El Rukns, one of the nation's most notorious street gangs, has ended with 3 of them acquitted of all counts but 10 convicted on charges from racketeering to conspiracy to commit murder.
The trial, which lasted four months, was the first of three with which the Government hopes to strike a death blow at the gang by imprisoning its leadership.
The two other trials, for the rest of the 65 reputed El Rukn members who were indicted in 1989, are scheduled for fall.


Bit of a Wobble for the Dollar
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
136.55
137.20
140.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7280
1.7405
1.5685
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1468
1.1501
1.1633
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6945
1.6895
1.8933
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$358.50
$355.90
$390.00
Republic National BankCurrency: Friday NY Close


CAMPUS LIFE: Tufts; An Old Theater Is Demolished For Green Space
After decades of housing traditional and experimental works, from Shakespeare to Tennessee Williams and Sam Shepard, the Tufts Arena Theater was demolished last week in about the amount of time needed to perform "King Lear."
The Arena, which opened in 1948 and is possibly the oldest theater-in-the-round east of the Mississippi, according to Sherwood Collins, chairman of the drama department, had been at the center of controversy among his department, Tufts student theater groups and the administration for the last four years.
During that time, the administration had proposed that the theater make way for new buildings or a multistory parking garage.


What to Do in Heat Wave and Deluge
JUST when gardeners thought they were in control, nature showed them up.
First there was the heat wave, when record-breaking temperatures cooked everything.
During this period low marks went to those gardeners who put out lawn sprinklers and let them run all day.
Their object was to keep the grass green.
What would the neighbors think if the grass was brown?
Such needless activity wastes precious water and is a hard habit to break.


Miss Quill Wed To M. S. Duncan
Elisabeth Miller Quill, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas H. Quill Jr. of Old Lyme, Conn., was married yesterday to Michael Scott Duncan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Duncan Jr. of Tenafly, N.J., and Rangeley, Me.
The Rev.
Howard O'Shea performed the ceremony at St.
Matthias Roman Catholic Church in East Lyme, Conn.
Mrs.
Duncan, 26 years old, graduated from Brown University and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
She is to join the firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett in New York in September.
Her father is a senior vice president at Frank B. Hall, an insurance brokerage in Providence, R.I.
Her mother, Heidi Quill, is the director of admission at the Country School in Madison, Conn.


Miss Mulvihill Wed in Maryland
Elizabeth Jude Mulvihill, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald J. Mulvihill of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Little Flower in Bethesda to Kevin Normandy Reynolds, a son of Mrs.
Edward M. Reynolds of New Haven and the late Mr.
Reynolds.
Msgr.
Joseph B. Coyne, Msgr.
John J. Enzler and Msgr.
Kenneth W. Roeltgen officiated.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from Gettysburg College.
She is a special assistant to Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, in Washington.
Her father is the partner in charge of the Washington office of the New York law firm of Cahill, Gordon &amp; Reindel.


Ron Reagan Is Taking On The Big Ones
The Reagan era is over.
But, proclaims Ronald Prescott Reagan, he hasn't had to take a job flipping hamburgers.
Or serving as master of ceremonies at Republican fund-raisers.
Or writing books, thinly veiled or otherwise, about his famous parents.
"I work in television. I'm sort of a quasi-entertainer," says the 33-year-old Mr.
Reagan, the former ballet dancer best known as the younger son of the 40th President of the United States.


Venezuela
To the Editor: We would like to alert readers to what appears to be a scam at Venezuelan airports.
While leaving Margarita Island with many other tourists recently we paid the $15 departure tax and were then later charged an additional tax of $10 a person.
At the boarding gate we were told by a Venezuelan passenger that the second tax should have been less than $1.
A guard prevented us from returning to the lobby to complain, but one of the tourists was able to get the attention of a Viasa Airline staff member, who, after a long struggle, got us a refund.
A year ago in Caracas, as we were entering the boarding area after we had paid the departure tax, our passports were withheld until we paid an additional $15 a person.
Although we alerted flight attendants upon boarding the plane, they were unable to help us.
We wrote to the Venezuelan Consulate in New York, and they answered our letter but ignored our complaint.


Kia Odorico and Gregory Himstead Are Married
Kia Lee Odorico, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Odorico of Searingtown, L.I., was married yesterday at Our Lady of Victory Church in Centerville, Mass., to Gregory Scott Himstead, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Scott Himstead of Barnstable, Mass.
The Rev.
John J. Perry, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Himstead, 25 years old, is a marketing representative for I.B.M. in New York.
She graduated from Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was an industry marketing analyst for I.B.M.
Her mother, Lucia Odorico, is a nurse at Mercy Hospital in Rockville Centre, L.I.


Governor Turns Florida Into His Lab for Change
Ditching his suit coat and ducking the stares of three dozen graduate students, the Governor of Florida turned to his lesson for the day.
"Where do policy ideas come from?" a question on the blackboard asked in big chalk letters.
"What determines the success of a particular policy?"


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Cromwell, Conn. 145,700
12 Grace Lane  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; h/w floors, finished basement w/fireplace, pool; taxes $2,537.
Higganum, Conn. 225,000
852 Little City Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 21-year-old contemporary; wraparound deck, family room w/ wb stove, workshop in garage, 2 acres; taxes $2,331.
Portland, Conn. 117,000
31 Middlesex Avenue Extension  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old ranch; 1-car attached garage, unfinished basement; taxes $1,368.
Bedford, N.Y. 1.3 million
11 Captain Theale Road  6-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 2-year-old Tudor; 2-story entry, sunken living room, 2 fireplaces, family room, eat-in kitchen, 3-car garage, patios, 4.3 acres; taxes $16,300.
Chappaqua, N.Y. 685,000
39 Annandale Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 42-year-old colonial; family room, library, new eat-in kitchen, deck, terrace, 1.2 acres; taxes $12,956.
Katonah, N.Y. 447,800
65 Pine Hill Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, family room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 2.5 acres; taxes $10,102.
OTHER AREAS Howell, N.J. 110,000
38 Salem Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 24-year-old split level; family room, w/w carpeting, deck, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,500.
Jackson, N.J. 110,000
Box 302 Route 528  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 33-year-old ranch; 1-acre, porch, fenced yard; taxes $2,726.
Glen Cove, L.I. 180,000
20 Southridge Drive  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen; taxes $2,800.


Gloria Jean's Leads the Specialty Coffee Stampede
Americans have been sipping fewer cups of coffee over all in the last few years, yet sales of specialty coffees like Hawaiian Kona and Jamaican Blue Mountain are surprisingly strong.
Also surprising has been the success of a small company called Gloria Jean's, a chain of shops that sell exotic coffees, coffee-making equipment and, in some stores, cups of hot and cold brew.
The Gloria Jean's Coffee Bean Corporation, based in Buffalo Grove, Ill., opened for business in 1979 as a single shop.
Seven years later, it started expanding through the sale of franchises and now has 110 stores -- all with a hardwood and forest-green decor -- in 26 states.


'THEY'VE GOTTA HAVE US'
Where is a great irony in Bill Duke's statement that "Anybody can direct anything -- but the point of view will be different" as the rationale for black directors making films on the black experience.
This is followed by information on Singleton's next project, a film about a "19-year-old black woman in South Central." Why would a black male direct such a film when a black female director would provide that essential point of view?
KATHLEEN R. PAYETTE
Louisville, Ky.


Robin Fancher Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Fancher of Barrington, R.I., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Robin Fancher, and Robert Salant Strandberg, a son of Mrs.
John R. Wierdsma of Locust Valley, L.I., and the late Albin D. Strandberg Jr.
Miss Fancher, 26 years old, graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College.
She is a fixed-income trading assistant at Lazard Freres in New York.
Her father and her mother, Janice G. Fancher, own Greenwood &amp; Gryphon, an advertising agency in Barrington.


On the Street; The Colors of the World
New York City is a crossroads of the world, and that is evident this summer.
A new generation is wearing ethnic dress as a badge of cultural pride.
Such variety has not been seen since the 1960's, when hippies adorned themselves with jewelry and weavings from other lands.
A virtual United Nations of style can be observed on Broadway in the 20's, where one sees traditional Korean dress, Indian saris, tunics and scarfs.
On Fifth Avenue, Japanese tourists carry umbrellas as sun shields.
In Greenwich Village, young men and women have adopted the Indonesian batik sarong.
Also popular are Caribbean and African cotton wrap skirts and turbans.
Still others have adapted facets of African costumes, often worn with jewelry made of wood, amber and seashells.
One young man, at left, removed the crown of his hat to accommodate his dreadlocks.


Volunteers Prosper at Fresh Air Fund Camp
Early Thursday, 600 excited youngsters gathered at the George Washington Bridge Bus Terminal in upper Manhattan, bound for a Fresh Air Fund camp in Fishkill, N.Y.
Keeping order -- or trying valiantly, at least -- were several dozen volunteers, acting variously as social directors, social workers, traffic cops and baggage handlers.


Stamps
Laws governing the design of new stamps in the United States forbid showing people who are still living.
In fact, with rare exceptions, a person must be dead for 10 years before his or her likeness can appear on a stamp.
But the law is being broken all the time, because models used for "generic" commemorations like the Aging Together stamp of 1982 or the Hispanic Americans stamp of 1984 were presumably alive when the stamps were issued.


Lipsyte Strikes a Raw Nerve; A Wakeup Call
To the Sports Editor:
The powerful and important article written by Robert Lipsyte should serve as a wakeup call to both men and women.
Men should "grow up" and learn some sensitivity and early lessons; women should yell from the rooftops, "We're not going to take this anymore." And we folks who make up "society" should punish the offenders both legally and publicly.


Tech Notes; A Computerized Attack on a Virus
Researchers at the Wistar Institute in Philadelphia have used a mini-supercomputer made by Stardent Computer Inc. to analyze electron microscope pictures of the adenovirus, and simulate its appearance.
The virus is a leading cause of infant death in third world countries.
But now that scientists at the Philadelphia biological-research institute know what the thing looks like and how it is structured, they hope to design an antiviral drug that will be able to attack and kill the adenovirus.


A Soul Can Freeze at 40 Below
THE TERRORS OF ICE AND DARKNESS
By Christoph Ransmayr.
Translated by John E. Woods.
Illustrated. 228 pp.
New York: Grove Weidenfeld. $19.95.


When Doctors Own Their Own Labs
MANY reasons have been given for the rapidly escalating number of medical tests ordered by doctors: the rising fear of malpractice suits, the aging of the population, the development of new diagnostic techniques.
And lately, a more troubling one has been advanced: the fact that many doctors have a financial stake in the laboratories to which they are farming out the work.
While this strikes some people as a clear conflict of interest, many doctors argue that by investing in laboratories and clinics they help raise money for expensive equipment like magnetic resonance imaging machines and can make sure that their patients get quality care.


Affordable-Housing Needs Lower Than Expected
THE county will need to build less affordable housing this decade than planned, according to a major report on housing needs released last week, but Putnam and Dutchess Counties will need to do more to accommodate the projected needs of their low- and middle-income residents.
The report addresses devising a comprehensive affordable-housing policy and asserts that because of demographic changes and other factors, Westchester policy makers will need to spend less money on new construction.
Rather, the report says, it needs to spend more on rent subsidies and rehabilitation projects to improve deteriorated housing stock.


'THEY'VE GOTTA HAVE US'
Where do these black kids, just out of school, with no practical experience, come off being regarded as film makers.
I don't care how good or potentially lucrative their script ideas may be, they're still amateurs, with much to learn about the intricacies of film making.


Ms. O'Connell Wed in Vermont
Jennifer Gunn O'Connell and Arthur Mark Connelly Jr., were married yesterday in Hartland Four Corners, Vt.
The Rev.
Maurice Landry performed the Unitarian ceremony at the home of the bride's mother and stepfather, Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Cushman.
The groom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Connelly of Yarmouth Port, Mass.
Mrs.
Connelly, 30 years old, teaches second grade at the Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School in New York.
She graduated from Hampshire College and received a master's degree in American studies from Columbia University.
Her stepfather is an English professor at Toin University and her mother, Carol Cushman, teaches English at the Waseda University High School, both in Tokyo.


Afrocentrism: Balancing or Skewing History?
After 15 years as a high school history teacher in Washington, Erich Martel was unnerved by what he considered an ill wind of inaccuracies and wishful thinking blowing into the curriculum.
That ill wind, Mr. Martel said, was Afrocentricity.


Ms. Greenwood Wed To David L. Finegold
Susan Mary Greenwood, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Greenwood of Brierfield, Lancashire, England, was married yesterday to David Louis Finegold, a son of Dr.
Milton Finegold of Houston and the late Joan Finegold.
The Rev.
Martyn Hughes, an Anglican priest, performed the interfaith ceremony at Rhodes House in Oxford, England.
Ms.
Finegold, 35 years old, received a master's degree in English language and literature from St.
Ann's College of Oxford University.
She is the sixth form director at the Banbury School in Banbury, Oxfordshire, England.


R. G. Rappleyea, 66, Pastor Emeritus, Dies
Msgr.
Robert G. Rappleyea, pastor emeritus of the Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Cross at 42d Street near Eighth Avenue in Manhattan, died on Thursday at St.
Francis Hospital in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
He was 66 years old and died of leukemia, a funeral home spokesman said.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Garden With a Legacy
For 25 years Robert Dash of Sagaponack has been tending his garden, a garden that has expanded into almost two acres of fascinating flora.
Prominent as an artist with canvas, Mr.
Dash has become an artist on soil, as well.


Ramie Targoff and Edgar Pew Wed
Ramie Targoff and James Edgar Pew were married yesterday at the Lyndhurst estate in Tarrytown, N.Y., by Justice Sondra Miller of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.
The bride is a daughter of Cheri and Michael B. Targoff of Irvington, N.Y.
The bridegroom, known as Edgar, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George L. Pew Jr. of Villanova, Pa.


ALL SIDES ANGERED BY AFRIKANER RIOT
A day after a rare clash between white rightists and the police that left 3 people dead and at least 57 injured, recriminations were traded today across the political spectrum over who was to blame for the violence.
Police officers in armored cars continued to patrol Ventersdorp, the small conservative town nearly 70 miles west of Johannesburg where the fighting took place.
But there was no sign today of the Afrikaner Resistance Movement, the neo-Nazi paramilitary organization whose supporters disrupted a speech by President F. W. de Klerk Friday evening and ended up battling the police and attacking blacks hapless enough to cross their path.


Donald Gramm: Required Listening
To the Editor:
The "missing link" between the great line of American operatic baritones and the new breed exemplified by Sanford Sylvan  [ Recordings View, by Will Crutchfield, July 21 ]  is surely Donald Gramm, who died in 1983.
Although he sang a wide range of roles, from Mozart to Roger Sessions, at houses including the Met and Glyndebourne Festival Opera, it is for his services to contemporary American song that Gramm will be remembered.
His recordings of works by Ned Rorem, John Duke, Theodore Chanler, Paul Bowles and others are exemplary in the literal sense and ought to be required listening for native singers, not only for their unforced beauty of tone but also for the clarity and naturalness of Gramm's thoroughly North American English.


Ms. L'Hommedieu, Reporter, to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Paige B. L'Hommedieu of Convent Station, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Bradley L'Hommedieu to Matthew Harrison King, a son of Henry L. King and Mary S. King, both of New York.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
L'Hommedieu, 24 years old, is a reporter in San Francisco for Time magazine.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father, who is retired, was a national accounts representative for Armstrong World Industries, a building supplier in Lancaster, Pa.


Even Weicker Can't Overshadow Budget-Fallout Concerns
Reporters and lobbyists crowded around a television in the Capitol on Wednesday to watch the speech in which Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. would say whether he was signing or vetoing the third budget passed by the Legislature.
Suddenly the screen was blacked out, then almost entirely filled by a broad back as someone stepped right in front of the television camera in the Governor's office.
It was Mr. Weicker, so large that he seemed to take up all of the space in his office.


Maguire Is Stricken
The NBC Sports commentator PAUL MAGUIRE, in Buffalo for an exhibition game between the Detroit Lions and the Buffalo Bills, suffered a heart attack yesterday morning, a hospital spokesman said.
Maguire, who played for the Bills in the 1960's, was taken to Buffalo General Hospital by private car around 8:30 A.M., said MIKE SHAW, a hospital spokesman.
He said that Maguire's vital signs were stable. (AP)


BEST SELLERS: August 11, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
7
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
2
2
22
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
4
12
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
4 *
3
14
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two women get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
5
6
7
BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Random House, $21.) The disappearance of a couple off Bermuda raises a question: is a creature from the deep responsible?
6
8
3
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
7
5
7
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
8
7
3
PASTIME, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) The private eye Spenser learns much about his own past while helping a young man track down his mother, who has disappeared.
9
14
2
MAXIMUM BOB, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $20.) A woman probation officer pursues the people trying to kill a redneck Florida judge. (LP)
10
9
72
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) Verse and pictures.
11
1
TEXAS!
SAGE, by Sandra Brown. (Doubleday, $18.) A young woman who has always been able to wrap men around her finger meets her match on a visit to her hometown.
12
10
14
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) A man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
13
12
4
DARKNESS, by John Saul. (Bantam, $17.50.) A family moves back to a Florida town, where something evil awaits.
14
11
3
SKY MASTERS, by Dale Brown. (Fine/Putnam, $21.95.) The United States Air Force comes to the aid of the Philippines in a war with China in 1994.
15
13
8
THE RUSTLERS OF WEST FORK, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $18.) A frontier novel featuring Hopalong Cassidy, first published in 1951. (LP)
16 *
11
DAMAGE, by Josephine Hart. (Knopf, $18.) A British gentleman is mesmerized when he meets the woman his son plans to marry.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
3
38
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
2
1
8
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America.
3
2
8
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
4
5
6
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
5
4
3
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
6
6
13
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) The changing role of today's male.
7
9
6
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press, $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.
8 *
7
5
BOSS OF BOSSES, by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) The downfall of the mobster Paul Castellano.
9
10
10
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
10
8
13
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How President Bush and his commanders have made military decisions.
11 *
3
THE DAY AMERICA TOLD THE TRUTH, by James Patterson and Peter Kim. (Prentice Hall, $19.95.) Americans' beliefs about sex, drugs and many other matters, as revealed through a poll.
12
14
9
COUNSEL TO THE PRESIDENT, by Clark Clifford with Richard Holbrooke. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the Democratic adviser.
13
15
12
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are treated on campus.
14
11
2
PETER LAWFORD, by James Spada. (Bantam, $22.50.) The life of the British-born actor, Hollywood man about town and Kennedy in-law.
15 *
17
5
UNDER THE INFLUENCE, by Peter Hernon and Terry Ganey. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized account of Anheuser-Busch.
16 *
1
THE BEAUTY MYTH, by Naomi Wolf. (Morrow, $21.95.) An argument against our society's emphasis on the importance of women's physical appearance.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
40
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) An illustrated book in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
2
3
83
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
3
5
27
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
4
4
120
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's financial advice.
5
47
HOMECOMING, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $18.95.) How to find the child you once were that lives within you and use it to deal with today's problems.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,947 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
THE JAMESES: A Family Narrative, by R. W. B. Lewis. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) Mr.
Lewis handsomely presents Henry, William and all the others interacting with one another in a family that was virtually a brilliant American nation of its own.
THE BOOKMAKER'S DAUGHTER: A Memory Unbound, by Shirley Abbott. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $19.95.) A moving personal memoir that explores the histories of two clever people -- the author herself and the father to whom age, experience and disappointment brought not wisdom but bitterness.
FIEDLER ON THE ROOF: Essays on Literature and Jewish Identity, by Leslie Fiedler. (Godine, $19.95.) The bad boy of literary criticism strikes another paradox: his assimilationism versus his preoccupation with Jewish figures and themes.
HEAT: And Other Stories, by Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $21.95.) The best of the stories in this collection effectively confine great chunks of rage and hatred on the psychological, internal level.
A CERTAIN FINKELMEYER, by Felix Roziner. (Norton, $19.95.) A profoundly comic novel about life in the Soviet Union before glasnost and all that, finished -- but not published -- in 1975.
THE THIRTEEN-GUN SALUTE, by Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $19.95.) The latest in an admirable series of romances, set in Lord Nelson's navy, whose themes include friendship and music, poetry, food, scholarship and the delights of nature.
Honest!
LONE STAR RISING: Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1908-1960, by Robert Dallek. (Oxford University, $30.) Mr.
Dallek's Johnson is a champion of the New Deal whose "sense of unrelenting deprivation" made him do anything to win the glittering prizes.


Ireland
To the Editor: I agree with Christine Cozzens ("West Cork's Wild Peninsulas," Travel, June 30) that for travelers looking for a bit of Ireland off the tourist track, the arthritic fingers of rock and moor jutting into the Atlantic from the country's far southwest will not disappoint.
I would only add that one of the best ways to see the Beara Peninsula is to link up with the periodic outings of the Bearhaven Historical Society.
Pubs in Castletown post schedules of field trips, and if you present yourself at the usual meeting point on the quays in the center of town, there will always be someone to offer a ride.
I would also note that a ramble with the group serves as a splendid introduction to the cordiality and sly banter of the Irish of Beara.
ALAN LITTELL Alfred, N.Y.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Silver Glimpsed in Cloud Over Bridgeport
WHEN Bridgeport's petition for bankruptcy was denied 10 days ago by Federal Bankruptcy Judge Alan H.TW.
Schiff, the local real estate community braced for the worst.
"I thought, oh boy, we're going to see everybody calling up and pulling out of deals," said Charles Coviello, a broker with Realty World-Trio Associates on East Main St.
"But nobody did."
He had said the same thing after the June 6 announcement by Mayor Mary Moran that she was filing for bankruptcy protection.
If anything, business got better throughout June and July.


Lipsyte Strikes a Raw Nerve; No Gender to Sexism
To the Sports Editor:
Robert Lipsyte ("The Manly Art of Self-Delusion," The Times, Aug. 4) is right on the mark when he says that "American boys are primarily reared not to be girls." But they were not reared to denigrate them.
To the contrary, popular fiction (from Frank Merriwell to Chip Hilton) equated masculinity with fair play and respect for women.
And while the cliche "the manly art of self-defense" is certainly sexist, the emphasis is on
self-defense
, and is no less sexist when used today to encourage "the womanly art of self-defense." It is no longer useful to separate the boys from the girls.
Both can use, or abuse, power and the hype that goes with it.
JANET HENLEY  Forest Hills, Queens


A New Gallery in Hartford Offers Varied Works by 10 Artists
JANICE LA MOTTA is a land scapist who, until recently, was the curator at the New Britain Museum of American Art.
Though still a painter, she now owns, with her partner, Kevin Rita, a small gallery named Paesaggio, which is the Italian word for landscape.
Situated in the relatively open country in the West End of Hartford, at the corner of Sisson Avenue and Gray Street, the gallery is one of three storefronts in a rambling clapboard house painted beige.
It has the kind of character that could magnetize other art enterprises and so provide an antidote to the "progress" afflicting so many parts of this city.
The same goes for the gallery's current show, in that it is the opposite of the Connecticut artist "assembly lines" to be found elsewhere.
Titled "10 for 10," meaning 10 artists for 10 weeks, the exhibit looks chosen for itself instead of gathered willy-nilly for the greater glory of the state (not all the contributors are from Connecticut).
Considering the tidal wave of provincialism at hand, this is no small achievement, and it is shared by only a few other private galleries, among them the Paris-New York-Kent and the P.M.W.


The Oft-Maligned Northern Pike Is Quite a Catch
For the third year in a row, my sons and I ventured into the wilderness lakes north of this town with our fly rods and with hearts free of suspicion that anything would come between us and our beloved smallmouth bass.
Enter the northern pike, the barracuda of the inland seas, a fish sometimes maligned for the boniness of its flesh and its tendency to swim sluggishly toward the boat when hooked on conventional tackle.


When Is a Boarding Pass Not a Boarding Pass?
AT least 50 percent of the ticketed passengers who go to the airport are already carrying boarding passes specifying seat numbers, according to the estimates of the Air Transport Association.
These passes have been issued by travel agents, by the airlines themselves to advance purchasers or by corporations with travel departments that can print tickets.
People who travel for business demand advance boarding passes in order to go to the airport just before takeoff and simply walk aboard without standing in any line but the one at the gate.
Usually, that is.


Miss Finneran to Wed R. D. Calder Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard B. Finneran of Greenwich, Conn., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter, Laurie Wilson Finneran, and Richard Darnell Calder Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Calder of Vienna, Va.
Miss Finneran, 26 years old, is a law clerk for Judge Clarence Thomas, the Supreme Court nominee, who is a Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.
She graduated from Yale University, as did her fiance, and the University of Chicago Law School.
Her father is a managing director of the Trust Company of the West, an investment concern in Los Angeles, and the president of its affiliate there, the TCW Americas Development Association.
Her mother, Judith W. Finneran, is the director of corporate relocation for Preferred Properties Inc., a real-estate agency in Greenwich.


Suppose You Had 100 Doors With Goats Behind 99 of Them
To the Editor:
As I recall from my school days, when you are dealing with tricky, confusing probabilities, it is useful to consider the chances of losing, rather than the chances of winning, thus:


Ms. Kenney Wed To Michael Vogel
Catherine Taft Kenney, a daughter of Joan Tilton Kenney of Canton, Conn., and John R. Kenney of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Scott Vogel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard S. Vogel of New York.
The Revs.
John Capen, a Methodist minister, and Gilbert Greggs, a Lutheran minister, and Rabbi Nathaniel Schwartz performed the ceremony at the Ethel Walker School in Simsbury, Conn.
Ms.
Kenney, who is 24 years old and is keeping her name, is a writer in New York.
She graduated from Yale University.
She was a member in 1988 and 1989 of the New Haven Board of Aldermen.
Her father, who is retired, was a lawyer for the Travelers Corporation of Hartford.


NOWHERE TO GO
Miller's article brought sadness as well as anger to this reader.
Some 21 Arab countries, with billions of dollars in oil money, cannot find a place for their Palestinian brothers.


In New York, Balkan Rivalries Are Fought on a Soccer Field
Before they take to the soccer field, the members of New York Croatia stand at attention.
"For the homeland!" the captain shouts.
"Ready! Ready! Ready!" the team members respond.
Their opponents in brash red and black uniforms at Evander Childs High School in the Bronx are the New York Albanians.
But old Balkan enmities are not behind the fervor with which each team approaches the game,


Reading the Great Tapestry
ONE of medieval Europe's most famous and flamboyant monuments, situated in a lovely Norman cathedral town, is the Bayeux tapestry, which, in fact, is not a tapestry and not woven.
It is a band of linen, about 230 feet long, embroidered in worsteds of eight colors and showing some 70 scenes representing the assault on Britain at the Battle of Hastings in which the Norman ruler, William the Conqueror, destroyed the forces of England's King, Harold.
The root of any quarrel between Duke William and King Harold seems to lie in an oath of allegiance said to have been taken by Harold to William as assurance that Harold would support the Frenchman's claim to the English throne when it fell vacant.
There is, however, little convincing evidence of such an assurance.
A written account of the death of Harold's father, Edward the Confessor, in January 1066 makes no mention of his designated successor.
It is therefore not really known if Edward preferred William or Harold to take over from him.
And a comet appeared in the sky at that moment that was believed to forecast disaster.
The Norman duke, supported by his half-brother, Bishop Odo of Bayeux, obviously prepared to claim the succession.
And a fleet of at least 100 vessels was built to ferry soldiery and horses across the channel.


Miami Tourists Are Targets Of Car Robbery
Tourists to Miami have become a target for criminals who smash the windows of rental cars stopped at traffic lights and grab pocketbooks and bags.
" 'Smash and grab' robbery is the new fad with robbers," said Sgt.
David Rivero, spokesman for the Miami Police Department.
He said that there had been about 30 such robberies a month in the last year.
"Rather than holding you up or purse snatching, now they attack you in your car."
Robbers prey on out-of-towners, Sgt.
Rivero said, because they usually carry a lot of cash and are much less likely to return to Miami to testify if the robber is caught.
The robbers look for cars, particularly with a lone woman at the wheel in an isolated area after dark, with out-of-town license plates or tags beginning with the letter Y, signifying a rental car.
If the window is open, Sgt.
Rivero said, they will grab her pocketbook or, if the window is closed, they will smash it with a rock.


Eight Wounded in Shooting At a Social Club in Brooklyn
Eight people attending a party in an illegal social club in Brooklyn were shot early yesterday by several gunmen who randomly fired into the crowd, the police said.
The victims were hit in the calves, thighs, ankles and hands, said Sgt.
Norris L. Hollomon, a police spokesman.
None of the injuries was life threatening, he said.


Robert Kazmayer, Business Analyst, 82
Robert Kazmayer, a former minister who became a business analyst and publisher, died at his home in Mariposa, Calif., on Aug. 4.
He was 82 years old and died of lung cancer, his son, Robert, said.


Come the Revolutions: Cuba Is Bowling Again
Once it was a sport for the elite of Cuba: glittering indoor palaces where the clatter of the ball hitting the 10 pins mixed with the tinkle of the rum hitting the ice cubes.
Come the revolution, the bowling apparatus nearly disappeared from the island, no doubt replaced by agencies that served the people better.


Miss Davis Wed To M. L. Noyer Jr.
Pamela Jean Davis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Davis, of Bedford, N.Y., was married last evening to M. Lawrence Noyer Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Noyer of Westhampton Beach, L.I.
The Rev.
William Foley, assisted by the Rev.
Peter Colapietro, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Bedford.
The couple are assistant United States attorneys in the Eastern District of New York.
Miss Davis, who will keep her name, is also an actress.
She appeared last fall in the Off-Off Broadway production of Friedrich Schiller's "Don Carlos." She graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from Temple University.


Lipsyte Strikes a Raw Nerve; Unworthy Heroes
To the Sports Editor:
Let's get to the nitty gritty of everything and say we have too much emphasis on sports in America.
If you are antisports, you are considered to be non-American.
Let's get way from this sportsmania where we make heroes of the lowest common denominator and pay these people astronomical salaries.
A Tyson makes millions while a nuclear physicist makes $100,000 a year.
MANNY MILLER Dix Hills, L.I.


Style Makers; Vicky Tiel -- Bridal-Dress Designer
Ever since Vicky Tiel started her career in Paris as a teen-ager in the 1960's, she has been known for designing sexy evening dresses with revealing decolletage.
Then about a year ago she realized that many women were ordering her dresses not for discoing but for waltzing down the aisle.
Always an astute businesswoman, Ms.
Tiel decided to design a line of wedding dresses.
"Buyers would pick a dress and have it made in white," she said on a recent trip to New York.
"I took the cue."


From the Civil War's Hit Parade
No one expects a pop song to survive a century.
As the hit parade marches on, most old songs are tossed away or simply forgotten; anything that's recognized just a few years later is prized as a golden oldie.
Yet "The Songs of the Civil War," a program that will be broadcast Saturday at 9 P.M. on Channel 13, is a reminder of just how many songs from the 1860's most Americans know in their bones -- not just "Dixie" and "The Battle Hymn of the Republic," but "The Yellow Rose of Texas," "Aura Lee," "Follow the Drinking Gourd" and even the bugle call "Taps," which was commissioned as an elegy for Civil War casualties.
By matching performers -- among them Judy Collins, Waylon Jennings, Ronnie Gilbert (of the Weavers), Sweet Honey in the Rock and Kate and Anna McGarrigle -- to venerable songs, "Songs of the Civil War" not only rediscovers material that has barely been heard in 130 years, but reclaims music so familiar that it's taken for granted, hummed but not noticed.
It returns the songs to their original context, the life-and-death struggle that the documentary film maker Ken Burns calls "the defining event for our country." Mr.
Burns produced the widely praised series "The Civil War" and co-produced "Songs" with the film maker Jim Brown.
Both programs were underwritten by General Motors. (Columbia Records is releasing a soundtrack album this week.)


Hebrides on Hudson


At a Seaside Gallery, It's 'La Boheme' With a Happy Ending
RON TERNER knew the scene: the icy reception at the art gallery door, the noncommittal response from a brusque employee, the portfolios returned without comment.
Because of his own brush with rejection as a young photographer he decided never to run his own gallery that way.
Now 42 years old, the man who has owned the Focal Point Gallery for 18 years here has retained a genuine friendliness that draws artists from miles around.
The gallery specializes in photography, and Mr.
Terner promises a sharing of ideas, if not an exhibition, to any artist who wants to bring in work.


Technology; Making Designer Chips On a Desktop Setup
Computer chip manufacturing may conjure up visions of huge sterilized factories with workers toiling in white "bunny suits." But a growing number of engineers in the United States are now making integrated circuits on their own desks.
The do-it-yourself chips are known as field programmable logic devices, and they are proving to be important time savers for engineers designing computers, telephone switches, medical devices and other electronic equipment.
Instead of waiting for a chip to come back from a factory, which can take weeks, engineers can produce chips in their offices or laboratories in a few minutes and try them out.
If the chips don't work, the design can quickly be changed.


The Schwarzkopf Filet
AFTER GEN.
H.
NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF stormed home in April, he began doing public appearances at a rate that made people worry.
Was the hero of Iraq barreling down the overexposure trail blazed by Mary Lou Retton?
Would he sell out to the highest bidders and give his gruff nod of approval to Jell-O Pudding Pops and Sneaker Tamers?
Commentators grumbled that it was wrong for a fighting man of historic stature to be seen posing with Mickey Mouse (at Tampa's Red, White and Blue Troop celebration) or lining up with the Ziegfeld girls from Broadway's "Will Rogers Follies" (at New York's Operation Welcome Home parade).
"Doonesbury" pictured him on "The Tonight Show," itemizing a schlocky schedule that included appearances on "Hollywood Squares" and "the Miss Hooters Contest in Tampa."
But there's a crucial difference between palling around with Mickey -- for free, and to the squealing delight of the troops and their kids -- and signing up to tape an "I'm Going to Disney World!" television advertisement.
Do the first and you're a good guy.
Do the second and you may be reviled as a greedhead.
Schwarzkopf's handlers (his literary agent, Marvin Josephson, and his speaking agent, Bernie Swain, a partner in the Washington Speakers Bureau) know that the nation would shrink back in horror if Schwarzkopf comes off as an opportunist.
Which may be why, after Aug. 31, when the general retires from active duty, we'll be getting a quieter, less visible Schwarzkopf, content to stick, for the time being, with the lucrative-yet-classy life of big-ticket writing and speaking.


Flashy New Swimwear for Feet as Well as Bodies
In recent summers, men have headed to the beach clad in snug bikini trunks, feet bare or shod in loose-fitting flip-flops.
But in the summer of 1991, snug trunks are outnumbered by loose-fitting briefs.
And it's the new beach shoes of choice that are worn snug.
Nike's Aqua Gear collection of coordinated swimwear and water sport shoes has kept fashion and sales pace with the increased popularity of sports like wind surfing and wave running (the latter refers to riding a water vehicle that looks like a snowmobile).
These sports call for steady footing and, of course, the pulled-together bearing that matching shorts and shoes imply.


Metallica's Speed Metal, Without the Speed
Coming from nearly any other multimillion-selling rock band, the songs on "Metallica" (Elektra 61113; all three formats) would sound harsh, bleak, pitiless.
The rhythm section bludgeons the beat; guitar riffs bulldoze forward implacably as James Hetfield howls and rasps.
His lyrics agonize over death, war, lycanthropy and lost religion.
For most rock or pop bands, the style and message would be unimaginably desolate.
But Metallica is going to have to convince its fans that, on its fifth full-length album, it hasn't sold out.
Metallica has been the standard-bearer for speed metal, a style born in the 1980's out of 1970's punk rock, hard rock and heavy metal.
Speed metal ignored the party-hearty fantasies of most heavy metal to take up more apocalyptic subjects like coercion and insanity; not for nothing is Metallica's publishing company called Creeping Death Music.
Yet there was an audience hungry to hear grim tidings.
Metallica's first albums sold hundreds of thousands of copies with hardly any radio exposure.
Its double album, ". . . And Justice for All," released in '88, sold more than two million copies, boosted by all-metal radio stations, the band's first more-or-less ballad and a video of "One" -- a song about a blind quadriplegic soldier wishing for death.


Players at Top of Order Take Dodgers and Braves to Top of Division
The Los Angeles Dodgers and the Atlanta Braves acquired new leadoff hitters this season, and they are running one-two in the National League West.
Ever since the San Francisco Giants installed a new player in their leadoff spot a month ago, they have made a dramatic move in the same division.
The Mets, on the other hand, have a new leadoff hitter this year, reputedly one of the best, and they are struggling to stay in the National League East race.
The Pittsburgh Pirates, meanwhile, staff the No. 1 spot in their batting order in an unorthodox way, and they have led their division nearly all season.


John G. Shmerler Married To Laura L. Rosenburgh
Laura Lewis Rosenburgh, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carleton F. Rosenburgh of McLean, Va., was married yesterday to John Gregg Shmerler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Shmerler of Cherry Hill, N.J.
The Rev.
John Morris, an Episcopal minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Westwood Country Club in Vienna, Va.
The couple, both 25 years old, graduated from Bucknell University, Mrs.
Shmerler is a third-year law student at Villanova University.
Her husband is a loan officer at the Continental Bank in Philadelphia.


Exultant Soprano


Suppose You Had 100 Doors With Goats Behind 99 of Them
To the Editor:
Your front-page article July 21 on the Monty Hall puzzle controversy neglects to mention one of the behind-the-door options: to prefer the goat to the auto.
The goat is a delightful animal, although parking might be a problem.
LORE SEGAL  New York, July 22, 1991


Coney I. Man Is Killed In Elevator Shaft Fall
A Coney Island man fell to his death in an apartment building elevator shaft yesterday when he he leaned against the elevator doors on the 15th floor and they suddenly gave way, the police said.
The police in Brooklyn identified the victim as Chandler Johnson, 24 years old, of 3222 Bayview Avenue.


Kelsey Graham 3d Weds Amy Maass
Amy Bishop Maass, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Maass of Chester, Vt., was married there yesterday to Kelsey DuBois Graham 3d, a son of Mr.
Graham Jr. of South Nyack, N.Y., and the late Florence Smith Graham.
The Rev.
Andrew Osmun performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Graham, 24 years old, and her husband, 26, graduated from Hartwick College.
She received a master's degree in elementary education from Leslie College and is to begin teaching at the Chapin School in New York in September.
Her father, who is retired, owned the Chester Hardware store.
Her mother, Wain Maass, is an elementary-school teacher at the Chester-Andover Elementary School.


Suspects Sought in Shootings of 3 During Crime Spree in Brooklyn
New York City detectives are looking for two suspects who they believe carried out a 14-hour robbery spree in Brooklyn in which they shot three people, killing two of them and wounding the third, a Methodist minister.
One of the slain victims was a retired New York police sergeant on his way to work; the other was a Brooklyn resident shot a few doors from his home.
The minister who survived was kidnapped from a street in the Park Slope section, taken at gunpoint in his car to the East New York section and shot in the face.


Chess
Walter Browne wins the Petrosian way: don't force, maneuver, keep your opponent guessing.
Tigran Petrosian was most outspoken in criticizing forcing moves.
The late Soviet world champion believed that, except when they win outright, they have the serious flaw of alerting the opponent to the problem of the position at hand.
And thus, as he saw it, forcing moves generally force the opponent to find the right responses.


POSTINGS: Reversal of Fortune; Appeal Ruling: Footing Faked
When Justice Leonard Cohen ruled in State Supreme Court in Manhattan in March 1990 that the city had unfairly withheld a tax abatement from the building at 50 Lexington Avenue, it looked like its developer and owners of co-op apartments there would be sharing nearly $1.4 million in tax rebates ordered by the court.
Gramercy North Associates, the project's development entity and sponsor of the co-op, had sued the city claiming that the requirements for the city's 421a tax abatement program were met because a foundation footing had been poured at least one month before a Nov. 29, 1985, deadline when the tax abatement program ended.


Can the Fed Keep the Cracks From Growing?
Just when everyone knew the economy was recovering, cracks are being noticed again.
The cracks are in the mountain of credit that was built up in the past decade, and it is fair to say that their existence is not news.
They spooked the markets last fall, but after that they were not so much papered over as dismissed as irrelevant.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Freehold 244,000
16 Palace Place  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 2-year-old contemporary; 2-car garage, fireplace, patio, den; taxes $5,235.
Howell 110,000
38 Salem Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 24-year-old split level; family room, w/w carpeting, deck, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $2,500.
Jackson 110,000
Box 302 Route 528  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 33-year-old ranch; 1-acre, porch, eat-in-kitchen, fenced yard; taxes $2,726.
Livingston 415,000
8 Rosedale Terrace  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 38-year-old split level; fireplace, c/a, den, pool, patio; taxes $6,875.
Short Hills 600,000
36 Farbrook Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 2-half bath, 35-year-old ranch; 3-car garage, family room, 2 fireplaces, c/a; taxes $7,554.
South Orange 290,000
130 Blanchard Road  3-bedroom, 3.5-bath, 32-year-old ranch; c/a, 2-car garage, den, fireplace; taxes $8,695.
OTHER AREAS Katonah, N.Y. 447,800
65 Pine Hill Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, family room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 2.5 acres; taxes $10,102.
Portland, Conn. 117,000
31 Middlesex Avenue Extension  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old ranch; 1-car attached garage, unfinished basement; taxes $1,368.
Glen Cove, L.I. 180,000
20 Southridge Drive  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace; taxes $2,800.


Corrections
Because of a typographical error, a report on Aug. 4 about the value of the American dollar in Europe misstated the cost of a half-pint glass of lager at the Blackfriar pub in London.
It is $1.50, not $150.


Troops in Madagascar Kill 10 Demonstrators
At least 10 people were killed and several hundred wounded today when troops opened fire on thousands of demonstrators marching on Madagascar's presidential palace, hospital officials said.
Witnesses said helicopter gunships and the elite guard of President Didier Ratsiraka opened fire after the protesters, demonstrating for political reform, pushed through security barriers as they neared the palace on the eight-mile route from the capital.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
JAMES ABBOTT McNEILL WHISTLER  A Life.
By G. .H.
Fleming.
Thomas Dunne/St.
Martin's, $29.95.


Offshore Banking's Umbrella Shields More Than B.C.C.I.
SECRET accounts, phony deposits, hidden losses, illicit payments, and a list of shady customers from the former Panamanian strongman Manuel Noriega to the terrorist Abu Nidal.
The litany of alleged transgressions of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International keeps mounting.
And over and over, the trail of deceit in what investigators call the largest bank fraud in history leads to these Caribbean isles of palm-fringed beaches and unfettered banking.
In London on Aug. 2, the confidential auditors' report that prompted the seizure of the banks' assets in Britain and other countries last month was released to creditors, who then passed it to the press.
The charges and documents add up to a couple of hundred pages that sketch out B.C.C.I.'s misdeeds in some detail.
For a bank that once operated in 69 countries and claimed $20 billion in assets, its operations in the Cayman Islands are mentioned with disturbing regularity.


Corrections
An article on July 28 about City Council races in New York omitted one candidate for the Democratic nomination in the 44th District in Brooklyn.
She is Sandy Abby Aboulafia.


Bowe Batters Foe, Critics
The first time Riddick Bowe sent his fellow heavyweight Bruce Seldon crashing to the canvas here at the Convention Center on Friday night, Seldon lay prone until the count reached 8.
Then he leaped to his feet like an acrobat.
It was the most artistic move Seldon executed all night, and his last trick before Bowe put a more meaningful dent in his consciousness in the first round of their bout, scheduled for 10 rounds.


Corrections
A report on July 28 about the marriage of Stephanie M. Cogan to Dr.
John G. Golfinos referred incorrectly to the bridegroom's father.
He is Dr.
Argyrios Golfinos.


For Some Blacks, Social Ills Seem to Follow White Plans
PROFESSOR Leonard Jeffries Jr. of City College in New York argues that white conspirators have plotted to destroy black America, and recently he named names: "people called Greenberg and Weisberg and Trigliani." In a July 20 speech at a state-funded cultural festival, he called them part of a "conspiracy, planned and plotted and programmed out of Hollywood" for the "destruction of black people."
The racially charged nature of Dr.
Jeffries's remarks stood out, but they came at a time when polling data show that a substantial number of blacks are wondering about conspiracies.
As black America gropes for a way to understand the plagues of AIDS, crack, violence and poverty, many black broadcasts and publications have been asking whether white conspirators are plotting blacks' destruction.
Such talk, while not new, is being heard now in many venues, from late-night talk shows on black radio to John Singleton's celebrated first film, "Boyz 'N the Hood."


Sunday Landing Is Planned for Space Shuttle
Space agency officials are planning for a landing of the space shuttle Atlantis in Florida on Sunday despite a failed cooling device and a reluctance among some NASA officials to use Kennedy Space Center as a main touchdown site.
The flight director, Jeff Bantle, said today that the final decision on where to send the five astronauts would depend on the weather.
Thunderstorms are approaching Florida from the north, but the forecast is favorable for the morning landing that has been scheduled at Kennedy, as well as at the California backup site, Edwards Air Force Base.
A Florida touchdown is scheduled for 8:24 A.M. eastern time.


Versailles Treaty Takes the Alabama
Meadow Star, queen of the fillies last year, was scratched from the prestigious Alabama Stakes today because of a muddy track and a lengthy race.
In her absence, Versailles Treaty scored by 4 1/2 lengths over Til Forbid and rolled to her third straight victory.
The tone of the race was scrambled when Meadow Star was withdrawn this morning after 24 hours of rain soaked the track at Saratoga Race Course.
The sun finally broke through this afternoon, but the surface was still muddy.
And the distance of a mile and a quarter, which already seemed too punishing for the small filly, suddenly seemed a lot longer and even more demanding.


Corrections
A picture caption on July 14 about Cape Cod misidentified a beach.
It is Nauset Light Beach, in Eastham, not Nauset Beach, in Orleans.


CORRECTIONS
Because of an editing error, a report in the "All About" column last Sunday, about currency options, misstated the median corporate spending on them.
What rose to $150 million last year from $90 million the year before was the volume of median corporate trading; actual spending to buy these rights for future purchases of currency would amount to a small fraction of the face value of the contracts.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Forget Upsets Becker


Consumer Groups Warn Tires May Explode
Two private safety groups contend that millions of tires used on light trucks may explode if mounted on the wrong-size wheels, and they accuse the tire industry of failing to eliminate a potentially fatal risk.
Firestone, which was singled out by the groups, says no problems have occurred except when people mounting tires disregard "long-standing and well-known tire industry safety rules."


Rare Rain Delay at Skydome Doesn't Distract the Red Sox
Greg Harris pitched a four-hitter and Jack Clark and Tony Pena each drove in three runs today, leading the Boston Red Sox over the Toronto Blue Jays, 7-1.
The American League East-leading Blue Jays have lost three in a row, and 13 of the last 20.
Boston has beaten Toronto in four of five games in the last week.


Hide and Seek


Topics of The Times; Botanical Bonus
To weed lovers, who are the most tolerant of Nature's admirers and find good in almost everything she does, that hot dry spell in July has brought a botanical bonus -- not just for themselves but for nearsighted hawks and people threatened by evil spells.
In lawns too burnt up to be cut, yellow-flowered hawkweeds have sprung up.
In spots so dried out that other plants give up, furry-leaved mullein abounds.
The folklore of weeds has given each plant some special virtues.


Political Talk
Neutral but Leaning
At the core of the struggle over redistricting of seats for the New York City Council has been minority politicians' demands that they be better represented on the expanded Council, whose primary is on Sept. 12.


Constructing a Wood Deck
BUILDING a raised wood deck is generally a major project.
But building small modular deck units, which are hardly more than decorative platforms, and arranging them to form a larger structure that rests on the ground or on any other hard, level surface is within the range of nearly anyone owning an electric drill and portable circular saw.
The units can be constructed individually and used like mosaic tiles or building blocks to create single or multilevel decks that can be arranged as desired.


Correction
The Streescapes column last Sunday about Washington Terrace misidentified Martin Luskin's law firm.
It is Tenzer, Greenblatt, Fallon &amp; Kaplan.


Constructing a Wood Deck
BUILDING a raised wood deck is generally a major project.
But building small modular deck units, which are hardly more than decorative platforms, and arranging them to form a larger structure that rests on the ground or on any other hard, level surface is within the range of nearly anyone owning an electric drill and portable circular saw.
The units can be constructed individually and used like mosaic tiles or building blocks to create single or multilevel decks that can be arranged as desired.


Sculpture With Canaries
AT the Snug Harbor Cultural Center, on Staten Island, there are spears strapped to the columns of one portico, stony extraterrestrials parked on the steps of another and canaries incarcerated in the main gatehouse.
The Snug Harbor Sculpture Festival has struck again.
As usual, the sculptors purport to address the site, and some even mention it in their statements.
Nevertheless, there are few works that complement or enhance it, the bird installation least of all.
The last time the reviewer saw wildlife pressed into service for art was when the Bergen Museum used canaries as an exhibition accessory a year or two ago.


The Unpredictable Appeal of Exotic Metals
Exotic metals took a beating last week, with the most active futures contract for platinum falling on Thursday to $350.90, its lowest price in five years, while rhodium, its sister element, traded far below last summer's stratospheric levels.
Though some theorists attribute the slump to selling by the Soviet Union or Japanese investors, the most popular explanation involves changes in automotive technology.
The theory goes that platinum and rhodium, key elements in catalytic converters, will be less in demand because the auto industry is developing palladium-based converters.


Triangle Where Business, Taxes and Neighborhood Intersect
OLD CROMPOND ROAD winds downhill from Zino's Nursery at Route 202, past one modern house and several other older residences, some meadows and patches of trees.
It could be a country road in the Catskills.
But to some town officials here, this little neighborhood looks more like a Platinum Half-Mile.


October Wedding For Ms. Gardner
The engagement of Elisabeth Zane Gardner, a law student at New York University, to Jeffrey Eric Ostrow, a New York lawyer, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Allan D. Gardner of Chappaqua, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gardner, 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is an executive vice president of Della Femina McNamee, the advertising agency, in New York.
Her mother, Janet Gardner, is a freelance writer and editor.


'THEY'VE GOTTA HAVE US'
I appreciated the way Bates let the black film makers featured in her article tell their own story.
I appreciated the effort to historically contextualize the subject of black film making.
I was pleased to learn of black women directors other than Debbie Allen.
But I found the exclusion of Robert Townsend (who made "Hollywood Shuffle" and this year's "The Five Heartbeats") a gross oversight.
Wendell Harris ("Chameleon Street") and Michael Schultz ("Livin' Large") also merit discussion.
TONY MOOR
Jersey City, N.J.


Amy Friedman Weds Michael Schmidt
Amy Lisa Friedman, the daughter of Kathleen Teltsch of New York and Victor Friedman of Wickford, R.I., was married yesterday in Cambridge, Mass., to Dr.
Michael Stephan Schmidt, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Wolfgang Schmidt of Boulder, Colo.
Rona Turano, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the Hooper Lee Nichols house.
The bride, 29 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a clinical social worker at the Tri-City Mental Health and Retardation Center in Everett, Mass.
A graduate of Haverford College, she received a master's degree in social work from Simmons College.
Her father is a food-marketing consultant in Wickford, R.I.
Her mother is a reporter for The New York Times.


Lipsyte Strikes a Raw Nerve; Two Sides to Story
To the Sports Editor:
As much as I liked Robert Lipsyte's diatribe against sports "powerboys," he failed to mention the role of certain women in his otherwise careful analysis.
Men like Mike Tyson, Muhammad Ali and John Kennedy are rightfully cited for their sexual abuse of the opposite sex.
But men in positions of power are seen by millions of adoring women as little more than what the singer Madonna calls "boy toys." It should come as no surprise that many women are easily seduced by fame.
Just ask any male rock star (if you can fight your way through the readily available female fans).
Remember: There are two sides to every story.
ROBERT BENT Newport, R.I.


Miss Coburn Wed to C. M. Schroeder
Alexandra Hastings Coburn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence H. Coburn of Wellesley, Mass., was married yesterday at the First Parish in Weston, Mass., to Christopher Matthew Schroeder, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund R. Schroeder of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The Revs.
Judith L. Hoehler and Harry H. Hoehler, Unitarian ministers, officiated, assisted by Msgr.
Francis S. Rossiter.
The bride graduated from Harvard University and is to begin studies for an M.B.A. at the University of Virginia in the fall.
She was until recently a research assistant at Salomon Brothers in New York.
Her father is a vice president and director of Standish, Ayer &amp; Wood, an investment company in Boston.
The bridegroom graduated from Harvard and is studying for an M.B.A. there.
He was an assistant to the counselor at the State Department in 1989 and 1990.
His mother, Elaine Schroeder, is a lawyer in Scarsdale.
His father is a partner in the New York law firm of Lord Day &amp; Lord, Barrett Smith.


'THEY'VE GOTTA HAVE US'
Movie studios are purchasing scripts by and about blacks, hiring black directors and producing their films, but they still haven't realized the importance of marketing to black audiences.
Karen Grigsby Bates's article ""They've Gotta Have Us' " (July 14) touched on this crucial subject.


Trying On the 60's
MY FRIEND'S 16-year-old daughter believes she was born too late.
If only she'd lived in the 60's, when Jim Morrison was alive and everyone wore awesome clothes and marijuana was practically legal.
Sitting at our kitchen table in a clean, crisp tie-dyed T-shirt and jeans she's frayed to perfection with scissors and a safety pin, she asks if we have, stored somewhere, any
real
clothes from the 60's -- some vintage fashion relics that one of us actually wore.
As it happens, we have
everything
in that reliquary we call our attic.
Obligingly, my husband goes upstairs and returns some time later with a denim jacket he beaded by hand and wore, circa 1967.
Our teen-age guest considers it with evident horror and distaste, as if what we are showing her is not just an outgrown coat, but the powder-burned, bloodstained shroud of some assassinated martyr.
"That's
gross
," she whispers. "I'm gagging. Take it away."


Tie-Dyed Fabrics in India
Shoppers looking for something old, easy to carry and needing no export papers to take home from India are discovering the antique embroidered and tie-dyed fabrics and costumes of the Rann of Cutch, an exotic corner of India's western state of Gujarat.
Desert communities in the area stretching from what is now the Pakistani province of Baluchistan to Gujarat and neighboring Rajasthan have always made particularly colorful and ornate clothing, shawls, pillow covers and bedspreads
Bhuj, the main town in the Rann of Cutch, remains a center of embroidery and tie-dyeing, with bright clothing and dopatta shawls hanging from shops that line the narrow, winding streets.
"Cutch was always known for its handicrafts and furniture," said A. A. Wazir, an art expert and museum consultant on old textiles, who sells some pieces from the large private collection he keeps in his home in Bhuj.
Represented in his collection are the embroideries of Muslim and Hindu communities that incorporated small mirrors in the work.
There are also many intricate tie-dyed designs in silk or cotton in the traditional Cutch colors of red, yellow, blue and green.
His collection also includes traditional caps and densely embroidered bodices or blouses and caps.


Kenyan Corruption Is Aired in Death Inquiry
A long judicial inquiry into the killing of a popular Foreign Minister last year has brought into the open allegations of corrupt practices by Kenya's second most powerful politician and an account of his stormy relationship with the slain official.
While the damaging testimony about Energy Minister Nicholas Biwott has come from a hardly impartial source -- a sister of the slain minister -- the fact that the charges have been allowed to be publicly aired and reported in Kenya's tighly controlled press suggests that President Daniel arap Moi is seeking to limit the political damage that Mr.
Biwott's behavior is causing to his Government.


Alliterative Options
To the Editor:
The longstanding success of the Mostly Mozart program each summer at Lincoln Center makes me wonder why other composers have not been similarly accorded their own nearly exclusive festivals, alliteratively titled.
Think of the possibilities: Basically Berlioz.
Largely Liszt.
Almost All-Albinoni.
Intrinsically Ives.
Chiefly Copland.
Predominantly Palestrina.
Fundamentally Faure.
Essentially Elgar.
Generally Gluck.
Roughly Rossini.
And -- since I suppose it's about time that the bicentennial boy's nemesis was given his due -- Substantially Salieri.
DAVID ENGLISH  Somerville, Mass.


Verdun and Zurich
To the Editor: I found your article on Verdun (Travel, Feb. 17) particularly fascinating, but I must inform you that the author, Alistair Horne, took some poetic liberties as he described the area as one of the eeriest places in Europe: "the wind whistles and no birds sing."
It is eerie.
The wind does whistle.
But birds sing all over the place, including cuckoo birds.
I think Mr.
Horne was recalling Keats's "La Belle Dame Sans Merci" rather than listening at Verdun.
T.
C.
WARE Chattanooga, Tenn.
Mr.
Horne replies: Mr.
Ware is right that I was indeed thinking of Keats's "And no birds sing." When I first went to Verdun, 30 years ago, it was on the Mort Homme, west of the Meuse, that I had this eerie experience.
Three years ago my wife and a young British major simultaneously remarked on the absence of birds near Douaumont, quite unprompted by me.


Q and A
Domestic Travel Insurance  Q. We are planning a motor trip to the West, which involves no advance or nonrefundable payments, so we do not need trip cancellation insurance.
However, we would like insurance that would cover medical evacuation and other serious needs. -- Beatrice Riback, White Plains


Edwards Given Release And Sets Sights on Italy
The Detroit Pistons have agreed to release 14-year N.B.A. veteran JAMES EDWARDS from the last year of his contract, a Michigan newspaper reported.
Last week Edwards signed a conditional three-year, $5-million contract with Knorr Bologna of the Italian League, according to The Oakland Press of Pontiac.
Edwards, 35 years old, must be released and then clear N.B.A. waivers for the Italian contract to become binding.
Edwards's Italian contract would pay him $1.5 million this season, $1.7 million in 1992-93 and $1.5 million in a 1993-94 option year, The Press said.
He would also receive a $250,000 signing bonus, a new car, use of a rent-free villa and a $500-per-victory bonus.


A la Carte: Barbecue Surprise
IT may be hard to believe, but finger-lickin' country vittles are being devoured right in the middle of the trendy East End.
Michael Elwood Gochennour and his Elwood and Ettie's Dixie Smoked Barbecue, in their second season on Main Street in Amagansett, are a wonderful incongruity.
Elwood and Ettie's is behind the Stephen Talkhouse, which is better known for the blues than for barbecue.
Follow the cutout pigs on the fence and walk under the trellis entrance on the west side of Stephen's.


Squeezing Fat, Calories, Guilt And More Profits Out of Junk Food
YEARS ago, when Jacqueline Kennedy was asked how she stayed so slim, she replied that she regularly ate luscious French food, but took just tiny portions.
She would rather eat a minuscule amount of something really good, she said, than heap her plate with less tasty foods.
The problem for most people, however, is that one taste of something really good is fatal.
It leads inevitably to the next taste, then the next, then the next.
Other than abstinence, the best hope seems to lie with the food engineers, who are promising to emerge from their laboratories with more and more lower-fat, low-fat and maybe even no-fat foods.


Real Stars Don't Kiss Babies
A HOLLYWOOD LIFE
By David Freeman. 332 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $19.95.


'THEY'VE GOTTA HAVE US'
Black film makers tend to blame poor ticket sales on poor marketing.
But the popularity of people like Oprah Winfrey, Eddie Murphy, Ray Charles, Bill Cosby and Doc Gooden is not based on marketing to a black community.
And thousands of black gang members, the segment of the black population that is hardest to reach, knew when "Boyz N the Hood" was opening and what it was about.
There seems to be more than marketing at work here.
EDWARD HANDMAN
Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.


How the Baby Was Born
To the Editor:
The birth of the Mostly Mozart Festival was anything but a committee decision "to develop a scheme to keep Avery Fisher (then Philharmonic Hall) open in July and August," as William W. Lockwood Jr. recently wrote  [ "The Birth of Mostly Mozart, as One Founder Remembers It," July 7 ] .
It was, in fact, a decision made by William Schuman, then president of Lincoln Center, to create summertime employment opportunities for New York's freelance musicians.


In Bayeux, 1066, 1944 and All That
ALMOST every town in Europe likes to play historical one-upmanship, but few can match Bayeux's association with two watershed events of the past millenium.
Not that Bayeux was actually central to either the Norman conquest of England in 1066 or the Allied landings on D-Day in 1944, but, well, that's the past.
Today this proud Normandy town claims a good share of both invasions and, in the process, it has given lovers of art and history two good reasons for making the trip there.
They are not the only reasons.
Tracing its roots to Gallo-Roman times, Bayeux boasts a three-towered cathedral consecrated in the 11th century, half-timbered buildings dating back to the 14th century and a fine tradition of lace-making.
It also offers modern French pleasures -- wonderful seafood plucked from the English Channel, just five miles away, cheeses -- such as Camembert, Pont-l'Eveque and Livarot -- from Normandy and, for a digestif, locally-made Calvados apple brandy.


CAMPUS LIFE: Seattle; Appointment Of C.I.A. Worker Stirs Opposition
Despite faculty and student opposition, the history department at Seattle University has hired a Central Intelligence Agency employee as a visiting assistant professor for the next two years.
Thomas Lauer, a researcher for the C.I.A., will begin his stint at the Jesuit university by teaching a course on Chinese Communism this fall.


Miss Green Weds Bradford Singer
Laura Anne Green, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David V. Green of Madison, N.J., was married yesterday to Bradford Schenk Singer, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ellis P. Singer of Edison, N.J.
The Rev.
Neil J. O'Connell, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Allan Lansberg performed the ceremony at the Highlawn Pavilion in West Orange, N.J.
Mrs.
Singer, 27 years old, is a public-school reading specialist in Medfield, Mass.
She graduated from St.
Bonaventure University and received a master's degree in education from the University of Bridgeport.
Her father is an executive vice president at John Hancock Freedom Securities in New York.
Her mother, Susan Green, is a trustee of St.
Bonaventure.


Ms. Binks Is Wed To David S. Lang
Heather Julia Binks, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Malcom Binks of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to David Stewart Lang, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stewart Robert Lang of Darien.
The Rev.
Bartlett Gage performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated cum laude from Duke University and is studying for a master's degree in law and public health at Boston University.
Her father is the managing director of Merrill Lynch Asia, with headquarters in Tokyo.


Aleya Saad Is Married to Thomas McDonough
Aleya Ibrahim Saad, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ibrahim A. Saad of Wilmington, Del., was married there yesterday to Thomas Francis McDonough, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. McDonough of Bayonne, N.J.
The Rev.
C.
Edwin Lasbury, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the DuPont Country Club.
Mrs.
McDonough, 33 years old, is the special events coordinator at the New Museum of Contemporary Art in New York.
She graduated from Boston University and received a master's degree in fine arts from American University.
Mr.
McDonough, 21, graduated from Rutgers University and next month will enter a doctoral program in art history at New York University.


Linguistic Reflections
To the Editor:
In his review of "Turkish Reflections" by Mary Lee Settle (July 14), Roderick Conway Morris is only partly right when he says that the Greeks who lived in Constantinople were calling the city Istanbul "at least a hundred years before the  [ Turkish ]  conquest."


Shakespeare In the Foothills Of Oregon
ROME was quiet, save for the occasional roll of thunder, as Cinna stared wildly at the heavens.
"What a fearful night is this!" he exclaimed, and those of us transported to ancient Rome followed his gaze upward from our seats to the threatening rain clouds.
Indeed, it was a fearful night above the open-air theater.
Dusk had brought storm clouds as well as bats that flitted above our heads.
Sometimes I thought that the mechanical thunder was the real thing: a portent not of Julius Caesar's death but of the audience's drenching.
No doubt it would be a twist on audience involvement to be lashed by rain as Caesar complains, "Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight," but we were spared so realistic an experience.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
SAUGATUCK SAILING
After a hiatus of four years, the Great Race on the Saugatuck River is back in Westport.
After six years the popular summertime event was halted when insurance became a problem.
This year the local Rotary Club is sponsoring the race, fully insured, and up to 50 boats, ranging from slick store-bought canoes to homemade whatevers, will slosh their way from the Route 1 bridge to Longshore Inn on Long Island Sound and back.
The race starts at 2:30 P.M. on Saturday, but speed is not a factor in winning prizes.


Real Fire Fails to Stir 'Backdraft' Audience
Moviegoers who were watching the fire "Backdraft" thought shouts of "Fire!" were a joke until they realized there really was a fire in the theater's marquee.
About 100 people were watching the film at the Capital Theater Friday night when four people ran in and shouted that the theater was burning.


Lipsyte Strikes a Raw Nerve; Total Failure
To the Sports Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's article fails in every conceivable fashion.
Lipsyte reveals all the zeal, arrogance and preachiness of born-again people.
Born-again feminist, born-again gay rights activist, born-again preacher for politically correct standards of gender relations, born-again irresponsible underminer of the office of the United States Presidency are all fine.
Lipsyte is not alone, and entitled to preach and struggle in public to his heart's content, but don't call it sportswriting.


A Long-Running Battle On How to Divide The Medicaid Burden
NO sooner had Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and Mayor David N. Dinkins agreed to put aside their differences over what to call a city-state conference than they found themselves squabbling over its agenda.
The Mayor wanted to advocate, again, that the state assume more of the city's $2 billion in Medicaid costs.
The Governor, in turn, did not want the city's financial problems cast solely in that light -- and then laid at his doorstep.
The issue is hardly a new one.


Noted With Pleasure
Living in the Plural
Our modern appetite for privacy would have struck some of our ancestors as odd, even inexplicable, as we learn from Heinrich Fichtenau in "Living in the Tenth Century: Mentalities and Social Orders" (University of Chicago).


Warming Up to TV's Hot Seat
Early in July, Warren Littlefield took one of the few breaks he has allowed himself since he assumed the title of president of NBC Entertainment last summer.
He went on vacation with his family to Italy.
One morning he and his brother-in-law decided to drive into Florence.
Arriving at a toll booth, they saw a figure in jeans and black jacket leap out and thrust a gun into the window of the car in front of them.
Fearing a terrorist attack, Mr.
Littlefield threw his car into reverse.
The man with the gun turned and fired -- directly through Mr.
Littlefield's windshield.


Air China
To the Editor: I wish to warn readers of the pitfalls of traveling on domestic airlines within China.
My husband and I have been making trips to China since 1979.
Having found Air China unsatisfactory, we have opted for J.A.L. or United if a trip was to be direct from the United States to China, but within China there is no avoiding Air China itself.
Recently many regional airlines have been established, but they are all Air China in disguise.


Caroline Peet, a Law Student, Weds Andrew M. Kaplan, a Financial Trader
Caroline Cartier Peet, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Chester Peet Jr., of Shelter Island, L.I., was married yesterday to Andrew Mark Kaplan, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel R. Kaplan of Mamaroneck, N.Y.
Rabbi Burt A. Siegel and the Rev.
John Traynor, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Ram's Head Inn on Shelter Island.
Mrs.
Kaplan, 26 years old, graduated from Mount Holyoke College and is studying law at Northwestern University.
She is to enter New York University Law School in September as a visiting student.
Her father is a retired banker.
She is a direct descendant of Lion Gardiner, the first Lord of the Manor of Gardiner's Island and of Nathaniel Sylvester, first Proprietor of Shelter Island.


Lunching With the Muses in London
MUSEUMS have come a long way.
The sanctuaries once dedicated to the cultural embalmer's art have world wide become first didactic and now aggressive in their quest for the public's leisure and lucre.
To seduce as wide a spectrum of the relaxing public as possible, more elaborate services have been added steadily to supply ample entertainment for a "day out." Nearly 20 years ago no less a clairvoyant than Sir Roy Strong, then director of London's Victoria and Albert Museum, sized up the trend when he authorized the slogan, "Spend a day at the V &amp; A."
Any day's outing must include refreshment.
As the museum-going populace has broadened and its tastes have simultaneously grown ever more sophisticated, trustees have recognized the need to assuage footsore wanderers with food less institutional than triangular plastic mummy cases containing sandwiches as dry as Egypt's sands or the steam-table fare of school cafeterias.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Retail sales, percentage change
-0.2
0.2
Wednesday
Consumer prices, percentage change
0.2
0.3
Inventories, percentage change
-0.5
-0.3
Thursday
Housing starts, in millions
1.04
1.05
Friday
Merchandise trade, in billions
$-4.6
$-4.9
Production, percentage change
0.7
0.3
Capacity utilization, percent
79.3
79.6
Monday: World agriculture supply-and-demand estimates Tuesday: World agriculture production  Wednesday: Real earnings *
Two- and five-year Treasury note auction  Thursday: Bundesbank council meets  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


The Executive Computer; Nextstation's Future Hinges on Software
Many people in the computer industry are skeptical that Next Inc., the company started by Steven Jobs in 1985, will survive.
True, Next did almost $50 million of business in the last quarter, amid difficult times for the computer industry.
And the company seems to have found a niche selling to students and faculty members at universities and to a small but growing list of companies willing to take a risk on Mr.
Jobs's machine.
And true, the Nextstation can put up some dazzling numbers on the scoreboard, from its speed in test runs to its price.


November Bridal Set for Dru Carey
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Llewellyn Carey have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Dru Bronwyn Carey and Christopher Nelson Schumacher, a son of Joan McLaughlin Schumacher of Fox Chapel, Pa., and the late John Nelson Schumacher.
Ms.
Carey, 34 years old, is a public defender at the Legal Aid Society of New York City in the Bronx.
She graduated from Boston University and received a J.D. degree from Northeastern University.
Her father is an operations manager at Cahners Publishing Company in Newton, Mass.
Her mother, Elizabeth Stuart Carey, is a member of the board of Singing City in Philadelphia.


Going to See the Virgin Mary
ENCOUNTERING MARY
From La Salette to Medjugorje.
By Sandra L. Zimdars-Swartz.
Illustrated. 342 pp.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. $24.95.


INSIDE
Large Migration to Germany
Germany is faced with an increasing invasion of Eastern Europeans fleeing insecurity and poverty in their homelands.
Page 12.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SILENT DAY IN TANGIER  By Tahar ben Jelloun.
Translated by David Lobdell.
Helen and Kurt Wolff/ Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $17.95.


Life's Underside Often Gives You the Woollies
It was pure coincidence that the Woolly Mammoth Theater Company was already well into the run of "Fat Men in Skirts" when the grim details of the Jeffrey Dahmer serial killings in Milwaukee hit the press.
The play by Nicky Silver is a dark comedy about, among other topics, dismemberment and cannibalism, as practiced by a mother and son who also happen to be lovers.
But in the light of sordid events, what was distinguished by its unadulterated outrageousness, when it opened last June, has now acquired a ghoulish reality.
You can't plan for this, of course.
Nor would you want to.
Yet the ironic overlapping of absurdities -- those of life and those of literature -- is something that audiences have come to expect of the Woolly Mammoth, or the Woollies, as its members are affectionately called. (The unorthodox name, signifying nothing in particular, was chosen only for its attention-grabbing properties.)


Kimberly Ann Leue Weds Alan Neal Bick
Kimberly Ann Leue, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Roger N. Leue of Long Beach, Calif., was married there yesterday to Alan Neal Bick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan H. Bick of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Floyd McKeithen performed the ceremony at the California Heights United Methodist Church.
The bride, 28 years old, was until recently a clerk for Judge Patricia M. Wald of the Federal Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.
She is to join the law firm of Covington &amp; Burling in Washington in September.
She is a graduate of Stanford University, from which she also received a J.D.


The Jag Rag: Happy Birthday Sweet 16
So here we are, cruising through Saddle River, N.J.
The houses are lovely.
The day is lovely.
And the car is ditto, bright red and brand new.
A Jaguar convertible.
The other part of the "we" is David Boole, just over from England and currently grappling with his green hat as we whistle through the burbs at something over legal speed.


Miss Kimball to Wed E. F. Rosato Jr.
William M. Kimball and Dorothy F. Kimball, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter Susannah Wetherbee Kimball to Ernest Francis Rosato Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Rosato of Philadelphia.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Kimball, 29 years old, graduated from the College of William and Mary and received a law degree from Fordham University.
She is to join the New York office of Watson Farley &amp; Williams, a firm of London solicitors, in September.
She was a member of the New York Junior Assembly in 1979.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the Chase Manhattan Corporation's acquisition of two insolvent Connecticut banks misidentified one of them.
It was the Mechanics and Farmers Savings Bank of Bridgeport, Conn.
The Farmers and Mechanics Bank of Middletown, Conn., is solvent and was not acquired by Chase.


Political Talk
Neutral but Leaning
At the core of the struggle over redistricting of seats for the New York City Council has been minority politicians' demands that they be better represented on the expanded Council, whose primary is on Sept. 12.


Now Also on CD, Furtwangler as Pre-eminent Wagnerian
Until the 1970's, the pre-eminence of Wilhelm Furtwangler as a Wagner conductor stood -- quite securely -- on surprisingly limited recorded evidence.
Apart from the assorted (mostly) orchestral excerpts, there were only two complete operas: the 1952 London "Tristan" and the 1954 Vienna "Walkure," which was intended as the first installment of the first commercial "Ring" cycle.
But Furtwangler died on Nov. 30, 1954, less than eight weeks after completing the "Walkure."
In 1972, however, EMI, overcoming formidable logistical and technical obstacles, issued the "Ring" that Furtwangler recorded in Rome for Italian Radio in October and November 1953, one act at a time before an invited audience.
EMI followed in 1976 with a "Meistersinger" from the 1943 Bayreuth Festival, despite two roughly 10-minute gaps in the tape.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 11


Lower Skyline, Higher Aspirations
It isn't going to be built tomorrow -- nothing is in New York -- but when it finally does happen, Riverside South, the huge project planned for the 72-acre former Penn Central rail yards on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, now stands a real chance of being a cause for celebration rather than embarrassment.
The much-debated plan -- in its most complete and successful version yet -- has just been made public.
It calls for a lively, Central Park West-inspired skyline of slender, fancifully topped towers along a southern extension of Riverside Drive and Riverside Park.
It is a romantic vision of the New York we have always known, not a science-fiction vision of a New York that will never be.
And the world's tallest building, the centerpiece of previous plans, has disappeared altogether.


Political Talk
Neutral but Leaning
At the core of the struggle over redistricting of seats for the New York City Council has been minority politicians' demands that they be better represented on the expanded Council, whose primary is on Sept. 12.


CAMPUS LIFE: Penn; Plan to Raze Building Produces Legal Battle
Students, faculty members, administrators and alumni at the University of Pennsylvanian are debating the proposed demolition of one of the campus's oldest buildings, which the university hopes to replace with a science laboratory.
The conflict, which has centered on the architectural importance of Smith Hall, a 99-year-old building, has primarily involved faculty members and students in the history and sociology of science department, the current tenants, against administrators and engineering and chemistry professors who would work in the proposed laboratory.
Two years ago, the university completed its first new laboratory since 1973, and faculty members have called for more new research centers.
"Some of the most exciting new research developments in engineering and chemistry are really hitting limits without new space,"the university's provost, Michael Aiken, said in an interview last week.
"If you look at these departments, they really cannot carry out their research and educational missions without new space." Historic Section
Opponents of the project have charged that the university has ignored the historical and esthetic value of the ivy-covered building, saying that demolishing it would damage the campus.
"It's the only place on Penn's campus where you can look all around and see only 19th-century buildings," said Elizabeth Hunt, a doctoral candidate from Bloomington, Ind., who is studying the history and sociology of science.
"When they put a new building in, that will all be lost."
Ms.
Hunt and others interested in preserving Smith Hall point to its historic significance as one of the first teaching laboratories in the nation, having been built in 1891.
"It's the first fully realized laboratory of hygiene or public health," she said.
But administrators have repeatedly countered that the university should not be committed to keeping all of its historic buildings, if they come at the cost of more important new ones.
"It is important for the university community to understand that the mission of the university is education, and the intent is to be a premier institution of research and learning," said Arthur Gravina, the vice president for facilities management.
Several multimillion-dollar renovation projects on some of the West Philadelphia campus's other historic buildings have been completed recently or are under way.
University officials hope to make room for the Institute for Advanced Science and Technology.
Administrators are trying to sercure more than $10 million from the Department of Defense for the $75 million project.
Military Research
But those opposed to the building and its placement have found ammunition in the proposed financing as well, saying that the university should not perform potentially weapons-related military research.
"The universities and the D.O.D. are hand in glove," Ms.
Hunt said.
"I would hope that they build without D.O.D. money and build it with a humanitarian mission."
But administrators have said that such research could not be performed in the building, despite Defense Department financing, pointing to a research policy dating to the late 1960's against research that cannot be published.
"The university has a policy that prevents secret research," said Shelley Green the university's general counsel.
"Whatever money we get from those agencies meets the same requirements as other monies."
The university hopes to begin construction on the new laboratory by winter, but several hurdles remain.
Continuing Debate
After the City of Philadelphia defied the university's wishes by declaring the building a historic landmark last year, the university returned and asked permission to demolish the building.
The Philadelphia Historic Preservation Commission granted permission to raze the building but Smith Hall advocates, including an ad hoc group called Friends of Smith Walk, appealed the decision.
That appeal has not been resolved.
The Friends of Smith Walk was formed last spring in an effort to involve alumni and others with ties to the university to bring pressure on the administration.
It also raises money to pay for legal fees in trying to block the preservation commission's decision.
"It's kind of an action group to do something about the university's desire to destroy an historic building and a very charming walkway," said Robert E. Kohler, a professor of history and sociology of science and a member of the Friends of Smith Walk.
"We're hoping that if people get excited about Smith Hall, then the university will decide that it's more in their interest to compromise and build their project somewhere where it doesn't require the destruction of an historic building, walk and precinct," Mr.
Kohler said.
"What's appalling is that compromise has not been sought."


Perspectives: Waterfront Planning; A Residential Vision for a Site in Queens
IN the waning days of its institutional life last year, New York City's Board of Estimate adopted land-use changes that cleared the way for a series of major developments.
That burst of activity almost cleared the plate of predevelopment rezoning actions for major projects.
But not entirely.
On the East River in Queens, opposite the East 50's in Manhattan and the southern tip of Roosevelt Island, sit six acres now used by the East River Tennis Club.


1871 Law at Issue in Abortion Dispute
The Justice Department's decision to intervene in a Wichita, Kan., dispute over abortion rights has thrown new light on a legal battle that is most likely to be resolved only when the Supreme Court decides on the merits of a similar case.
At the heart of the dispute is a 120-year-old law that was meant to shield freed slaves from harassment by the Ku Klux Klan.
The law, the Civil Rights Act of 1871, makes it illegal for two or more people to conspire "for the purpose of depriving any person or class of persons" from exercising their Constitutional rights.
In recent years, clinic operators and women's rights groups have invoked the law to prevent anti-abortion protesters from blocking the entrances to abortion clinics.


Making a Difference; A Legal Lesson or Two
Back in the 1980's, when John B. McKinnon was running the Sara Lee Corporation's Hanes division, he ran some ticklish advertising copy past a company lawyer.
"He said simply, 'You can't do this,' and walked out of the room," Mr.
McKinnon recalled.
"No attempt to figure out what we could do, to try to be constructive."
That experience stuck with Mr.
McKinnon.
So did the number of times that corporate lawyers waffled when he asked for help in deciding whether to sue someone.
And the number of times he saw business executives run afoul of Washington's alphabet soup of agencies -- the S.E.C., the E.E.O.C., the F.T.C. -- out of ignorance of the legal ramifications of something they said or did.


Correction
An arcticle on July 7 about a suit challenging Proposition 13 in California misidentified a defendant and his office, and omitted the identity of a second defendant.
A recent letter from the plaintiff, Stephanie Nordlinger, notes that the defendants are Kenneth E. Hahn, the Los Angeles County Tax Assessor (not Supervisor), and the county itself.


Los Angeles Officers Strike Black Worker
A police employee was struck in a scuffle with two white Los Angeles policemen after the worker, a black woman, arrived at police headquarters without identification, a spokesman said today.
The woman, Jennifer Jones, 41 years old, was not wearing a uniform and showed no identification papers when she was challenged by two uniformed officers as she arrived for work on Friday, the spokesman, Lieut.
Fred Nixon, said.


Constructing a Wood Deck
BUILDING a raised wood deck is generally a major project.
But building small modular deck units, which are hardly more than decorative platforms, and arranging them to form a larger structure that rests on the ground or on any other hard, level surface is within the range of nearly anyone owning an electric drill and portable circular saw.
The units can be constructed individually and used like mosaic tiles or building blocks to create single or multilevel decks that can be arranged as desired.


Will Intramural Squabbling Derail Debt-Ridden Sony?
Last month, Ron Sommer, the executive responsible for the Sony Corporation's consumer electronics business in the United States, was irritated by a report in the morning paper.
His colleague Michael P. Schulhof, the head of the company's music and film businesses in New York, had told a reporter that Sony planned to make a digital tape recorder based on technology developed by rival Philips N.V. of the Netherlands.
Such product decisions are the province of the hardware group, which is based in Park Ridge, N.J.
And Mr.
Sommer said in a recent interview that Sony has still not decided on such an introduction.
"Maybe we both would have preferred that he hadn't made that comment," Mr.
Sommer said.


Patriots Try to Regroup After Season of Disgrace
It is easy to begin a look at the New England Patriots with Bruce Armstrong, perhaps because Armstrong is the hardest man to miss.
An offensive tackle from Louisville entering his fifth season with the Patriots, Armstrong is a solid 6 feet 4 inches, 284 pounds.
He earned Pro Bowl honors last year on a team that finished with the National Football League's worst record (1-15), losing its last 14 games.


Mattingly Hurting, So Are Yanks
One run, six hits, and no Don Mattingly.
That depressing line score added up to the wrong start on a long doubleheader evening.
The Yankees fell yesterday, 5-1, to Detroit in a punchless first game, as club officials debated whether to put their star first baseman on the disabled list.


The Executive Life; Dress Down Days For Corporate Summer
Earlier this summer, the American Express Travel Related Services division sent a memo to 50,000 employees, inviting them to hang up their suits every Friday.
"People can wear anything they feel comfortable in," said Larry Kurlander, an American Express spokesman.
Well, sort of.
"I suppose bikinis would be verboten," he added.
But wherever the line is drawn, between Memorial Day and Labor Day, Friday is viewed by many companies as a quasi-holiday -- at least when it comes to dress codes.


TriBeCa West: The Issue of Boundaries
FOR decades, a grubby industrial neighborhood west of City Hall and wedged between the financial district and Canal Street went virtually unnoticed.
But by the late 70's, urban pioneers -- many of them artists squeezed out of SoHo by the gentrification of that onetime industrial area -- discovered its spacious, inexpensive and mostly vacant factories, warehouses and lofts.
Within a decade the area was transformed from an after-dark urban ghost town to one of the city's fastest growing and most desirable residential neighborhoods.
The new arrivals dubbed it TriBeCa, for "triangle below Canal."


Have Law Degree and Want High Visibility? Call Gotti, He Might Have a Job
John Gotti, the reputed head of the Gambino crime family, is looking for a few good lawyers -- three, to be exact.
He needs them pronto, because the men who were to handle his racketeering trial in Brooklyn, Bruce Cutler, Gerald L. Shargel and John L. Pollock, have been disqualified by the judge hearing the case.
What self-respecting megalomaniacal trial lawyer could resist such an assignment, with its guaranteed epidemic of headlines and appearances at the top of the 11 o'clock news?
On the other hand, if Government eavesdroppers are to be believed, the client can be pretty prickly.


Topics of The Times; A Voice for Culture
Hard times aren't good times to be New York City's Commissioner of Cultural Affairs, as Mary Schmidt Campbell knows very well.
But during her four-year tenure, Dr.
Campbell, who has just been appointed dean of New York University's Tisch School of the Arts, made her department heard.
She did so by seeing that it served the full range of New Yorkers, and was especially successful in bringing minority artists into mainstream public programs.
Dr.
Campbell has said of budgets that they're rather like the weather: "There are good seasons and bad seasons, and you just kind of ride them out." Dr.
Campbell rode her good -- and bad -- seasons very well.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My coffee table has an unfinished black-and-white marble top.
Anything placed on it leaves spots, be it a water glass, a plate and so on.
These spots seem impossible to remove.
Is there any product that will remove them, and is there anything I can put on the marble that will help prevent this problem?
A.
Marble is very porous and stains easily.
Most marble tops have sealers that prevent stains from soaking in.
But even with a sealer, stains have to be mopped up promptly.
Removing stains later on is not easy, because the removal depends on the type of stain and how old it is.
The older the stain, the harder it is to remove.
I suggest you buy a marble-cleaning kit from a marble dealer or a department store.
It will contain various solvents and cleaning agents for different types of stains.
If that does not work, you may have to have a marble dealer polish and refinish the table.
After it is clean, be sure a marble sealer is applied, and then keep the table waxed with a white paste wax.


NEW JERSEY FOLLOW-UP
Auto Injury Cases
THE State Department of Insurance estimates that nearly four million New Jersey drivers now have auto insurance policies that carry the "verbal threshold" -- an insurance option that lowers premiums but limits lawsuits by permitting individuals to sue for only serious injuries.


Winner at Casino, but Too Young to Collect
A customer at the Lady Luck casino here hit a half-million dollar jackpot on a slot machine on Friday but could not collect because he is only 19 years old.
Nevada law requires that gamblers be at least 21.


Sports of The Times; Tyson Is a Role Model in Reverse
Iron Mike Tyson might be in more trouble now than he ever was in the ring, and this includes the time Buster Douglas hit him so hard he spent an embarrassing amount of time crawling on the canvas looking for his mouthpiece, which he eventually found, and his senses, which seem to have irretrievably abandoned him.
Tyson is being legally challenged by two women for what he might have considered playful acts, or just the divine right of champions -- or ex-champions -- of which he is one.


Long Way From the Primrose Diner
He is 69 years old and by now Lou Duva has become as recognizable in public as his fighters.
There is the white hair and the face of a battlewise munchkin: a crinkled expanse with blunt dark brows and a pug nose that got that way from taking a few too many punches.
That was after World War II, when Duva was a welterweight who fought with more enthusiasm than finesse, and certainly with less preparation than he would allow the world-class fighters that he and his son Dan now manage and promote.


Commercial Property: Sale Leasebacks; Thawing Corporate Capital Frozen Into Real Estate
PHILIPS Medical Systems has sold its 467,000-square-foot building on Route 8 in Shelton, Conn., to the American affiliate of Auguste-Thouard, a giant French commercial real-estate concern.
But Philips isn't going anywhere.


NOWHERE TO GO
The Palestinians hope the United States will persuade Israel to grant "a modest request, an area equal to 20 percent of what was historically Palestine." Eighty percent of what was historically Palestine is now called Jordan.
Twenty percent of what was historically Palestine is now Israel.
Is she talking about 20 percent of the 20 percent?
That 80-20 formula was exercised once before: although the territory called Palestine was to be a homeland for the Jews, 80 percent of that land (Eastern Palestine) became the country of Jordan, in recognition of the legitimate rights and national aspirations of the Arabs of the area.
EUGENE KAUFMAN
Oceanside, L.I.


CORRECTIONS
A chart last Sunday with an article about the Microsoft Corporation, depicting the capitalization of six major computer companies and their ratio of capitalization to revenues, carried an incorrect legend for shading that denoted the types of company.
The three major software producers were represented by black bars, hardware producers by white ones.


A New Mr. Tee Dominates P.G.A.
John Daly turned the theme of the 73d P.G.A.
Championship into the making of a folk hero today by continuing to hit some of the longest drives ever seen in competition while building a three-shot lead going into the final round.
The 25-year-old tour rookie showed no letup in his assault on the Crooked Stick Golf Club course by shooting a three-under-par 69 for a 54-hole total of 11-under-par 205.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on July 21 located Club Med Waterville, a new facility in Ireland, incorrectly.
Waterville is on the Iveragh Peninsula, not the Dingle Peninsula.


Scullers and Skiers Battle for a Bronx Lagoon
A decades-old dispute between the scullers and water-skiers of Pelham Bay Lagoon in the Bronx has developed into a political issue with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's office seeking to mediate between the clashing recreational cultures.
The dispute has led to a rare city-state jurisdictional fight over nothing more serious than the speed limit on the narrow, placid waterway.


IN SHORT: FICTION
INTERGIRL  A Hard Currency Hooker.
By Vladimir Kunin.
Translated by Antonina W. Bouis.
Bergh Publishing/Talman, Cloth, $19.95; Paper, $9.95.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Sunday Outing article last Sunday about fresh-picked corn in Ulster County, N.Y., misstated the distance from New York City to the Gill Farm near Hurley.
It is about 100 miles, not 150.


Dentist Has AIDS Virus, Inmates to Be Told
Hundreds of inmates treated by a prison dentist infected with the AIDS virus will be told of his condition now that a Federal district judge has rejected his attempt to block the notification, prison officials say.
The American Civil Liberies Union, representing the dentist, had asked for a temporary restraining order to keep the United States Bureau of Prisons from alerting the inmates.
But the judge, James Holderman, rejected the request on Friday, and the A.C.L.U. said it would sue for invasion of privacy.


Vandals Force Closing of New Golf Course
Vandals identifying themselves with the militant environmental group Earth First have forced the closing of a new golf course by writing messages on the greens.
Using a chemical that the authorities have yet to identify, the vandals wrote, "Earth First!," "Hayduke lives" and "Ron you pig" on 11 greens and several tees at the course sometime last week, Undersheriff Sky Walters said Friday.


Suppose You Had 100 Doors With Goats Behind 99 of Them
To the Editor:
For those conversant with basic probability theory, the Monty Hall puzzle involves a straightforward application of conditional probability.
Concisely, the probability of choosing the car if one switches doors equals the probability that the car is behind one of the two doors not originally selected ( 2/3), times the probability that it is behind the unopened one of those doors, namely 1.
Thus, the probability of getting the car if one switches is ( 2/3)x(1)= 2/3.
That so much ignorance has been exposed in this discussion is disappointing but not a surprise, although one would not have expected it from so many holders of advanced degrees.
What is of greater concern are the attitudes expressed by the "experts," which can only be characterized as arrogant and intolerant.
Perhaps this very quality of many of our teachers demonstrates a significant reason for the national disgrace of innumeracy.
JOSEPH WOOLFSON  Professor of Mathematics Sarah Lawrence College Bronxville, N.Y., July 23, 1991


LEBANESE GROUP SAYS IT WILL FREE AMERICAN CAPTIVE
Lebanese kidnappers said in Beirut today that an American hostage would be freed by Tuesday.
The announcement by the Revolutionary Justice Organization, which says it holds two Americans, came amid growing evidence of complicated negotiations involving the United Nations, Israel and pro-Iranian Lebanese factions over the exchange of large numbers of captives.
The Revolutionary Justice group's statement was accompanied by a photo of a gaunt-looking Joseph Cicippio, who is 60 years old.
He was the acting controller of American University in Beirut when he was kidnapped in September 1986.
The group's other captive, Edward Austin Tracy, also 60, is a writer and adventurer, and was abducted in October 1986.


New Jersey Fights Pay-Phone Use by Drug Dealers
In New Jersey's biggest cities, some pay phones have become open-air offices for drug dealers -- in some cases guarded by pit bulls to keep the public away.
Officials and residents in a half-dozen cities have complained to New Jersey Bell in increasing numbers in recent months, saying in many cases that they would rather do without pay phones than endure the crime and violence they attract.


Ms. Krutan Weds Stephen J. Bartell
Diane Sue Krutan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Krutan of Edison, N.J., was married in New York last evening to Stephen Jay Bartell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Bartell of San Diego.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman performed the ceremony in Central Park.
Mrs.
Bartell, 35 years old, is a vice president at Ally &amp; Gargano Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Rutgers University.
Her father is a vice president and the director of merchandising at Botany 500, the clothing company, in New York.
Her mother, Ruth Krutan, designs jewelry.


Corrections
A correction in this space last Sunday about a 24-hour telephone line set up by the Better Business Bureau of Metropolitan New York to provide access to complaints involving travel and tour operators misstated the number.
It is (900) 463-6222.


Ginger Reed Wed to Howard Morgan
Virginia Carol Reed, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard John Reed of Moreland Hills, Ohio, was married yesterday in Chagrin Falls, Ohio, to Howard DeWitt Morgan, a son of Harry W. Morgan of Atlanta and Catharine Westlake of Deansboro, N.Y.
The Rev.
Lud Golz performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Federated Church.
Mrs.
Morgan, who is 24 years old and is known as Ginger, graduated cum laude from Wellesley College.
She is to begin M.B.A. studies at Columbia University in September.
Until recently, she was a financial analyst at Morgan Stanley in New York.
Her father owns North Coast Remanufacturing in Cleveland.


Players Association Priority: Taking Care of Business
Few American unions can boast of being as successful a conduit of cash to their membership as the Major League Baseball Players Association.
The association has become a super-union: a savvy bargaining unit that has won nearly all its battles, and a business agent capitalizing on baseball's licensing mania.
No other sports union plays both roles so well.


Joining Them
Back when he was new in office and the Senate was regularly turning down his nominees for high level Justice Department jobs, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh may have said to himself,
"That's


World Markets; Sweden Gets a Case of the Jitters
Sweden is stumbling.
After a surprisingly robust performance this year, the stock market has gotten a case of the jitters, the result of a pessimistic economic outlook and the uncertainty surrounding the upcoming elections this fall.


Amid Furor, Importers Drop Syringe Pencil
Two import companies said Friday that they hoped to end a schoolyard controversy by no longer selling novelty pencils that resemble hypodermic syringes.
The importers, the Brandy Trading Corporation and Mirage Imports, said they dropped the pencils from their inventories after receiving complaints that the products gave the wrong message about drug use.


Jan D'Alessandro Is Married to John Wadsworth
Jan D'Alessandro, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward G. D'Alessandro of Green Village, N.J., was married yesterday to John Vredenburgh Wadsworth, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Wadsworth of Buffalo.
Msgr.
John F. Corr officiated at Christ Church in Dark Harbor, Me.
The bride, 27 years old, graduated from Brown University and received a law degree cum laude from Georgetown University.
She was, until recently, an associate at White &amp; Case in New York.
Her father is the senior partner in the Florham Park, N.J., law firm of D'Alessandro &amp; Jacovino.


Style Makers; Delores Walker -- Jeans Designer
Delores Walker sounds like an actress in a television commercial aimed at "full figured" customers.
"We 'hippy' women have a hard time finding jeans that fit," she said.
Ms.
Walker, who lives and works in Oakland, Calif., has turned that need into her niche in the already crowded jeans market.
The Dax Company markets Flair for the Derriere jeans, made to fit women and men with what she calls the "classic" figure: small waist and full hips and thighs.


States of Enchantment


Suppose You Had 100 Doors With Goats Behind 99 of Them
To the Editor:
Your July 21 article on the game-show problem makes no reference to the Rev.
Thomas Bayes (1702-61), the British theologian and mathematician who derived the mathematical formula for solving this type of problem.
The problem involves calculating a posteriori conditional Bayesian probabilities.
This and related problems are discussed in undergraduate textbooks and are easily accessible to interested people.
DOMENICO ROSA  Associate Professor of Mathematics Teikyo Post University Waterbury, Conn., July 23, 1991


Jennifer Hume and George Shively Wed
Jennifer Elizabeth Hume, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Hume of Old Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to George Sydney Shively, the son of Cynthia T. Shively and George C. Shively, both of Bronxville, N.Y.
The Rev.
Christopher L. Webber and the Rev.
Terence Elsberry performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich.
Mrs.
Shively, 26 years old, teaches at the Packer Collegiate Institute in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Connecticut College and is studying for a master's degree in elementary education at the Bank Street College of Education.
Her father is a marketing consultant.
Her mother, Mary Ann Hume, teaches English at Greenwich High School.


CHINA BACKS PACT ON NUCLEAR ARMS
China announced today that it had decided "in principle" to sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, becoming the last major nuclear power to commit itself to the terms of the agreement to curb the spread of atomic weapons.
The announcement came during a summit meeting today between Prime Minister Li Peng and Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu of Japan, whose nation last week marked the 46th anniversary of the two American atomic bomb attacks.
Mr.
Kaifu, who arrived today for three days of talks, is the first leader of any industrialized country to visit China since the Tiananmen crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators in June 1989.  'Things Have Changed'
"On many occasions in the past, China made clear its reasons for not acceding to the treaty," Wu Jianmin, China's Foreign Ministry spokesman, said tonight.
"Now things have changed. This is for the purpose of attaining the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of nuclear weapons."


Davia Temin Is Wed To Walter T. Kicinski
Davia Beth Temin, a vice president at Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company, investment bankers in New York, was married yesterday to Walter Theodore Kicinski, a managing director at Paine Webber in New York.
The Rev.
Sharon Vandegrift, a Methodist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Cloisters of Swarthmore College in Swarthmore, Pa.
Ms.
Temin, who is 39 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Swarthmore and received a master's degree in psychology from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Jack T. and Sylvia Temin of South Euclid, Ohio.
Mr.
Kicinski, 51, graduated from Siena College and was a Wilson fellow at Princeton University.
His first marriage ended in divorce.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Kicinski of Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


Pinch-Hitting for the Democrats; Invest in the Future? Yes, but How?
As the Democratic convention grows closer, the field of candidates grows steadily smaller -- and the chance for illuminating debate grows remote.
Senator Jay Rockefeller and Representative Richard Gephardt have now counted themselves out, and so far, the only rallying cry is that yes, Democrats have discovered economic virtue.
Former Senator Paul Tsongas, the only declared candidate, and Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, a leading undeclared candidate, urge the sensible goal:


Democrats in Congress Push for Jobless Bill
The Democratic leaders of Congress are trying to turn up the political heat on President Bush by enlisting state and local officials to lobby for a bill that would extend unemployment benefits.
The House Speaker, Thomas S. Foley of Washington; the House majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, and the Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine, wrote to 27 Democratic governors and 346 Democratic mayors on Friday asking them to press Mr.
Bush to sign the $5.2 billion jobless benefits bill passed last week.


POSTINGS: Historic Revitalization; A Fighting Chance In Bridgeport
At a time when Bridgeport has become a symbol of the severe economic woes facing the Northeast -- last week its application for protection under Federal bankruptcy laws was denied -- investors are planning to revitalize one of the Connecticut city's more historic downtown buildings.
The investors, Ernie and Chris Trefz of Bridgeport, have paid $96,500 for 60 John Street, buying it from City Trust Bancorp, which held the three-story, 140-year-old building in foreclosure.
David Barbour, a Fairfield, Conn., architect in charge of the project, said work on the building, which was purchased vacant, will be completed by the end of the year.
It is to include chemical exterior cleaning, restoration of cornices, a new decorative parapet with flagpoles, new windows, floor refinishing, new window boxes and fabric awnings.
No tenants have yet signed on, but Mr.
Barbour said the investors hope to attract an ethnic restaurant and pub to the ground floor and photographers, graphic designers or other professionals to loft-like commercial spaces on the upper two floors.


Soul Searching
HIDDEN JOURNEY
A Spiritual Awakening.
By Andrew Harvey. 253 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $22.50.
ON A SPACESHIP WITH BEELZEBUB
By a Grandson of Gurdjieff.
By David Kherdian. 282 pp.
New York: Globe Press Books. $24.95.


Sports of The Times; Tyson Is a Role Model in Reverse
Iron Mike Tyson might be in more trouble now than he ever was in the ring, and this includes the time Buster Douglas hit him so hard he spent an embarrassing amount of time crawling on the canvas looking for his mouthpiece, which he eventually found, and his senses, which seem to have irretrievably abandoned him.
Tyson is being legally challenged by two women for what he might have considered playful acts, or just the divine right of champions -- or ex-champions -- of which he is one.


New Yorkers, etc.
There are a number of chic and fashionable buildings in every city, and that is quite a different thing from chic and fashionable areas.
In Manhattan, Fifth Avenue, Park Avenue and various enclaves and streets are considered fashionable, but that doesn't mean that every building on those streets is equal in status.
Some people know this and some don't, and although it doesn't mean zilch in the scheme of things, it's part of the fabric of the city.
It undoubtedly makes a difference in how the people who live in such particularly elegant buildings are perceived by passersby who see uniformed doormen, nannies and their charges, dog walkers and their charges and drivers awaiting their passengers.
Many people think it must be wonderful to be ensconced in one of those edifices, and they are very likely right.
No doubt it would be kind of great but, human nature being what it is, it is also nice to know -- for most of us, at least -- that this kind of living isn't all icing.


Katherine Ellis Is Married
Katherine Therese Ellis, an assistant vice president at U.S.
Trust Company of New York, and Kenneth Jones Nixon 3d, a trader in the New York office of Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd. of Tokyo, were married yesterday at St.
Mary Roman Catholic Church in Winchester, Mass.
The Rev.
Stephen A. Koen 2d officiated.
Mrs.
Nixon, 27 years old, graduated from Wellesley College and is an M.B.A. candidate at New York University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles A. Ellis Jr., of Winchester.
Mr.
Nixon, 27, graduated from Providence College.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nixon Jr., of Larchmont, N.Y.


Joyce Booth and Todd Beamon Marry
Joyce Booth, an assistant district attorney in Queens, was married yesterday to Todd Beamon, a copy editor for the financial news section of The New York Times.
The Rev.
Richard Jenkins performed the ceremony at the New Hope Baptist Church in St.
Paul.
Mrs.
Beamon, 32 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and received a law degree from the William Mitchell College of Law.
She is the daughter of Jesse Meeks of Minneapolis, a retired diesel mechanic for Lend Lease Truck Rental in Minneapolis, and Lillie B. Booth of Duluth, Minn., a building and grounds worker at the University of Minnesota at Duluth.


Valenzuela Is Rocky
FERNANDO VALENZUELA's comeback attempt continues along a roller-coaster course.
In seven innings, he allowed five runs and eight hits and took the loss as Calgary beat Edmonton, 10-3, in a Pacific Coast League game Friday night.
But Valenzuela, 1-2 in three starts for the California Angels' affiliate, did strike out 10 while throwing 120 pitches in his longest Triple-A outing. (AP)


Cynthia Spera Is Engaged
The engagement of Cynthia Bernadette Spera to Robert Carey Neff Jr. has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Gabriel A. Spera of Scotch Plains, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Spera, who is 27 years old and a graduate of Vassar College, is a third-year law student at Seton Hall University.
She is a law clerk at the firm of Kraft &amp; McManimon in Newark.
Mr.
Neff, 29, graduated from Middlebury College and received a law degree from Seton Hall University in June.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Neff of Fair Haven, N.J.


Flatiron Building
To the Editor:
From the late 1940's to January, 1957, my husband and I lived at 178 Fifth Avenue, directly across from the Flatiron Building (Streetscapes, July 21).
I am confident that it was cleaned at some point during this period.
I remember observing the progress of the workers behind clouds of steam, marveling at the contrast between the freshly cleaned areas and the rest of the building, and also noting with pleasure that as the job advanced, our own apartment became significantly brighter.
I also recall being horrified that, for whatever reason, the lowest portion of the building was painted, not steam-cleanded.
The building at 178 Fifth Avenue, built in 1862, is a story in itself.
Our studio apartment two flights above street level, probably a converted master bedroom, featured a 13-foot ceiling ornamented with plaster festoons, a huge marble fireplace in working order, 9-foot windows, and an enormous bathtub.
Incidentally, the stories about the fierce winds on the corner are true; occasionally, during hurricanes, I saw windows smashed and pedestrians blown to the ground.
MIRIAM HECHT  Manhattan


The Challenge in Peru: Drugs and Disarray
A WESTERN military expert here tells of the time a member of the Peruvian security forces was escorting him around an isolated town in the jungle that had been the scene of repeated bloody confrontation between Shining Path guerrillas and the army.
In conversation, the official learned that the young guard had only eight shells in his rifle.


Arafat Can Still Make The World Take Notice With One Word: No
THERE he was again.
After what had seemed a long absence, Yasir Arafat's familiar three-day-old stubble and his black-and-white-checked head scarf suddenly reappeared last week on the front pages of the world's newspapers, and at diplomatic center stage.
His remarks stunned and frustrated some fellow Palestinians, Arab leaders, and American officials, all of whom had struggled for months to secure the agreement of Syria, Jordan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia to convene a Middle East peace conference aimed at resolving the seemingly unresolvable Arab-Israeli conflict.


Making Jointly Supported Health Care Plans Work
To the Editor:
When Jack Sheinkman ("How to Solve the Health Care Crisis," Forum, July 28) says politicians won't lead reform, business and labor leaders will have to, he's correct.
But our experience in designing and negotiating health care plans with labor and management shows that jointly supported plans only work when they acknowledge and respect the interests of both parties.
Mr.
Sheinkman's plan to drop employer-supported plans in favor of a single, government-supported plan fails on that ground.


Down-Home, Sunny Southwestern Fare
IT was late winter when Y. E. Coyote opened in Hicksville.
But with the advent of hot weather, the spiffy storefront on South Broadway began to sizzle.
Its sunny Southwestern food and summer are a perfect mesh.
To answer the first question everyone asks, the Y and E are not someone's initials, but a takeoff on the cartoon character Wily Coyote.


David A. Deakin Weds Michelle Bates
Michelle Elizabeth Bates, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David C. Bates of Stantonville, Tenn., was married yesterday to David Andrew Deakin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Deakin of Bennington, Vt.
Jean Ellis-LaBossiere, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl Gunderson in West Newton, Mass.
The bride and bridegroom, both 26 years old, graduated from Williams College.
Mrs.
Deakin is the managing editor of the magazines Club Industry and Rehabilitation Today in Framingham, Mass.
Her father and her mother, Ann Mabry Bates, are psychotherapists in Selmer, Tenn.


Charges in Child's Drowning
A woman pleaded no contest to involuntary-manslaughter charges on Friday in the death of her 17-month-old son, who was left alone in a bathtub and drowned after hitting his head.
The defendant, Gia K. Webb, 21, is expected to be placed on probation when she is sentenced Sept. 10,


Reyna Marder to Wed Pierre Gentin Next Month
Mr. and Mrs.
M.
Rick Marder of Great Neck, L.I., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Reyna Elizabeth Marder and Pierre Marc Gentin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Benjamin Gentin of Great Neck.
Ms.
Marder, 25 years old, graduated summa cum laude and received a law degree from Yale University where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Next month she is to become an associate with the New York law firm of Debevoise and Plimpton.
Her father is a real-estate investor in New York.


Miss Roberti and M. P. Browne Wed
Rosemary Roberti, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Dominic M. Roberti of Haverford, Pa., was married yesterday to Matthew Paul Browne, the son of Patricia D. Einhorn and Lieut.
John A. Browne of the New York City Police Department, both of Fleetwood, N.Y.
The Rev.
John J. Piderit performed the Roman Catholic ceremony in the Blue Chapel at Fordham University in the Bronx.
The couple graduated from Fordham, where Mr.
Browne was an executive editor of The Ram.
Mrs.
Browne, 24 years old, teaches art at St.
Elizabeth School in New York.
Her father is an associate professor of chemistry at St.
Joseph's University in Philadelphia.
Her mother, Carole Roberti, is a freelance editor.


8 Are Killed as Trucks Collide
Eight young people were killed early today when two pickup trucks collided on a two-lane highway.
The vehicle in which the victims were riding did not have a top, and six of them were thrown out, said Officer Jim Neeley of the California Highway Patrol.
Their identities have not been disclosed.
The two people in the other pickup escaped with injuries.
The collision occurred shortly after 2 A.M. on Highway 4 about 40 miles east of San Francisco.


A. C. Begley Weds Miss Boccon-Gibod
Isabelle Boccon-Gibod, the daughter of Dr.
Liliane Boccon-Gibod and Dr.
Laurent Boccon-Gibod of Paris, was married yesterday in a civil ceremony at the town hall in Vanxains, the Dordogne, France, to Adam Channing Begley, a son of Sarah Higginson Begley of Stockbridge, Mass., and Louis Begley of New York.
The bride, 23 years old, graduated from the Central School of Arts and Crafts in Paris and received a master's degree in industrial engineering from Columbia University.
She is to start work as an engineer at the International Paper Company in Hopkinsville, Ky., in September.
Her parents are physicians and professors of medicine at the University of Paris.


Challenging The Asian Illusion
For a very long time, when people talked about race, they talked about black America and white America.
Where did that put Asian-Americans?
Spike Lee touches on the Asian-American dilemma in "Do the Right Thing" when the Korean grocer, afraid of having his business attacked by rioting blacks, yells: "I not white! I black! Like you! Same!"


ROCKEFELLER'S ASSETS
The impression one gets in Robin Toner's article on Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th is of an earnest, yet not-quite-up-to-it candidate for President ("Rockefeller's Assets," July 21).


In the Latest Shuffle, Some Hope Is Dealt
LIKE grim Polaroid faces trapped on playing cards, the Western hostages, including Terry Anderson, Tom Sutherland and Terry Waite, last week seemed to hover over the pit of Lebanon's grisly trade in human lives.
With the release of the British television journalist John McCarthy, carrying a sealed letter to the United Nations Secretary General that was to be opened today, there remained only 11 Western hostages in Lebanon.


CORRECTION
A picture caption with this column last Sunday misidentified an automobile in the Blue Suede Shoes collection.
The "dream car" was the 1955 Chrysler Ghia Falcon, not the 1953 Buick Wildcat I.


The Simple Pleasures of Blueberries
BLUEBERRIES are the least complicated of berries.
It starts with the picking.
There is no uncomfortable stooping and the bushes have no thorns.
Once picked, the berries are less perishable than strawberries, raspberries or blackberries.
The freshest, firmest blueberries have a grayish finish from a kind of natural protective coating that gradually wears off.
Also, their seeds are inconsequentially small so the cooked berries for jam or sauce do not have to be sieved.


Review/Jazz; Horn and Lincoln: 2 Divas
Jazz singing has always acted as a mediator between the jazz and pop impulses, balanced somewhere between the needs of the musicians and the needs of the audience.
Wednesday night's "Two Divas of Jazz," featuring Shirley Horn and Abbey Lincoln at Alice Tully Hall as part of the Classical Jazz Festival, found a balance by respecting the integrity of the songs and by having a host of instrumentalists on stage to add extensive improvisations.
The show opened with Ms.
Horn, who over the last several years has gone from near obscurity to jazz celebrity.
She deserves her celebrity; she's mastered the intense slow groove, and she's figured out a way to avoid the influence of other singers.
The set had her fleshing out harmonies with modern, graceful chords, and her singing, perfectly edited, moved from the tune of the song to new melodies that seemed so logical as to be pre-written.
Ms.
Horn was joined by a series of soloists, including the saxophonist Branford Marsalis (who turned in a wistful, pellucid improvisation on "It Had to Be You"), the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis, and the saxophonist Buck Hill, all of whom played off Ms.
Horn's loping swing and her smooth voice.


U.S. Debut in Westport For a Dutch Orchestra
THE Levitt Pavilion in Westport prides itself on giving performing opportunities to local performers.
But the free concert at 8:30 P.M. on Thursday features the Ricciotti Ensemble from the Netherlands.
The Levitt's managing director, Michele Orris, called the concert historic.
"The remarkable Dutch youth orchestra under the direction of Leonard van Goudoever will be making its first appearance in the United States," he said.
Following that Westport debut, the ensemble plays on Friday evening at 7 in Edgerton Gardens in New Haven, and at that same hour Saturday on the Green in Oxford.
The Ricciotti gives its first New York City concert in the Lincoln Center Out-Of-Doors Festival on Aug. 23.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
FILM RESTORER SPEAKS
Robert A. Harris, restorer of the film "Spartacus," will give a talk about his work during intermission of a screening Friday evening.
The epic starring Kirk Douglas and directed by Stanley Kubrick won four Academy Awards when it was released in 1960, and it is the latest of Mr.
Harris's restoration projects.
He has also restored Sir David Lean's "Lawrence of Arabia" and Emil Gance's "Napoleon."


A Destiny Fulfilled, a Fuss Created
BODY SNATCHER
By Juan Carlos Onetti.
Translated by Alfred Mac Adam. 305 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $23.


The Smallest Athletes Take to the Ice
AT last the day of the big game had come.
The young players had worked hard for two weeks.
Now everything was ready: the referee, the real buzzer and the official scoreboard lit up like a Christmas tree -- all the trappings of a legitimate ice hockey game.
Never mind that it was the middle of the summer.


David Lisi Weds Jessica E. Fitzpatrick
Jessica Emilie Fitzpatrick, a daughter of Mariana Amram Fitzpatrick of New York and Paul W. Fitzpatrick of Seabrook Island, S.C., was married yesterday in Ithaca, N.Y., to David Michael Lisi, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elio Lisi of Huntington, Conn.
The Rev.
Jack Lewis, a Presbyterian minister, performed the nondenominational service in the Anabel Taylor Hall Chapel at Cornell University,
Ms.
Fitzpatrick, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is a psychiatric social worker.
Until recently she worked at the Tompkins County Mental Health Clinic in Ithaca.
She graduated from Clark University and received a master's degree in social work from Bryn Mawr College.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of J. P. Morgan in New York.
Her mother is a sales manager for Waldenbooks in New York.


E. Tamu Bess Is Dead; Political Aide Was 39
E.
Tamu Bess, a former special assistant to Basil Patterson when he was deputy mayor of New York City and New York State Secretary of State, died Aug. 1 in Midway Hospital Medical Center in Los Angeles.
She was 39 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
Ms.
Bess died in surgery after being shot in an attempted robbery in front of the home of a colleague, the Los Angeles police said.


THE NEVER-FAIL CAKE
Michael Frank's charming and nostalgic Food column "The Never-Fail Cake" (July 7) really appealed to me, and I also like to bake.
I eagerly assembled the ingredients to make this cherished delicacy and followed the recipe scrupulously.
What emerged from my 350-degree oven 30 minutes later were what appeared to be two nine-inch tortillas.
I was taken aback, but decided to see the whole show through, and so I iced those tortillas.
The icing was a bit pale and sweet, but I reminded myself that the proof of the cake is often in the eating, and I was right.
Nobody ate more than two bites.


76 Arrested as Wichita Protesters Shift to 3d Clinic
After more than three weeks of sit-ins outside two other women's clinics, anti-abortion protesters shifted their demonstration today to a clinic that is not covered by a Federal judge's anti-blockade order.
The Wichita police arrested 76 people who blocked a back door at the third clinic, the Wichita Women's Center, where about 250 demonstrators gathered and refused to move.


By Golly, It's Dolly
O.K., what do the following actresses have in common?
Carol Channing, Ginger Rogers, Martha Raye, Betty Grable, Bibi Osterwald, Pearl Bailey, Phyllis Diller, Ethel Merman, Mary Martin, Eve Arden, Thelma Carpenter, Dorothy Lamour and Barbra Streisand.
They all played Dolly Gallagher Levi, the world's most celebrated yenta.
The absolutely newest Dolly is Dorothy Loudon, who stars in "The Matchmaker," Thornton Wilder's 1954 four-act comedy that inspired David Merrick's "Hello, Dolly!" in 1964.
The play, in previews at the Roundabout Theater, opens Aug. 22.
"I'm not singing in this one," Ms.
Loudon says.
"But I can't exactly rest the pipes. It's a farce, choreographed like a musical, and the energy level is way up. Dolly never stops talking, moving or eating. I don't know whether I have all the energy for Dolly. But at least -- good Lord! -- I'm old enough."


A SHOP RAT'S TALE
IN THE TORCH BAR ON BUCKHAM ALLEY IN FLINT, Mich., it is dim even at midday on a sunny Saturday.
Over at the front table, which is pressed against the window but still mired in a permanent nocturnal gloom, a salon of sorts has coalesced and the resident author asks the semiresident film maker a clever question.
"O.K., Mike," says Ben Hamper to Michael Moore, whose surprisingly popular mock-documentary "Roger and Me" explored Flint's troubles after huge layoffs in the city's eight General Motors manufacturing plants.
"If there were a battle to the death between Flipper and Lassie, who would win?"
Moore pouts a moment. "To the death?" he asks. "Lassie and Flipper?"


Mutual Fund; Shortening Up on Money Funds
To make money market funds safer for investors, the Securities and Exchange Commission tightened standards on June 30, requiring these funds to shorten their average maturity to 90 days, from 120 days.
That forces funds to invest in shorter-term, presumably safer, instruments.
One fund chose to change its marketing approach -- and its name -- rather than its investment strategy.
The Neuberger &amp; Berman Ultra-Short Bond fund is perhaps the only hybrid, part money fund and part short-term bond fund.
The average maturity of its holdings is 30 days to a year.
The fund has never been a true money market fund.
When interest rates climb, the fund performs worse than money market funds but better than short-term bond funds, which have average maturities between one and five years.
When rates fall, they outperform money markets.


The Problems of Scarce Capital
To the Editor:
Madis Senner astutely describes some likely effects of scarcer capital on the global economy ("The Grim Shortage of Global Capital," July 28).
However, the obvious source of the capital shortage is insufficient saving at prevailing interest rates.
The issue is how to increase saving or reduce consumption.
The United States, he suggests, should "address the budget deficit." However, improved fiscal balance requires lower government spending (unlikely) or higher taxes -- and this more probable route would
reduce
the private sector's ability to save.


Optimism Is Disappearing For a Solid Recovery Soon
The economic recovery that had been widely expected since late spring now seems much less certain, raising the likelihood that a strong rebound in hiring, wages and retail sales will not occur before the fall, at the earliest.
Many economists have reached that conclusion in recent days after confronting statistics and surveys that measure the economy's recent performance.
Economic conditions have clearly improved since the spring, the data show, but the progress toward recovery seems to have temporarily halted.


ENGINE FOR ROCKET EXPLODES IN JAPAN
Japan's troubled space program suffered another major setback Friday when the engine that is supposed to power its next generation of rockets exploded during a test, killing an engineer and raising more questions about the future of the country's space efforts.
Japanese officials said the 23-year-old engineer, Arihiro Kanaya, was the first person to die in Japan's 22-year-old unmanned space program.
But it was the latest of a string of accidents involving the engine, the first to be built by Japan without the help of the United States.


From Four Museums, Four Favorites
THERE is no such thing in a great museum, in London or anywhere else, as an honor roll about which everyone, without exception, is agreed.
But there are works of art that stay with us forever, and four of them will be touched on here.
Without Titian's "Bacchus and Ariadne," the National Gallery in London would be a thinner, poorer place.
The landfall of the God Bacchus on the island of Naxos was a favorite subject with many a European old master.
So was the look of instantaneous recognition that passed between him and the stranded Ariadne.


Jane Piper Dies at 74; Was Acclaimed Artist
Jane Piper, a prominent Philadelphia painter, died on Thursday at her home in the Center City section of the city.
She was 74 years old.
She died of cancer, a friend of the family said.


Mary Carleton Is Married
Mary Catherine Carleton, a daughter of Mrs.
Prescott H. Pardoe of Chevy Chase, Md., and Charles S. Carleton of Philadelphia, was married yesterday in Belfast, Me., to Eric David Jones, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Jones of Bethesda, Md.
The Rev.
R.
Truman Fudge performed the ceremony at St.
Margaret's Episcopal Church.
The bride graduated from Vassar College.
The bridegroom, a graduate of the Northwestern University, is to begin studies at Vermont Law School in South Royalton in the fall.


Discovering Columbus
FEW STORIES IN HISTORY are more familiar than the one of Christopher Columbus sailing west for the Indies and finding instead the New World.
Indelibly imprinted in our memory is the verse from childhood: "In fourteen hundred and ninety-two/Columbus sailed the ocean blue." The names of his ships, the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria, roll fluently from our lips.
We know how Columbus, a seaman of humble and obscure origins, pursued a dream that became his obsession.
How he found not the riches of Cathay but a sprinkling of small islands inhabited by gentle people.
How he called these people Indians, thinking that surely the mainland of Asia lay just over the horizon.
Yet the history of Columbus is frustratingly incomplete.
When and how in the mists of his rootless life did he conceive of his audacious plan?
He supposedly wanted to sail west across the Ocean Sea to reach Cipangu, the name then for Japan, and the region known generally as the Indies.
But was he really seeking the Indies?
How are we to navigate the poorly charted waters of ambiguous and conflicting documentation everywhere Columbus went and in everything he did?
We are not certain how he was finally able to win royal backing for the enterprise.
We know little about his ships and the men who sailed them.
We don't know exactly where he made his first landfall.
We don't know for sure what he looked like or where he lies buried.
We do know he was an inept governor of the Spanish settlements in the Caribbean and had a bloodied hand in the brutalization of the native people and in the start of a slave trade.
But we are left wondering if he is to be admired and praised, condemned -- or perhaps pitied as a tragic figure.


Exposing The Flip Side Of Switzerland
Switzerland is a country designed by God for the maintenance and upkeep of calendars and picture postcards.
Having been a neutral nation since the early 16th century, today it prodigally dispenses chocolates, army knives, cheeses full of holes, and chirruping clocks.
The little republic of snow and yodels and numbered accounts is beautiful, staid, quaint and blissfully peaceful.
Well, maybe.


From Brazil to Peru to Jamaica, Gun Smugglers Flock to Florida
Lax gun control laws in the United States and a hunger for weapons in Latin America have combined to make Florida the hub of a booming illegal trade in arms, say law-enforcement and military officials here and abroad.
Alarmed at the flow of weapons, from cheap pistols to sophisticated assault rifles, Latin American and Caribbean governments are urging the United States to stop the traffic, which in the last decade has become so extensive and well-organized that gun-smuggling groups can now offer the most powerful weapons on the market to clients anywhere in the world.


A Fall Wedding For Elena Hahn
The engagement of Elena Margaret Hahn, a vice president of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York, to Victor K. Kiam 3d, a vice president of Remington Products in Bridgeport, Conn., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert R. Hahn of New York and Shelter Island, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Hahn, 27 years old, graduated from Harvard University.
Her father is the director of communications of the United States Council for International Business in New York.
Her mother, Ethelee Hahn, is the chairwoman of the foreign language department at the Convent of the Sacred Heart in New York.


Alissa de B. Riker Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Riker Jr. of Rumson, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Alissa de Bonnevale Riker and Ray Edmond Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray W. Murphy of Edmonds, Wash.
Miss Riker, 27 years old, graduated from Georgetown University.
She is a project director for the Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice in San Francisco.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of engineering for ferry services at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
He owns RJR Consultants in Rumson.
Her mother, Diane de B. Riker, is a freelance editor and writer.


Golfer, 80, Crushed To Death by Cart
An 80-year-old golfer was crushed to death by his golf cart, the authorities said on Friday.
J.
Paul King of Lafayette died Thursday afternoon at Crouse Irving Memorial Hospital in Syracuse.
King was working under his Harley Davidson golf cart at the Hill and Dale Golf Course in Tully when the cart rolled over him, said Robert Burns, a spokesman for the Onondaga County Sheriff's Department.


Jennie Wood Wed To James Sheldon
Jennie Marilla Wood, a daughter of Dr.
Francis C. Wood Jr. of Seattle and the late Lenora Stevenson Wood, was married yesterday in Seattle to James Nias Sheldon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David F. Sheldon of Shelburne, Vt.
The Rev.
Robert Fulghum, the author, performed the Unitarian ceremony at the home of Kay Bullitt, a family friend.
Mrs.
Sheldon, 32 years old, graduated cum laude from Mount Holyoke College and received a master's degree in environmental studies from Yale University.
Her father is a professor of endocrinology at the University of Washington in Seattle.


Questioning Thomas About Natural Law
To the Editor:
The favorable references to natural law by Judge Clarence Thomas, President Bush's Supreme Court nominee, point up a line of inquiry that the Senate Committee on the Judiciary should fully explore.


Rubbernecking Through French History
LOVE AND EMPIRE
By Erik Orsenna.
Translated by Jeremy Leggatt. 487 pp.
New York: Cornelia and Michael Bessie Books/ HarperCollins Publishers. $25.


Christopher Barton Weds Miss Tebbens
Sarah Fredrika Tebbens, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur G. Tebbens of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday in Elmsford, N.Y., to Dr.
Christopher Cramer Barton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Barton of Framingham, Mass.
The Rev.
Donald R. Cutler performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of St.
Joseph of Arimathea.
Mrs.
Barton, 25 years old, graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in marine geology and geophysics from Columbia University, where she is a doctoral candidate in those subjects.
Her father is a partner in the Larchmont law firm of Tebbens &amp; Brown.


Americans Confront the Debt the House Built
THINK of them as little S.&amp; L.'s or insurance corporations, Americans who earned big and invested bigger, especially in real estate, in the booming 1980's, and who are now on the recessionary rocks.
They are the burgeoning number of people who are finding that the house they bought is worth less than they owe on it, their credit cards are borrowed to the limit, and they are going bankrupt.
The number of Americans declaring personal bankruptcy has grown by 152 percent in six years, from 285,000 in 1984 to 718,000 last year, and the trend shows no sign of abating immediately, according to the American Financial Services Association, a Washington trade group.


2 Brothers Arrested In Shootings of 2
Two teen-agers were shot in the Bronx early yesterday, and two adult brothers were arrested and charged with attempted murder.
The shootings happened at 12:24 A.M. in front of 1209 Bronx River Avenue in the Soundview section, said Sgt.
Norris Hollomon, a police spokesman.


Fusion and Collage


Cashen Studies Mets, Options
Frank Cashen emerged from the hushed clubhouse, his head hanging down, his stare fixed with frustration after yet one more wasted afternoon for the Mets, who had lost, 6-2, to the Cubs.
Cashen, the Mets' general manager, had no dramatic announcement to issue, but he appeared to understand the need to speak.
His team had lost its second straight game in a vital stretch of 10 games on the road against their three rivals in the National League East, and their greater slide had grown to 14 defeats in their last 18 games.


Making a Difference; From Calculators to a Computer Giant
Robert J. Crowell started in business selling calculators as a college student.
Now he is the head of a newly formed giant in personal computer retailing.
Mr.
Crowell, who is 40, is chairman and chief executive of JWP Businessland Inc., a company formed last week when JWP Inc., a technical services company in Purchase, N.Y., bought Businessland Inc., a computer retailer, and combined it with its own computer sales division.


The Simple Pleasures of Blueberries
BLUEBERRIES are the least complicated of berries.
It starts with the picking.
There is no uncomfortable stooping and the bushes have no thorns.
Once picked, the berries are less perishable than strawberries, raspberries or blackberries.
The freshest, firmest blueberries have a grayish finish from a kind of natural protective coating that gradually wears off.
Also, their seeds are inconsequentially small so the cooked berries for jam or sauce do not have to be sieved.


'Collision at Home Plate'
To the Editor:
Your review of James Reston Jr.'s book "Collision at Home Plate: The Lives of Pete Rose and Bart Giamatti" (July 7) included a quotation from me.
Like so much else in the book, the quote is inaccurate.
I never said it, nor anything approximating it.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My coffee table has an unfinished black-and-white marble top.
Anything placed on it leaves spots, be it a water glass, a plate and so on.
These spots seem impossible to remove.
Is there any product that will remove them, and is there anything I can put on the marble that will help prevent this problem?
A.
Marble is very porous and stains easily.
Most marble tops have sealers that prevent stains from soaking in.
But even with a sealer, stains have to be mopped up promptly.
Removing stains later on is not easy, because the removal depends on the type of stain and how old it is.
The older the stain, the harder it is to remove.
I suggest you buy a marble-cleaning kit from a marble dealer or a department store.
It will contain various solvents and cleaning agents for different types of stains.
If that does not work, you may have to have a marble dealer polish and refinish the table.
After it is clean, be sure a marble sealer is applied, and then keep the table waxed with a white paste wax.


Vintage Wares Are the Real Potluck of the Vacation Kitchen
Old kitchens in summer houses that have been passed on from owner to owner are often repositories of a stock of vintage utensils, including dishes, glassware and gadgets that add immeasurably to the quality of life in the country or at the beach.
Typically dating from the 1920's to the 50's, these seasonal leftovers may possess a mellow charm on the shelves, but with their sensible designs they're functional as well.


All the Bright Young Criminals
CYBERPUNK
Outlaws and Hackers on the Computer Frontier.
By Katie Hafner and John Markoff. 368 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.95.


The Computer Age: Still a Work in Progress
WHEN the International Business Machines Corporation introduced its first personal computer 10 years ago tomorrow, the company hoped to sell 250,000 machines over the life of the product.
Others predicted that machines would be in every home and on every desk, and those without them would be left behind in the race toward the information age.
Both predictions were wrong.
The personal computer has succeeded far beyond I.B.M.'s wildest expectations, with millions sold and computers now accepted as a fact of life almost as basic as electric power.
But the grander vision of a computerized society has not yet been realized.
In many cases, computers have mainly been used as faster calculators and better typewriters and have not yet radically altered the way we live and work.


Amos and Andy's Social History
To the Editor:
Mel Watkins reviewed "The Adventures of Amos 'n' Andy: A Social History of an American Phenomenon" by Melvin Patrick Ely on July 7.
I found the entire article objectionable for several reasons.


R. H. Pajeski Wed To Lisa Saurwein
Lisa Graham Saurwein, a daughter of Margaret H. Saurwein of Nashua, N.H., and Paul G. Saurwein of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday to Robert Hurish Pajeski, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Pajeski of Milford, Conn.
The Rev.
Kenneth Thomas officiated at St.
John's Episcopal Church in Essex, Conn.
Mrs.
Saurwein-Pajeski and her husband are 31 years old and graduates of Cornell University.
She is the director of facilities operations and engineering at NBC in New York.
Her father retired as a private business consultant in New York and Cambridge.


East Europeans Flee to West in Hunt for Better Life
The young man from Arad, Romania, drew his hand across his chest to show how deep the Neisse River was where he carried his wife and two children across, joining an increasing invasion of Eastern Europeans fleeing mounting insecurity and poverty in their homelands to the West.
In all, 1.3 million people left what used to be the Soviet bloc in 1990, the year after political upheaval swept away Communist governments across the region, said Stefan Teloken, spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Bonn.
This year, a slight decline is expected, he said, but only because East Germans, who fled west by the hundreds of thousands in the months before German unification in October 1990, are no longer registered.


Sunday Dinner; Alfresco and Far From the Madding Street
When the heat is not oppressive, outdoor dining always has a special appeal.
New York City is not like Paris, Madrid or other cities where wide, leafy boulevards invite the sidewalk nibbler.
But there are special retreats outdoors.
Here are three downtown restaurants that offer garden settings behind their main dining rooms and are far from fumes and noise.
Barolo


Sotomayor Soars to a Games Record
Javier Sotomayor of Cuba set a Pan American Games record in the high jump this afternoon as Cuban athletes continued their domination of the games.
Sotomayor, the world-record holder in the high jump, won the event with a jump of 7 feet 8 inches while Troy Kemp of the Bahamas earned the silver medal with a jump of 7-7 1/4.
But the highly anticipated showdown with Hollis Conway, who until Wednesday held the United States record, never quite materialized.


On Reaganomics' 10th Birthday, Not All Celebrate
TEN years ago President Reagan laid the foundations of the Reagan revolution by signing two laws so sweeping and ambitious that they overshadow most of the legislation passed since then.
Mr.
Reagan's historic package of tax and budget reductions cut individual income tax rates by 23 percent over three years, and to an astonishing degree those laws, signed Aug. 13, 1981, still shape the nation's political debate.
Politicians still fiercely argue the fairness of those changes and the merits of cutting taxes as a way to stimulate economic growth.
But the relentless demand for Federal largess, the growth of social insurance benefits and the nation's military buildup long ago overwhelmed the budget cuts.
Social Security outlays grew 90 percent in the last decade, while spending for Medicaid and Medicare has nearly tripled.
Still, Jack F. Kemp, spiritual father of the 1981 tax cuts, says they had a lasting legacy.
"I doubt, in our lifetime or our children's lifetime, that we'll ever go back to a steeply graduated and progressive income tax system" with top rates of 70 percent or higher, he said last week in an interview.
The most important and permanent of all the 1981 tax changes is probably the indexing of tax brackets, which prevents the automatic increase in tax rates that occurs when wages and salaries increase as a result of inflation.
And is the overall tax burden any lighter now?
Total Federal, state and local tax receipts declined as a percentage of gross national product from 1982 to 1984, but gradually climbed back to the level where they were when Mr.
Reagan took office: slightly more than 27 percent of G.N.P.
C.
Eugene Steuerle, one of the nation's foremost experts on tax policy, who was Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Treasury from 1987 to 1989, said that after a round of state tax cuts in the late 1970's and the Federal income tax cut in 1981, state and local governments increased taxes in the ensuing decade.
At least 33 states have raised taxes this year as they wrestle with serious fiscal problems.
To be sure, Federal income tax rates are lower today, but Social Security payroll taxes are higher.
About 32.5 million families pay more in Social Security payroll taxes than in income taxes, the Congressional Budget Office has estimated.
The tax revolt of the late 1970's and early 80's reduced overall levels of taxation only "slightly and temporarily," said Mr.
Steuerle.
It focused on two of the most unpopular levies, the income tax and the property tax, but did nothing to slow the growth in Social Security taxes, he said.
President Bush has resisted a proposal by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan to cut Social Security payroll taxes.
The magnitude of the 1981 tax cuts is such that if all their provisions were still in effect, they would have reduced Federal tax receipts by $322 billion last year.
In fact, almost two-thirds of the revenue loss has been offset by tax increases and other changes since 1981.
In 1986, Congress lowered income tax rates again, but significantly broadened the definition of taxable income, curtailing tax shelters, limiting many personal deductions and repealing the investment tax credit for businesses.
In "The Tax Decade," a book to be published this fall by the Urban Institute Press, Mr.
Steuerle reviews the extraordinary outpouring of tax legislation in the last 10 years and concludes that the result for most income groups was "almost no change in average tax rates."
However, in the 1980's the tax rate on the last dollar of earnings -- the rate most likely to affect individual decisions about work and savings -- did drop for many people.
For example, the top rate for the most affluent people dropped from 70 percent in 1980 to less than half that today.
But Mr.
Kemp, now Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, expresses despair that "we have forgotten the lessons of the early 1980's." Underlining the rift in Republican ranks, he said, "The budget agreement engineered last year by my good friend Dick Darman inadvertently paralyzes the President's call for a cut in the capital gains tax rate," because such a cut would produce revenue losses, according to conventional estimates.
Mr.
Darman is the Federal budget director.
When Mr.
Reagan cut taxes, he "did it on faith," Mr.
Kemp said.
But now, he added, "we're listening to econometric models that tell us lowering the capital gains tax will lose revenue, and lowering the payroll tax will destroy the economy."
Mr.
Bush abandoned his campaign pledge of "no new taxes" last year and supported a budget package that raises more than $150 billion of additional revenue over five years.
He continues to call for a cut in the capital gains tax, even espousing it in a speech to low-income people at a housing project in St.
Louis a few months ago.
Congressional Democrats have blocked the capital gains proposal on the ground that it favors the wealthy -- it would lower the tax on profits from the sale of stocks, bonds, real estate and other assets.
On Tuesday, at a 10th anniversary celebration sponsored by the Heritage Foundation, Mr.
Kemp will speak and there will be a videotaped message from Mr.
Reagan.
But Mr.
Bush, who once derided the Reagan policy as "voodoo economics," was not invited.
"Inviting Bush to this event would have been like inviting a nudist to a Moral Majority meeting," said Burton Yale Pines, senior vice president of the foundation.
While the overall tax burden has not changed much, there have been clear winners and losers from the changes in the last decade, particularly the Tax Reform Act of 1986, intended by Mr.
Reagan to encourage "risk-taking, innovation and that old American spirit of enterprise." Among the losers were people who had invested heavily in tax shelters.
The biggest winners included wage earners with few deductions, credits or exclusions under the old tax law.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week that ended July 27  MANHATTAN  Battery Park City 427,500
200 Rector Place  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,175-sq.-ft. condo in a 4-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining area, den, harbor view; common charge $1,800 (Broker: Battery Park City Realty)  Chelsea 340,000
426 West 23d Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. duplex co-op in a brownstone; elevator, dining area, fireplace, 2 terraces; maintenance $1,050, 68% tax-deductible (Broker: Kingman Associates-Charles H. Greenthal)  Greenwich Village 499,000
2 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft prewar, penthouse co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned-elevator, balcony, Washington Square Park view; maintenance $1,316, 14% tax-deductible (Broker: Ann Weintraub Realty-Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  Greenwich Village 1.13 million
40 Fifth Avenue (11th St.)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 2,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, maid's room, dining room, breakfast loggia, fireplace, 3 exposures; maintenance $2,748, 29% tax-deductible (Broker: Kanelba &amp; Robillotti)  SoHo 370,000
114 Spring Street  1,850-sq.-ft. open loft; elevator, 2 baths, high-ceilings, 3 exposures; maintenance $115, 75% tax-deductible (Broker: J.I. Sopher)  West Side 425,000
25 Central Park West (62d St.)  (Century)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. prewar condo; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, sunken dining room, 3 exposures; common charge $1,175, taxes $3,276 (Broker: Nancy R. Sweetser-Stribling &amp; Associates)  BRONX  City Island 155,000
318 King Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family cottage; dining room, finished basement, L.I.
Sound view, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $800 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Gun Hill Road Area 260,000
2769 Mickle Avenue  2-family, semi-attached, frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each, 2-car garage, 25- by 110-ft. irregular lot; taxes $1,900 (Broker: J.A.V. Realty)  BROOKLYN  Carroll Gardens 358,000
279 Carroll Street  3 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, study, eat-in kitchen in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, dining area, den in others; 20- by 97-ft. lot; taxes $1,634 (Broker: Cobble Heights Realty)  Prospect Heights 170,000
60 Plaza Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. co-op in a prewar building; dining area, windowed kitchen, terrace; maintenance $657, 43% tax-deductible (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  QUEENS  College Point 192,000
9-33 119th Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, brick house; dining room, den, fireplace, slate roof, 1-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Rego Park 300,000
86-12 62d Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, semi-attached brick house; dining room, Florida room, steam room and jacuzzi, fireplace, finished basement, 1-car garage, 36- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,584 (Broker: Century 21/Metalios Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Annadale 175,000
158 Stafford Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, detached, frame colonial; dining room, remodeled eat-in kitchen, 40- by 108-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone)  Ward Hill 227,500
69 Tompkins Circle  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 4-story, single-family, semi-attached, frame house; dining area, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, deck off each floor, 1-car garage, Manhattan skyline view, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $250 (Broker: Rand Properties)


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Commack 210,000
40 Valley Wood Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old, center hall colonial; dining room, family room w/ fireplace, pool, 2-car garage; taxes $4,700.
Farmingdale 157,000
29 Maynard Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split level; new eat-in kitchen, dining room, den, 1-car garage; taxes $5,000.
Glen Cove 180,000
20 Southridge Drive  5-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace; taxes $2,800.
Kings Park 157,000
53 Rosewood Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old contemporary; den, finished basement, brick patio; taxes $4,500.
Upper Brookville 625,000
110 Linden Lane  6-bedroom, 4-bath, 20-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, basement, deck, pool, 2 acres; taxes $13,000.
Williston Park 195,000
192 Cornwell Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old two-family; 50- by 100-foot lot, 1- car garage; taxes $3,400.
OTHER AREAS Katonah, N.Y. 447,800
65 Pine Hill Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; 2 fireplaces, family room, eat-in kitchen, pool, 2.5 acres; taxes $10,102.
Portland, Conn. 117,000
31 Middlesex Avenue Extension  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old ranch; 1-car attached garage, unfinished basement; taxes $1,368.
Jackson 110,000
Box 302 Route 528  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 33-year-old ranch; 1-acre, porch, fenced yard; taxes $2,726.


Tensions Heat Up in Belfast After Two Sectarian Killings
Masked gunmen killed a store owner in West Belfast this morning, and tension mounted before weekend rallies commemorating two politically sensitive anniversaries.
No group asserted responsibility for the shooting, but suspicion fell on Protestant paramilitary groups since the shooting took place 24 hours after Irish Republican Army gunmen killed a Protestant militant.


David Duquette Jr. Weds Miss Doykos
Patricia Mae Doykos, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John D. Doykos of Methuen, Mass., and Rye Beach, N.H., was married yesterday to David Joseph Duquette Jr., a son of Dr.
Duquette of Loudonville, N.Y., and the late Joan C. Duquette.
The Rev.
Richard K. Gross performed the ceremony at St.
Theresa's Roman Catholic Church in Rye Beach.
The couple, both 27 years old, graduated from Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass.
Mrs.
Duquette graduated from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in German literature from the University of Virginia.
She is to begin Ph.D. studies in German literature at New York University in September.
Her father is a clinical professor of dentistry at Harvard University.


CRIME
Nice timing on PRIVILEGED INFORMATION (Viking, $19.95), given the current dispute about the ethics of Anne Sexton's gabby shrink.
This suspense novel by a Colorado psychologist, Stephen White, turns on the very point of medical ethics that some psychiatrists contend the poet's doctor compromised when he handed over her psychiatric records to a biographer.
Unlike Sexton's accommodating therapist, the psychologist-hero of this first novel puts his career -- even his life -- in jeopardy to protect a client's privacy.
"The guidelines about confidential communication prohibited me from discussing cases with anyone without the permission of the patient," explains Alan Gregory, whose practice in Boulder takes a nose dive after three of his female patients come to violent ends.
"The fact that my patient was dead," he continues, "didn't free me from the boundaries of confidence."


Sheila Gallagher Planning to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Terence J. Gallagher of New Vernon, N.J., have announced September wedding plans for their daughter Sheila Elise Gallagher and Matthew Littell, a son of Walter D. Littell of Cambridge, Mass., and the late Penelope P. Littell.
Miss Gallagher, 25 years old, is the assistant to the chairman of the Andy Warhol Foundation in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Connecticut College.
Her father is a lawyer in Morristown, N.J.


In a Queens Race, Early Skirmishes on Death
Can dead people sign political petitions?
Can someone who has not been living in Queens in recent years be allowed to run for Queens District Attorney?


Career Overboard?
Sometimes only the captain's reputation goes down with his ship.
All 561 people aboard the Greek cruise liner Oceanos were rescued before the ship sank off South Africa last weekend, but many of them expressed outrage that the captain, Yiannis Avranas, and the crew were among the first to leave the sinking ship.
After the lifeboats were gone, 225 people waited to be rescued by helicopter as the listing vessel was tossed by 30-foot swells.
One of the passengers, Irene Smith, said, "We were so angry with the captain that we wanted to throw stones at him." A captain's behavior in such circumstances is governed more by tradition than law, but one expert urged that he be prosecuted for "betraying the responsibilities of a ship's master." Captain Avranas, meanwhile, was unapologetic, saying he left early to help direct the rescue.
"When I give the order abandon ship, it doesn't matter what time I leave," he said.
"If some people want to stay, they can stay."


The Simple Pleasures of Blueberries
BLUEBERRIES are the least complicated of berries.
It starts with the picking.
There is no uncomfortable stooping and the bushes have no thorns.
Once picked, the berries are less perishable than strawberries, raspberries or blackberries.
The freshest, firmest blueberries have a grayish finish from a kind of natural protective coating that gradually wears off.
Also, their seeds are inconsequentially small so the cooked berries for jam or sauce do not have to be sieved.


Donna Pflaumer Weds in Virginia
Donna Marie Pflaumer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard E. Pflaumer of Weymouth, Mass., was married yesterday to Michael Brian McDonald, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond G. McDonald of Glen Head, L.I.
The Rev.
Francisco Mendez performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Rita's Church in Alexandria, Va.
Mrs.
McDonald, 29 years old, is an associate research analyst at the Center for Naval Analyses in Alexandria.
She graduated from Boston College, where she also received a master's degree in mathematics.
Her father is the proprietor of the Bra-Wey Sport Shop in Braintree, Mass.


Jeannette Miller Married at Yale
Jeanette Tucker Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David P. Miller of Darlington, Md., was married yesterday in New Haven to Douglas Richard Nazarian, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence F. Nazarian of Penfield, N.Y.
The Rev.
J.
Philip Zaeder, a Presbyterian minister, and the Rev.
Michael H. Lubas, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the Battell Chapel of Yale University.
The bride and bridegroom are 24 years old and graduates of Yale.
Mrs.
Nazarian recently completed a post-baccalaureate pre-medical program at Goucher College.
Her father is a land management consultant.
Her mother, Trudy Miller, is the director of volunteers at the Sexual Assault Spouse Abuse Resource Center in Bel Air, Md.


Grace Hammond To Marry in May
Mr. and Mrs.
Harry S. Hammond Jr. of Branford, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Grace Palmer Hammond to Jack Forrest Boss 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Boss Jr. of North Olmsted, Ohio.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Hammond graduated from the University of New Hampshire and received a master's in teaching English as a second language from the University of Hawaii at Manoa and a master's in Christian Education from Princeton Theological Seminary.


NOWHERE TO GO
The harrowing picture of life among the Arabs of Gaza omits an essential reason for their wretched condition -- the continuing refusal of the Arab states, through the United Nations, to permit Israel to build new housing and provide other amenities that would make life there more livable.


Foreign Affairs; Bye Bye Rocky
The reason Senator Jay Rockefeller bowed out of the Presidential race -- he was not "ready" -- suggests why Americans do not think Democrats are ready for the White House.
It recalls the announcement by Senator Bill Bradley a few years ago that he would not run because he needed more contact with the country "through unhurried travel."
What do these guys want to do, memorize the Social Security regulations and spend another dozen years preening in Congress?
Ronald Reagan didn't know his multiplication tables when he ran for President in 1980.
But he knew how to lead and what he wanted.
George Bush also looks like more of a leader than any of the present Democratic challengers.


A Revival of 'Cabaret' at Candlewood
IN the best of all possible theater worlds, stock productions of musicals would offer more sustenance than customary recycled copies of the original, scaled down to size.
If opera houses can put on revisionist productions, why can't theaters specializing in musicals?
Well, Candlewood can.
The playhouse in New Fairfield earns credit for coming close, in its intelligent attempt to have a new look at "Cabaret." This may have been the first show to have the label "concept musical" affixed to it, and the original concept of the director, Harold Prince, is used at Candlewood as a source for new notions than as gospel.


Tons of Chemical Waste From Homes in County
THE scene at the Valhalla Fire Training Center was unsettling.
Under rainy skies, tents covered hundreds of 55-gallon drums filled with hazardous chemical waste.
Chemists sifted through tons of toxic products, separating flammable substances from those that could be incinerated at a hazardous-waste-treatment center.
This was not the site of some enormous industrial chemical accident, but one of the county's Household Chemical Cleanup Days.
The hazardous waste collected in 891 drums in July had come from the kitchens, garages and basements of county residents.


Dying Saguaro Cactuses Are Bewildering Scientists
One of the most enduring symbols of the American Southwest, the tall, crook-armed saguaro cactus, is dying out, and scientists do not know why, a biology professor says.
The Saguaro National Monument reserve outside Tucson, Ariz., has lost "more than 50 percent in the last 50 years," Kate Lajtha, a biology professor at Boston University, said in an interview Wednesday at the Ecological Society of America's national convention.


Ms. Greenberg To Wed in Fall
October wedding plans for Farrah Michelle Greenberg and Kenneth R. Kleiner, a son of Julie Sanjenis and Samuel K. Kleiner, both of New York, have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Gary J. Greenberg of Harrison, N.Y.
Ms.
Greenberg, 26 years old, is a fashion editor at Elle magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Southern California.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.
The future bridegroom, 26, graduated from Emory University and received a law degree from Hofstra University.
He is to join the law firm of Trager &amp; Trager in Fairfield, Conn., in September.
His father is the counsel at Fisher Brothers, an owner and manager of buildings in New York.


Sarah Arnholz, Law Clerk, Wed to Christopher Wood
Sarah Helmi Arnholz, a daughter of Frederica Arnholz of Brooklyn and the late Thomas A. Arnholz, was married yesterday to Christopher Randolph Wood, the son of Clara Wood of Concord, N.H., and the late H. Booth Wood.
Justice Walter M. Schackman of State Supreme Court officiated in his chambers in Manhattan.
Ms.
Arnholz, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Amherst College and received a J.D. from New York University.
She is a clerk for Judge Edward R. Korman of Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
Mr.
Wood, 30, graduated from Columbia University and is a Ph.D. candidate in Spanish literature at Yale University.


More Cases Expected in S.&amp; L. Fraud
THE savings and loan scandals that have grabbed most of the headlines have focused public attention on states like California and Texas, but Federal law-enforcement officials say New Jersey has emerged as one of the states with the highest incidence of corruption in some of its lending institutions.
Michael Chertoff, the United States Attorney for New Jersey, said that in just the past year his office had charged 42 people in connection with major bank and savings and loan fraud totaling almost $90 million.
Thirty-eight of the defendants have been convicted or have entered guilty pleas, and four are awaiting trial.


Streetscapes: The Felix Warburg Mansion; A Window to the Past in the Present
IF you squint a bit, it might be a scene from the early 1900's when the big mansions were going up on Fifth Avenue.
Or it could be the 1960's when they came down.
But with the Felix Warburg mansion, built in 1908 at the northeast corner of Fifth Avenue and 92d Street and the now-under-renovation home of the Jewish Museum, it's strictly 1990's and the result is an eerie combination of both.


Timmermann Pulls Out
Olympic shot-put champion ULF TIMMERMANN will miss the world track and field championships later this month in Tokyo because of a chronic hip injury, and may be sidelined for the rest of 1991.
The German Athletics Federation said Friday that Timmermann, who broke the Olympic record four times while winning the gold medal in Seoul, South Korea, in 1988, will not be able to compete in Toyko.


Best Pal Rallies for Upset in the Pacific
On a day that many believed would settle the rivalry between Farma Way and Festin, local upstart Best Pal ran the race of his life to defeat perhaps the year's best field of older horses and capture this afternoon's inaugural $1 million Pacific Classic.
The 3-year-old Best Pal, who finished second in this year's Kentucky Derby, returned $11.80 on a $2 bet to win.
He covered a mile and a quarter in a track record 1:594/5 seconds for his eighth victory in 15 career starts in winning the eighth leg of the American Championship Racing Series.


Flatiron Building
To The Editor,
Your interesting piece on the Flatiron Building and the capricious gusts its design provoked on 23d Street brought to mind the admonition "23 skidoo," often invoked by the constabulary in dispersing the gay blades who congregated near the building, in the early years of the century, in the hope of espying a well-turned ankle when the winds would lift an Edwardian hemline.
GAVIN MURPHY Manhattan


Cuba Ends U.S. Run On Golds
The streak is over.
A United States women's basketball team will not win a gold medal in a major international event for the first time since 1982.
Cuba ended the American run with an 86-81 victory this afternoon in the semifinals of the Pan American Games.
As the United States men struggled through the last five years without a gold medal, the women could always be counted on to bring home a title, whether it be the Pan Am Games, the Olympics, the Goodwill Games or the world championships.


Camera
Forty-six years ago this week, on Aug. 15, 1945, the news hit the United States like a tidal wave of joy: Japan had surrendered; World War II was over.
Broadcasters shouted through radio loudspeakers, drivers honked their horns, and in towns across America, impromptu parades stepped off.
In New York, the magnet that is Times Square pulled servicemen and women, tourists and office workers into an instant celebration.
Alfred Eisenstaedt, a Life staff photographer, rushed there with his 35-millimeter Leica from his office near Rockefeller Center.
A nurse and a sailor arrived about the same time.
Caught up in the frenzy stirred by the news, the nurse and the sailor, strangers to each other, kissed.
Life published the photograph the next week and since then, that moment has become an icon of an American celebration, known the world over.


Ireland
To the Editor: Being a longtime member of the Irish-Georgian Society, I was looking forward to seeing Ireland first hand.
However, tourists must be warned about the Dublin airport taxi drivers who will charge double, if not watched.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday headed "Dropping a Card From Abroad," with the Travel Advisory column, carried an erroneous credit.
It was by The New York Times.


Constructing a Wood Deck
BUILDING a raised wood deck is generally a major project.
But building small modular deck units, which are hardly more than decorative platforms, and arranging them to form a larger structure that rests on the ground or on any other hard, level surface is within the range of nearly anyone owning an electric drill and portable circular saw.
The units can be constructed individually and used like mosaic tiles or building blocks to create single or multilevel decks that can be arranged as desired.


The Old-Fashioned Way
To the Editor:
In Robert Leiter's review of "The Illustrated Atlas of Jewish Civilization" (In Short: Reference Books, Jan. 27), he quotes from the publisher's information that the maps are based on my extensive cartographic data base, and goes on understandably to comment, "Once again one has to marvel at the wonders computers have wrought."


Making a Difference; Ms. Managing Partner
She never meant to be a symbol, but a few weeks ago Debora de Hoyos cracked one of the legal profession's glass ceilings when she was named managing partner of her Chicago-based firm, the 532-lawyer Mayer, Brown &amp; Platt.
Ms. de Hoyos becomes one of the few women in such a position at a major law firm.
Letters and phone calls -- from strangers as well as friends -- have been streaming in.
"It perturbed me at first," she said of the attention to the piercing of the gender barrier.
"I didn't think of myself as a symbol. I thought of myself as someone who has had a good professional experience." Her resistance melted away as she realized the significance of the appointment.
"It was very important to a lot of people," she said.
"One client called to say how pleased he was as a father of two daughters."


Answering The Mail
Q.
My coffee table has an unfinished black-and-white marble top.
Anything placed on it leaves spots, be it a water glass, a plate and so on.
These spots seem impossible to remove.
Is there any product that will remove them, and is there anything I can put on the marble that will help prevent this problem?
A.
Marble is very porous and stains easily.
Most marble tops have sealers that prevent stains from soaking in.
But even with a sealer, stains have to be mopped up promptly.
Removing stains later on is not easy, because the removal depends on the type of stain and how old it is.
The older the stain, the harder it is to remove.
I suggest you buy a marble-cleaning kit from a marble dealer or a department store.
It will contain various solvents and cleaning agents for different types of stains.
If that does not work, you may have to have a marble dealer polish and refinish the table.
After it is clean, be sure a marble sealer is applied, and then keep the table waxed with a white paste wax.


For Campers, Worst Bugs Are in Computers
Esther Hernandez has camped at Wildwood State Park on Long Island Sound here for almost 20 years.
But when Mrs.
Hernandez and her husband showed up on a Sunday evening last month, they almost didn't get in.
They drove up to the campground office, expecting to be met as always by a park employee lugging a large ledger with penciled-in information about the availability of campsites.
Instead, the employee was seated at a computer terminal and told them they were supposed to have called a toll-free phone number for a reservation.


Children's Books/Folk Tales; Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
HOW THE OX STAR FELL FROM HEAVEN.
Written and illustrated by Lily Toy Hong.
Albert Whitman. $13.95. (Ages 5 to 8) Once the ox star lived in heaven, and without a beast of burden to help them in the fields, people struggled to raise their crops and were often hungry.
After scrambling an edict from the Emperor of All the Heavens, the ox falls to earth in this Chinese folk tale.


Currency Tips In Argentina
For travelers in Argentina over the past year, coping with the local currency -- the austral -- has been a nightmare.
After a period of hyperinflation and low prices for United States travelers, the Government attempted to prop up the austral against the dollar, and by December Argentina was much more expensive.
Store owners refused to take credit cards, and dollar traveler's checks were worth only about 80 percent of face value.
But a new economic stabilization plan was introduced in March, and the dollar has been steady since then at about 10,000 australes.
Visitors need no longer avoid carrying a lot of australes for fear that their value will fall overnight.
Dollars are still widely accepted in Argentina, though, and if visitors find themselves without australes they can still use dollars to buy a meals, clothing or craft work.


Piercing Wall Street's 'Lucite Ceiling'
When pressed, Bernard B. Beal will say that he made his most critical career decision at gunpoint.
It was the summer of 1972, and Mr.
Beal, the son of an elevator operator in Brooklyn, had just finished his scholarship-sponsored studies at the Wooster School in Danbury, Conn.
He had applied to various colleges, but preferred entrepreneurship.
So he took his college fund and bought a stake in a fast-food restaurant in the Bronx, which he helped manage.
When a gunman arrived one hot night, the young manager tried to bolt and a bullet grazed his leg.
Bernard Beal decided that maybe college was a better idea after all.
College and an M.B.A. from Stanford led to a nine-year stint at E. F. Hutton, now Shearson Lehman Brothers.
Then, in 1988, Mr.
Beal at last became an entrepreneur: He joined with several partners to form M. R. Beal &amp; Company, one of the fastest-growing minority-owned investment banking firms on Wall Street.


Correction
A report in the Headliners column last Sunday misstated the year Bobby Jones won the Georgia State Amateur golf tournament.
It was 1916.


Lark Ginzburg Is Married
Lark Ginzburg, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph Ginzburg of New York, was married yesterday in Bloomfield, N.J., to James Allen Kuhta, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Kuhta of Clifton, N.J.
Mayor James Anzaldi of Clifton performed the ceremony at the Oakeside Cultural Center.
Mrs.
Kuhta, 30, is a student at Thomas Edison State College in Trenton and is an administrative assistant at the Delta Consulting Group, a management consulting firm in New York.
Mr.
Kuhta, 33, is the president and owner of Constant Watch Security Systems of Passaic County in Clifton.


Wall Street; Partnerships: A Push for Disclosure
The 1980's were days of reckoning for a broad swath of American enterprise.
Real estate values shuddered, then shrank.
Oil and gas prices stagnated.
Even the prices of used aircraft declined.
But each time Albert W. Garet, a retiree who lives in Bayside, N.Y., opened his brokerage account statement, he saw that his investments -- various limited partnerships invested in airplanes, real estate and energy projects -- had not declined a penny from his purchase price.


What to Do in Heat Wave and Deluge
JUST when gardeners thought they were in control, nature showed them up.
First there was the heat wave, when record-breaking temperatures cooked everything.
During this period low marks went to those gardeners who put out lawn sprinklers and let them run all day.
Their object was to keep the grass green.
What would the neighbors think if the grass was brown?
Such needless activity wastes precious water and is a hard habit to break.


A Celebration of Differences
Looking at the Megadance program that closed the Serious Fun festival at Lincoln Center last weekend, I was reminded of an observation made by the contemporary French choreographer Angelin Preljocaj at the 1990 Lyons Dance Biennial.
For all its experiments, he said, French modern dance today has no counterpart to an American avant-garde figure like Merce Cunningham, who has changed an entire art form and invited audiences to see dance in a new way.
Mr.
Preljocaj said that he and his colleagues contribute something less encompassing -- differing and individual points of view.
In this respect, he concluded, France has a "danse d'auteur," closer in spirit to the cinema d'auteur movement of the 1950's and 60's.


For Children of Divorce, Fathers Count
To the Editor:
In "Children of Divorce: Steps to Help Can Hurt," (Science Times, July 23), you cite a study of which I am co-author, published in the American Sociological Review, October 1987, on how paternal involvement affects children's well-being.
You inaccurately report that our research supplies evidence that "children often do better if the father drops out of the picture altogether."


Sunday Menu; Sausage Flavor, No Guilt
Not everything made with less fat tastes good.
One important exception is sausage.
The amount of fat is so high in the traditional sausage -- anywhere from 30 to 50 percent, far more than is needed to carry the flavor -- that superb lower-fat poultry sausages are no surprise.
Though not exactly health food, those with 10 to 12 percent fat add the characteristic flavor to a dish without breaking the fat budget as long as the servings are small -- about three ounces.


Crestfallen Albanians Speak of Death
After two days and nights of sleeping on the bleachers of a soccer stadium here, scrounging for handouts of water and bread and finding nothing like a men's room, Ferit Dobrolishti still likes to say that he would rather die than return to Albania, the land that he and thousands of others fled this week aboard a commandeered ferry bound for Italy.
But the protestation by the 19-year-old engineering student seems to have been beaten thin in the shadeless heat of the stadium, where garbage tufts the soccer pitch and the corridors reek of human excrement -- noisome testament to a reception that the Italian authorities have apparently designed to show the fugitives and any others who might think of following them that they are not welcome.
Violence Grows Worse
So unopen are the Italian arms that the tension and desperation plaguing the overheated and underfed Albanians can barely be bottled up.
Last night, for the first time, the police used tear gas here and at the port where the Albanians disembarked to quell disturbances among the seaborne fugitives.


Sunday Outing; From the North Shore's Whaling Era
From the shores and the heights of this hilly North Shore village, families once watched Long Island Sound for ships returning from voyages that took as long as five years.
There were nine ships in the Cold Spring Harbor fleet of 1836 to 1862, three-masters that hunted whales for the oil that illuminated 19th-century homes and lubricated the Industrial Revolution.
The Tuscarora, the Barclay, the N. P. Talmadge, the Monmouth, the Richmond, the Alice, the Huntsville, the Splendid and the Sheffield vanished into history after petroleum was discovered in Pennsylvania.
Yet every day but Monday, the fleet comes to life at the Cold Spring Harbor Whaling Museum.
The village was named for the underground springs that its early settlers found.
"Harbor" was added in 1826, when it got its first post office.
The museum is a modest one-and-a-half-story structure that might escape a driver's notice among the boutiques, antiques shops, toy stores and whatnot stores along Main Street, the portion of Route 25A, or Northern Boulevard, that runs through the village.
It's a better town to walk in than drive, with sidewalks and ample parking space in public lots.
Creating an Illusion
Awaiting the visitor inside the museum are, among other things, whale bones and teeth; a killer whale skull the size of an easy chair; a trypot, a cauldron the size of a small bathtub in which all meat was removed from whales' blubber, leaving only the precious oil; and a 30-foot whaleboat.
These memorabilia of the American whaling era, which died out by 1925, are fascinating in themselves, but the era itself seems to come alive in the commentary of 10 interpreters, as the museum calls them.
They create the illusion that they not only know all about these things, but were there.
One interpreter is Jack Abrams, a retired teacher and principal who lives in Northport.
Mr.
Abrams was recently found standing at the starboard side of the whaleboat addressing an intent audience across the thwarts from him on the port side.
The boat, he said, was used to pursue whales; the whaling ship itself, which displaced 300 to 800 tons of water, was far less nimble than the boat and its manpower of six oarsmen, a tillerman and a harpooner.
The boat could quietly pull alongside a whale swimming at its traveling pace, about 7 miles an hour; if alarmed, the whale would shoot away at about 20 m.p.h.
Boys and Whales
"The boats go after the whale after it's surfaced and spouted to clear water out of its blowhole and breathe," Mr.
Abrams said.
His glance fell on a blond youngster.
"You -- yes, you!" he said.
"If you've been swimming under water, what do you do when you come up? Show me."
"Well, I, er," the boy said, and blew out of his mouth and nose.
"Exactly! Exactly," Mr.
Abrams said.
"You and the whale blow out the water. You're not fish; you're mammals. You blow out of two nostrils, he blows out of one, and the men in this boat get him." (Mr. Abrams does well with children. Ann Gill, the museum's director, said that of 47,500 visitors last year, more than 17,000 were students at private and public schools in New York City.)
Mr.
Abrams strode to the whaleboat's bow and pointed to a half-circle cut into the coaming, a very short deck over the bow area.
"This," he said, "is what they called the clumsy cleat. It's for the crewman who uses this . . . " He picked up a harpoon from the boat.
"The man puts his thigh into the curve to steady him," Mr.
Abrams went on.
"The harpoon's not for killing, but lancing, or hooking, the whale. If the man stabbed down as hard as he could, hitting a vital center in the whale, it would rear up and smash the whaleboat. The crew hooks him and wears him out, then tows him to the ship." Scrimshaw on Plastic
The whaleboat is no replica.
It was aboard the Daisy, a ship on which Robert Cushman Murphy, an authority on oceanic birds and Lamont Curator Emeritus at the American Museum of Natural History, took a voyage in 1912.
He later bought the whaleboat and offered it to Cold Spring Harbor on the condition that it be protected from the elements.
A large stone shed was built for it in 1942, and the museum grew up around the shed.
The names of the village's nine whalers are listed on a wall of a classroom in which youngsters are taught scrimshaw.
Instead of whalebone, they carve plastic picnic spoons and knives.
Beside the list of ships is a small but striking diorama of a harpooned sperm whale rearing from the sea to crush its tormentors, the tiny crewmen of a tiny whaleboat; their attitudes bespeak terror.
"The Whales: Can They Be Saved?" a film with starkly graphic footage from the 1920's, is shown at various times daily.
Mr.
Abrams offered an affirmative postscript to the film's title -- that the gray whale and the humpback whale are gaining in population.
Live Exhibits
On the way to the whaling museum, drivers approaching from the west might like to drop in at the Cold Spring Harbor Fish Hatchery and Aquarium, which lies in a valley on route 25A, less than a mile from the village's downtown.
The exhibits here are alive: brook trout, brown trout, rainbow trout, carp, salmon, sturgeon and turtles swim in or bask around outdoor pools.Some swim in an aquarium building.
That building's major attraction is a living cross-section of a pond somewhere upstate.
All the creatures seen here are natives of New York State's inland waters or unwitting immigrants, dumped into ponds and streams by unthinking pet owners.
Another aquarium holds smaller fish, salamanders and frogs, which peep out of their cages' camouflage at children trying to spot them.
A round pool outdoors contains trout ready for breeding.
Both the hatchery and the whaling museum are owned by the village.
Both are also champions of preserving endangered species -- the museum for the largest creatures in the sea (and on earth) and the hatchery for the creatures of its state's ponds and streams.
GETTING THERE
Cold Spring Harbor is 33 miles from Manhattan, and the Long Island Rail Road station is three miles south of the whaling museum, with no public transportation.
So driving is the way to go.
From New York City, take the Long Island Expressway to the Northern State Parkway at Roslyn.
Take the Northern State to South Oyster Bay Road, follow it north to Route 25A, or Northern Boulevard, and there turn east (right) and follow 25A into Cold Spring Harbor.
Sunday parking is not restricted and the village's lot, on Route 25A, is very large.
No refreshments are sold at the hatchery or the museum.
Each has rest rooms.
For hungry children (or grown-ups), in the village proper are the Inn on the Harbor and the Cold Spring Harbor Restaurant.
The museum is open from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Tuesday through Sunday.
Admission is $2 for adults, $1.50 for those over 65, $1 for students 6 to 18 years of age and free for children under 6.
The hatchery's hours are 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission is $2 for adults and $1 for those over 65 and children 5 to 12 years old.
Children under 5 are admitted free.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on July 28 about traffic safety programs for elderly drivers misstated the state's policy on auto insurance premiums for older adults who complete defensive driving courses.
New Jersey does not require lower premiums for them.


Corrections
A headline last Sunday about the marriage of Kathleen Malone Wray to Jon Steven Baughman referred incorrectly to the bridegroom.
He is known as Steve.
The report also referred incorrectly to the bride's mother.
She is Gilda Wray.


Theaters and Teachers Share a Mission
WHEN Louise Wigglesworth saw the South Jersey Regional Theater production of "Painting Churches," she couldn't help thinking that the set would be just right for "Charley's Aunt," which she was directing for her students at Pinelands Regional High School in Tuckerton.
She remembered that Joanna Papada, the theater's artistic director, had told her, "Get a bunch of kids to dismantle it, put it on a truck and you can have it."


HAITIANS EXPELLED BY SANTO DOMINGO
The Dominican Republic has expelled thousands of Haitian sugar plantation workers in recent weeks, inflaming long-latent enmities and suspicions in the two countries that share a single Caribbean island.
The Haitian authorities say that more than 10,000 people have been forced to return to this poor and densely populated country since mid-June, among them many who left Haiti so long ago that they no longer have homes or close relatives here.


New York City Council Field: Fresh Faces, Traditional Mold
A drastic overhaul of New York City government and a divisive redistricting process are on the verge of achieving their stated goal: an expanded City Council that better reflects the minority groups who now constitute a majority of the city's population.
The ethnic and racial diversity of the more than 300 candidates who filed designating petitions with the Board of Elections by last week's deadline virtually guarantees that the proportion of black and Hispanic members will rise from the current one in four to perhaps four in 10 when the new Council is inaugurated next January.


7 Monks and 2 Others Are Slain At a Buddhist Temple in Phoenix
Nine people, including seven monks, were found shot to death today in the kitchen of a Buddhist temple on the outskirts of Phoenix.
The bodies were found at the Arizona Buddhist Temple this morning by a worshipper who had brought flowers to the temple, Sheriff Tom Agnos of Maricopa County told the Associated Press.


Miss Simmons Plans to Marry
The engagement of Elizabeth Bradlee Simmons to Oliver Filley Ames Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ames of North Easton, Mass., has been announced by her parents, Sarah B. Simmons of New Canaan, Conn., and Hardwick Simmons of Katonah, N.Y.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Simmons, 27 years old and a graduate of Harvard University, will teach English at the Dana Hall School in Wellesley, Mass., starting in September.
Her father is the president and chief executive at Prudential Securities in New York.


'Children Raising Children'
The article "Continued Rise In Pregnancies Among Teen-Agers Is Stirring Concern" (July 7) is one more report of a condition that will have far-reaching ramifications in our country for generations.
The drain on society's financial resources will only be exceeded by the human cost, as children raising children will lead to serious problems of addiction, delinquency, learning difficulties as well as a general inability to contribute to the common good of families, neighborhoods and communities.
All this is well known, yet the underlying causes for this increase in younger and younger pregnancy continues to elude professionals.
It is not simply a matter of economics, as wealthy suburbs are marching into the statistic column.
Education helps, but it is not a solution.
Readily available birth control and decision-making skills are available, but they will not help young girls
and boys
who deliberately want to have babies.
These efforts are important and will, no doubt, assist young people in making responsible choices as adults.
But in all likelihood these programs will not significantly affect the number of children born to children.


Black Theater Groups Share Dreams
Denzel Washington was here.
So were Esther Rolle, Avery Brooks, Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee and other actors, as well as directors, script writers and hundreds of fans.
They all descended upon this central North Carolina city last week for the second National Black Theater Festival.
Audiences at the six-day event were treated to 20 productions by some of the nation's leading black companies.
There were also workshops and seminars on subjects from set design to audience development.


CAMPUS LIFE: UC-Irvine; Trying to Keep Minority Students Going to School
Eloy Rodriguez, a biology professor at the University of California at Irvine, wants to encourage Spanish-speaking and other minority students to stay in school by immersing them in science for a month on the campus here.
Professor Rodriguez directs the Kids Investigating and Discovering Science program for 120 pupils in elementary schools and the Howard Hughes Summer High School Science Academy, programs that he hopes will prepare minority students in science, bolster their academic self-confidence and eventually lower their dropout rate.
These programs also train elementary and high school teachers to teach science to bilingual students.


Courtney A. Mahoney to Wed T. J. Spellman 3d
Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick A. Mahoney of West Islip, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Courtney Ann Mahoney to Thomas Joseph Spellman 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Spellman Jr., of St.
James, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Mahoney, 23 years old, graduated from Hofstra University.
She is a trial-preparation assistant in the Manhattan District Attorney's Office.
Her father is the Sheriff of Suffolk County.


Any Spare Change? The America's Cup Defense Wants You!
The costs of competing in and staging an America's Cup yacht racing series have spiraled in the last decade.
But financial support for the event, known throughout its history as a rich man's sport, has not kept pace with prices.
Dennis Conner, the cup's most successful skipper, has found it difficult to raise money for his 1992 Stars &amp; Stripes campaign.
His budget, downgraded from $30 million to $20 million in the last year, has stalled out at little more than $10 million, the amount raised so far.
Might Be Forced to Go With One Boat
The lack of money has forced Conner to put off building a second boat.
His team has set Sept. 1 as the deadline for deciding whether to go ahead with a second boat.


Mrs. Wille Weds O. B. Chisolm Jr.
Barbara Bowen Wille of Greenwich, Conn., and O. Beirne Chisolm Jr. of Rye, N.Y., were married in Greenwich yesterday.
The Rev.
Richard F. Van Wely officiated at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Chisolm, 54 years old, is the executive director of the Forum for World Affairs, a group in Stamford, Conn., that sponsors lectures and conferences on international issues.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's in art history from the University of London.
She is the daughter of Virginia T. Bowen of Delray Beach, Fla., and the late Edmund J. Bowen.
Mr.
Bowen was the Albany branch manager of Smith, Barney &amp; Company.
The bride's late husband, R. Frank Wille, was chairman and chief executive of the Greater New York Savings Bank.


New York Leads Big Cities in Robbery Rate, but Drops in Murders
New York City led the nation's 25 largest cities in robberies last year, claiming the dubious distinction for the second straight year at a time when reports of violent crime were surging across America, an analysis of data released today by Federal officials indicates.
In a city where crime has become a dominant theme of private and political discourse, a record 100,280 robberies were reported to the police last year -- 13.7 for every 1,000 residents, according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's annual Uniform Crime Reports for 1990.


New &amp; Noteworthy
ETCHINGS IN AN HOURGLASS, by Kate Simon. (Harper Perennial, $9.95.) With this sequel to "Bronx Primitive" and "A Wider World," Kate Simon, who died last year, completed the story of how she broke out from her circumscribed life in a neighborhood of Jewish immigrants and tasted everything she could in the outside world.
"The three volumes together may well become a classic of autobiography," Doris Grumbach said here last year.
EDGE OF EDEN, by Nicholas Proffitt. (Bantam, $5.99.) A Nairobi police inspector teams up with a former big game hunter to track down a poacher, rumored to have the powers of a witch doctor and connections to the highest levels of the Kenyan Government.
"This novel has the kind of guttiness that signals a book whose author is on to some important truths," Thomas Fleming said here last year.
"The result is a revelatory work of fiction that takes us inside Kenya, the country that in many ways symbolizes the problems of black independence."


The Subtle Power Of Peepholes
To the Editor:
Let me reframe the debate around Elizabeth Broun's removal of Sol LeWitt's "artwork" from the exhibition "Eadweard Muybridge and Contemporary America Photography" in the National Museum of American Art  [ "Peering Into Peepholes and Finding Politics," by Michael Kimmelman, July 21 ] .
Change the category from sex to race.
If Mr.
LeWitt had made a degrading image of a black person, everyone would understand Ms.
Broun's action, even if they disagreed with her methods.
When African-Americans reject demeaning images of themselves, no one accuses them of "bullying antiracism." We understand, because they now refuse to be silent when a white person tries to humiliate them.
We no longer defend racist language with the white sword of moral authority.
We call the white image maker to task, not the black protester.


Rules on Approved Uses of Drugs Could Bar Help for Some Patients
When standard chemotherapy failed to stem the growth of Ruth Soukup's lung cancer and made her violently ill, doctors prescribed a newer medicine that had proved successful in rigorous patient trials.
The new drug, carboplatin, shrank the tumor with few side effects, but Medicare refused to pay the $1,000-a-month cost.
The problem was that while the drug is listed in the major physician guides as a treatment for lung cancer the Food and Drug Administration label for the drug designates it only as a treatment for tumors of the ovaries.


Jane Wootton Brown Weds
Jane Wootton Brown, the daughter of Jane W. Walker and Archibald McD.
Brown, both of Virginia Beach, Va., was married yesterday to Francis Lee Summers 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Summers Jr. of Staunton, Va.
The Rev.
John H. Jordan officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Virginia Beach.
Mrs.
Summers, 27 years old, teaches kindergarten at the Betty F. Williams School in Virginia Beach.
Mr.
Summers, 32 and a graduate of Furman University, is a financial consultant at Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner &amp; Smith in Norfolk, Va.


Wynton Marsalis, Immersed in the Deep Blues
Some 100 years after its development, the blues and its distinctly American tonality still roll on.
The impact has been astounding: a humble 12-bar, 3-chord repeating cycle, made popular by the repressed black minority, has given definition to some of the most important musical developments of the 20th century.
With its endless decline and regeneration and its unsettled harmonic pulling and pushing -- Europe and Africa in contention -- the blues seems to sum up a tumultuous century.
It even defines by its absence: popular music without the blues impulse or tonality sounds archaic and limited in expression.
Few jazz musicians have had the audacity or the commercial freedom to tackle the subject as thoroughly as the trumpeter Wynton Marsalis.
Mr.
Marsalis has just released a three-CD series called "Soul Gestures in Southern Blue," which is jazz's largest concept album ever.
It is also brilliant music.
Other jazz composers have tackled the blues form or mood at LP length -- Duke Ellington in "Ellington Indigos" and "Blues in Orbit," Charles Mingus in "Blues and Roots," Jackie McLean in "Bluesnik," Miles Davis in "Kind of Blue" and John Coltrane in "Coltrane Plays the Blues" -- but none have had the liberty to put out a nearly three-hour project.


Rocket Blasts Himself
Despite seven receptions for 146 yards and 70 yards on kickoff and punt returns in the Toronto Argonauts' 37-35 victory over the Saskatchewan Roughriders, RAGHIB ISMAIL wasn't satisfied with his performance.
"Still a long way to go man, long way to go," Ismail said after Friday night's game.
"I feel like I'm getting it back a little. It's like a step or two away. I could've done a lot better. I feel that I'm still a little slow. It's like when you're getting your motor started. I'm still searching for my best game, but it'll come."


The Right Way to Retool the Soviet Economy
To the Editor:
You report that Mikhail S. Gorbachev's letter to the Group of Seven leaders was called inadequate partly because it "hedges on the goal of privatizing large enterprises" (news article, July 16).
It would be unfortunate if Western assessment of Soviet economic transformation focused on privatization.
Far more important are the steps that should be taken first, such as monetary stabilization, freeing of prices, marketization and full legalization of private ownership.


Bridge
In the past, teams from North America have fared badly in the World Junior Teams Championships, for players 26 years old and younger.
This year's contest, sponsored by NEC of Japan, will begin Thursday in Ann Arbor, Mich., and may well be different, for two reasons.
First, the omens are favorable.
When this event was first played, in 1987 in the Netherlands, the Dutch team won.
And two years later, in Nottingham, England, the British squad scored a convincing victory.
So there appears to be a home-court advantage.


Maine
To the Editor: I enjoyed the article about Eagle Island, Me. (Travel, July 7), but I was sorry there was no reference to Matthew Henson, the black man who accompanied Admiral Peary to the North Pole.
I'm sure that the four Eskimos who were there also made valuable contributions to the achievement, but Admiral Peary acknowledged Mr.
Hanson's help as absolutely essential to the success of the expedition.
I think it is important to recognize the achievement of black Americans in history outside of academic courses and books and articles that focus on that subject.
CHARLES W. WILDER Brooklyn


As a Discipline Advances, A Debate on Scholarship
Although some Afrocentric research is reasonably widely accepted, other work appears to be based on highly questionable scholarship.
And some scholars have made accusations that dangerously misguided versions of science and history are creeping into American classrooms.
Their chief criticisms of Afrocentricity's scholarship are that many of its findings are arrived at unscientifically and lack adequate proof and that the academic credentials of many Afrocentrists are in fields other than those in which they study black subjects.
The critics also say that much of what is advanced depends on sources considered poor or outdated.


The Atlantic Charter: Design for Tomorrow?
A document drawn up a half-century ago today can plausibly be seen as the foundation of the new world that lies at last within humanity's grasp.
Not many historic pronouncements have dated so little as the joint declaration to which Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill subscribed on Aug. 12, 1941.
The two men met in a shrouded rendezvous at Placentia Bay off the coast of Newfoundland -- a destination to which they had traveled in utmost secrecy through dangerous waters on heavily armed warships.
Though Roosevelt and Churchill had been exchanging messages since World War II began in 1939, they had never talked face to face.
Beyond satisfying his curiosity about the other -- and these were men with acute instincts for history -- each had particular objectives.


BRITISHISMS LYING DOGGO
One of my cockney friends swears this is how the derivation of "loo" came about (On Language: "Britishisms Lying Doggo," July 14).
In Europe and elsewhere, that facility is often referred to as a "water closet." In a variation of rhyming slang, when asked where he was heading, a cockney would reply: "To meet my Waterloo." In due course, that expression became, simply, loo.
Sounds reasonable to me.
FREDRIC C. HAMBURG
Bethesda, Md.


Miss Mack Wed To B. E. Sheridan
Lorna Duncan Mack and Barry Edward Sheridan were married yesterday at Our Lady of Grace Roman Catholic Church in South Chatham, Mass., by the Rev.
William J. Cullen.
The bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Mack of Ringoes, N.J.
The bridegroom is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Michael F. Sheridan of Richmond, Mass.
Mrs.
Sheridan, 25 years old, graduated from Princeton University.
She is an associate in corporate communications at Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
Her father is the president of Carter-Wallace Products in New York.
Her mother, Lorna Carey Mack, is an editorial consultant for the Princeton University Press edition of the papers of Henry David Thoreau.


Marathon Swim Goes to Last Mile
Jim Barber of Indianapolis overtook Igor de Souza of Brazil in the final mile to win the 10th annual 28 1/2-mile Manhattan Island Marathon Swim yesterday.
Barber covered the course in 7 hours 6 minutes 34 seconds.
Kris Rutford of Lincoln, Neb., also passed de Souza in the final mile to take second in 7:06:44, and the Brazilian, who had led from the start, was third in 7:08.20.


NOWHERE TO GO
Miller's moving description of the worsening plight of the Palestinian diaspora raises an important issue for the forthcoming peace negotiations.
The Palestinians's fears of massive expulsions from Kuwait and other countries, where they have long resided, recalls the fears of British non-Zionist Jews like Edwin Montagu, Secretary of State for India in 1917, that establishment of a Jewish national home in Palestine would be used as an excuse by European anti-Semites to expel the Jews from their midst.


Two Guides On Britain
"The Best of Britain Guide: Heritage, Culture and Fine Hotels" is a new publication from American Express Europe and is sponsored by four groups of hotels in Britain: Leading Hotels of the World, Pride of Britain, Relais and Chateaux and Small Luxury Hotels of the World.
The book illustrates over 105 of the town houses, country mansions and hunting lodges that make up Britain's circuit of luxury hotels.
Each chapter features views of the interior and exterior of the hotels anddescriptions of their grounds and services.
The guide is available at (800) 448-3039, for $29.95, plus $4.50 for mailing.
If you buy the book with and American Express card, American Express will discount the price $5 and send along a voucher worth $:25 (about $43) toward the first night's stay in any of the hotels.
A free booklet called "Amazing London" focuses on money-saving tips for a visit to the city.
It has information on museums and other attractions that don't charge.
Copies are available from the British Tourist Authority, 40 West 57th Street, New York, N.Y. 10019; (212) 581-4700.


Greg Adler Wed To Ms. Schwartz
Marilyn Ann Schwartz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Daniel W. Schwartz of North Woodmere, L.I. was married last evening at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I., to Greg Adler, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Adler of New York.
Rabbi Morris Friedman performed the ceremony.
Ms.
Schwartz, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, is to join the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association in New York as a securities analyst this month.
She graduated with distinction from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is an associate professor of psychiatry at the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn and the director of forensic psychiatry at the Kings County Hospital Center.


'THEY'VE GOTTA HAVE US'
If any white person of Singleton's stature had named his cat "Black Boy," there would be a hell storm brewing.
Also, Singleton was quoted as saying, "What sense would it have made to have some white boy impose his interpretation on my experiences." Yet I notice Singleton's idol, Spike Lee, felt no qualms in "interpreting" Italian-American experience in his film, "Jungle Fever." COURTNEY WAYSHAK
Cambridge, Mass.


Sports of The Times; Tyson Is a Role Model in Reverse
Iron Mike Tyson might be in more trouble now than he ever was in the ring, and this includes the time Buster Douglas hit him so hard he spent an embarrassing amount of time crawling on the canvas looking for his mouthpiece, which he eventually found, and his senses, which seem to have irretrievably abandoned him.
Tyson is being legally challenged by two women for what he might have considered playful acts, or just the divine right of champions -- or ex-champions -- of which he is one.


Taunts and Outrage Greet Protest March in Canarsie
More than 300 chanting, placard-waving black demonstrators led by the Rev.
Al Sharpton staged a tense protest march through Brooklyn's racially troubled, predominantly white Canarsie section yesterday and were met with taunts, jeers and racial insults but no violence.
An escort of 400 riot-equipped police officers on foot and motorcycle encircled the marchers and several times officers rushed in to avert clashes between demonstrators and a band of about three dozen whites who strode alongside and hurled epithets and angry catcalls.


Ms. Del Sesto Marries Richard Lesser
Gabrielle Del Sesto, a daughter of Christopher T. Del Sesto of Cranston, R.I., and Marina del Sesto of New York, was married yesterday in Newport, R.I., to Richard Lesser, the son of Edward A. Lesser of Erie, Pa., and Arlene Wagner of Pittsburgh.
Associate Justice Haiganush Bedrosian of the Rhode Island Family Court officiated at Ocean Cliff.
Ms.
Del Sesto, who is 31 years old and is keeping her name, is a director of corporate research for MTV Networks in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University, where she received an M.B.A.
Her father is the senior vice president and treasurer of Johnson and Wales College.
Her grandfather the late Christopher Del Sesto was Governor of Rhode Island from 1959 until 1961 and was an associate justice of the Rhode Island Superior Court from 1966 until his death in 1973.


All About/Air-Conditioners; When Manufacturers Must Depend On the Miseries of Summer
On a blistering summer day, with suffocating humidity and urban tempers on knife's edge, any city can be New York -- hell, with an attitude.
Among the small brotherhood of companies that make and sell air-conditioners, however, heat is bliss.
Three days of hazy, hot and humid weather, so an industry rule of thumb goes, means sales, sales, sales.
Only when summer lashes back with mild temperatures does this industry, with an estimated $1.2 billion in wholesale revenues, mop its brow.
"Unfavorably cool," as one company spokeswoman terms the miserable condition.


On 700th Anniversary as a Nation, Switzerland Does Some Soul-Searching
With the highest living standard in Europe and a political system that is a model of grass-roots democracy, Switzerland could be forgiven for marking its 700th anniversary as a nation this month with just a touch of, well, Swiss complacency.
But a special exhibition at the Federal Parliament building here quickly signals that Switzerland's mood today is anything but self-satisfied.
Instead of cheese or cowbells or even a jolly gnome, the first exhibit shows the slumped figure of a man injecting himself with heroin.


Following Fire, Ship Returns
Premier Cruise Lines' Starship Majestic was due to go back into service last week after being disabled from a fire at sea July 14.
The ship was set to resume its three- and four-day cruises out of Port Canaveral, Fla., to the Abaco Islands in the northern Bahamas.
A small fire broke out on the ship around 2 A.M. as the ship was returning from a three-day cruise.
None of the ship's 739 passengers and 381 crew members were injured.
The fire was extinguished quickly, the cruise line said, but the passengers were evacuated from their cabins and sent to lifeboat stations because of carbon dioxide produced by the ship's fire control system.


Marine Park Is Charged With Mistreating Dolphins
Ocean World, a popular 3.5-acre attraction here, has become the first marine park in the country to face legal action by the Federal Government on charges of mistreating dolphins.
In a civil complaint filed Friday, the Department of Agriculture accused the park of willfully violating the Federal Animal Welfare Act in several ways, among them by keeping dolphins in an undersized petting pool and subjecting them to over-chlorinated water until their skin peeled off.


Anne E. Salzberg Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Salzberg of Farmington, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Anne Elizabeth Salzberg, to John Kenneth Olshan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth S. Olshan of Redding, Conn.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Salzberg, 23 years old, graduated from Boston University, as did her fiance.
She is an assistant account executive at Robert Marston &amp; Associates, a public relations agency in New York.
Her father is the sales manager for Buckley &amp; Mann, fabric manufacturers in Franklin, Mass.
Her mother, Ruth Salzberg, is a writer.


POSTINGS: $1.65 Million State Grant; 75 L.I. Affordables
Seventy-five town houses and one-family houses are to be built in Central Islip, L.I., with the help of a $1.65 million grant from the New York State Affordable Housing Corporation.
This is the third phase of the 400-unit College Woods complex being built near Exit 56 on the Long Island Expressway by the Town of Islip Community Development Agency.
The state subsidy amounts to $22,000 a unit and will help bring the cost of the houses down to about $80,000 to $99,500, from $110,000 to $129,000.
They will be sold to "moderate-income purchasers who are unable to purchase homes in the town," the state agency said in its description of the project.
Construction is to begin next month.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15
An American hostage will be freed by Tuesday, pro-Iranian Lebanese kidnappers announced in Beirut, defying a threat by another group to kill a French hostage if there were any more releases.
Page 1


Dorothy Meek Weds Nicholas Porter
Dorothy Lyles Meek, the daughter of Joanne Marston Lauder of Sun Valley, Idaho, and Samuel W. Meek Jr., of Greenwich, Conn., and Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Nicholas Tewkesbury Porter, a son of the Rev.
Canon and Mrs.
H.
Boone Porter of Southport, Conn.
The bridegroom's father, who is an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Watch Hill Chapel in Watch Hill, R.I.
The bride, 26 years old, was until recently a graphic designer in London.
She graduated from Yale University and attended Christie's Fine Arts Program in London..
Her father is of counsel at the Palm Beach office of the Connecticut law firm of Cummings &amp; Lockwood.


Pump Up the Volume, Beethoven
In a few weeks students will return to college campuses, towing trailers full of electirc guitars, synthesizers, sequencers, samplers, mixers, power amplifiers and speakers.
They take so much electronic gear that schools have to rewire the dormitories.
They are the audience of the future, and to the presenters of classical music they must look like the audience from hell.
The feeling is mutual.
If the students I teach are representative, their generation sees classical music as alien territory.
Last year I asked a clsss of 30 bright undergraduates what it would take to get them to a symphony concert or the opera.
Answer: neither wild horses, nor cash bribes, not even higher grades would suffice.
Yet as they discussed the question, it turned out that these students, who use terms like "culturally constructed" and "de-centered subject" with ease and some accuracy, don't dislike classical music; they just don't know it.
Thanks to the gutting of secondary-school music programs, few of them have played in bands or orchestras.
Many of my students have never even heard Beethoven's Fifth, though they do like it when I play it for them.
The main obstacle, they say, to enjoying a live classical concert is the acoustic ambience, totally different from the intense amplification of the rock, jazz or even folk concerts they attend.
The Decibel Gap, not the music, keeps them from the symphony or the opera.
For my students loudness is a form in intimacy.
They like music that hugs the body.
At rock concerts they stand right in front of the speakers, but at the symphony they can't hear the music.
Even if they have not suffered hearing loss they can't follow the changing dynamic level typical of orchestral music.
The music seems unfocused,lost and far away.
And in this dark age of acoustic engineering, it often is.
Last May I took my 12-year-old son to a recital by Yo-Yo Ma and Jeffrey Kahane at the hall normally used by the Oregon Symphony.
We sat up in the balcony, half a city block from the performers.
I could follow the music only because I knew it.
My son drifted off.
On the drive home he asked, "Why is it more enjoyable to listen to music on the car radio than in the concert hall?" He had a point.
It is thrilling to hear acoustic music resonate in a great hall like the Amsterdam Concertgebouw, but in most concert halls the acoustic sound is uneven and masked, not spacious but distant.
I often wonder why Indian musicians, whose tradition is so much older and more "natural" than ours, have no qulams abut amplifying their performances.
With opera, the Tech Gap compounds the Decibel Gap.
My students find opera impossible to hear and absurd to watch.
Opera has long been the art form American kids love to hate, but the problem today isn't ridculous plots and overweight singers in silly costumes.
It's the tacky, low-tech production, unworthy of a third-rate rock show.
My students are surprised that such a prestigious art form should be so primitive technically.
Even the most elaborate Zeffirelli productions broadcast live from the Metropolitan lack visual flair compared to MTV.
Studnets say they look "chessy."
Allan Bloom may despair of the musical taste of the young, but my students, though they have much to learn, are not brain-damaged victims of rock music and mass culture.
They love to listen to music, and the love to play music, classical as well as rock.
Last year a group of them gave a stylish staging of Bach's "Coffee Cantata," to cheers from their fellow students.
But like past generations of Ameircan undergraduates, who idolized the Casa Loma Orchestra or the Dave Brubeck Quartet (no one ever claimed that undergraduates were infallible), they define themselves by their taste in contemporary pop music, which, in their case, is eclectic, ethnic and goofy.
They like two Bay Area groups: Zulu Spear and the New Klezmer Trio.
They like Sun Ra, the Dirty Dozen Brass Band and the World Saxaphone Quartet.
They like Tom Waits, the Tone Dogs of Seattle and Naked City of New York.
The common element in their taste is a nostalgia for the avant-garde of the late 60's - before they were born.
My students find modernism baffling and Minimalism passe, and they aren't knowledgeable enough to catch the stylistic allusions of postmodernism.
But they know the music of Jimi Hendrix and John Coltrane inside out.
They know who engineered "Electric Lady Land," they can sing "A Love Supreme," and they are authorities on Frank Zappa and King Crimson.
When they hear comtemporary concert music, they feel right at home with Karkheinz Stockhausen's "Donnerstag" and Witol Lutoslawski's String Quartet, espeically in the supercharged recording by the Kronos Quartet.
They like music that is visceral and visionary - and loud.
These qualities, however, are not unique to recent music.
Fifteen years or so from now, when they find themselves aghast at the musical tastes of their children, my students will turn to the music of Beethoven and Wagner and Stravinsky for the same kicks they now get from N.W.A. and John Zorn.
Classical music is safe for another generation, as long as it is heard on state-of-the-art sound system and viewed on a life-size monitor.


Mutual Funds; On Stock Shifts and Other Questions
Readers have written in in recent weeks with a range of questions, from how to select index funds to how some government money-market funds work and how to cash in stock for mutual fund shares.
Here are some answers.
Question: My father has given my 5-year-old son some shares of stock in a custodial account to pay for his college education.
I'd rather keep the money in a mutual fund because I think it makes sense to diversify the investment over such a long period.
Will a mutual fund give me a break on the transaction costs to sell the stock if I invest the proceeds in its fund?


Time Rescues a Collector's Reputation
It would be difficult to spend time in the Chrysler Museum in Norfolk, Va., and not come away convinced that the most underrated American art collector of the past 50 years and more was the late Walter P. Chrysler Jr.
The museum that bears his name is not a mainline museum.
It is sprawly, lopsided, opinionated and idiosyncratic.
There are self-evident masterpieces from five centuries -- the Veronese altarpiece (one of three painted for a church in Mantua), the huge Boucher "Vegetable Vendor," the Chardin "Basket of Plums," the Gauguin "Loss of Virginity" and from the year 1916 the Matisse "Bowl of Apples on a Table" that gives monumentality to the notion of still life.
Any museum in the world would kill for those.


Uncle Food
MEN IN THE kitchen are often regarded as eccentric or charmingly inept.
I am not referring to men who whip up elegant midnight suppers for friends, but men who are drafted to cook the family meal.
Because I was raised on the cooking of two bachelor uncles, I can say that there is truth in both the "inept" and the "eccentric" characterizations.
My two uncles had separate approaches to food.
Uncle Gabe came under the "charmingly inept" category.
He was inept even at eating.
A poet and a scholar, Gabe was so abstracted that he could not tell chicken from fish.
In the family, we always said simply, "Gabe doesn't know what he is eating." Gabe once exclaimed, while eating flank steak, "Oh, pumpernickel bread!" Along the same lines, he once spooned up some potato salad and cried out, "Whitefish!"


Garden Q. &amp; A.
From Salad to House Plant
Q.
How do you get the seed from an avocado to grow into a plant? -- Marilyn Magder, Princeton, N.J.
A.
Avocados are now plentiful for summer salads, so this is the time to act if you want a free house plant.
Begin with a fruit that is ripe, or better still, overripe.
Remove the rough outer skin and cut away the edible flesh, taking care not to score or damage the pit.
Clean the pit, and peel off the brown outer coat.
Stick three toothpicks into the pit in a circle around its largest part.
Suspend the pit, flatter end down, in a glass of water; cover at least the bottom third of the pit.
Move the pit to a warm spot, away from the sun, change the water every few days and wait for germination.
But beware.
This process varies in the extreme.
It can take anywhere from a few weeks to a few months.
When the roots are several inches long, move the avocado to a small flower pot, using any all-purpose potting mix.
Keep the plant in a shady spot for several days, then move it to a sunny window.
As house plants, avocados have rarely been known to bear fruit.  Autumn Bloomers
Q.
I seem to have missed the boat for fall when I did my spring planting, but I would like to make up for lost time now by adding flowers for late-season color.
What do you suggest? -- Anthony Henry, Boston.
A.
It's not too late to add flowering plants for late summer or fall color, providing you have a well-stocked local nursery to supply you with established annuals and perennials grown in pots or balled and wrapped in burlap.
This is not the time to plant bare-root flowers.
Among the long-lasting annuals you can still add now are browallia, lantana, globe amaranth (Gomphrena globosa), ageratum, cigarflower (Cuphea ignea) and cleome.
Perennials include Japanese anemone (A. hupehensis and A. hybrida), joe-pye-weed (Eupatorium purpureum), Michaelmas daisy (Aster novae-angliae), toadlily (Tricyrtis species), plumbago (Ceratostigma plumbaginoides) and Sedum spectabile Autumn Joy.
Of course, there are chysanthemums in countless shapes, sizes and colors.
Also, don't forget grasses like these, which add good winter texture and color: fountain grass (Pennisetum alopecuroides), maiden grass (Miscanthus sinensis Gracillimus and Purpurascens), red switch grass (Panicum virgatum Rubrum) and Japanese blood grass (Imperata cylindrica Rubra).
. . .
Address questions to Garden Q. &amp; A., The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y., 10036.
Those of general interest will be published.
Unpublished questions cannot be answered individually.


Ana Maria Wagner Wed To Robert Harris Hoffman
Ana Maria Wagner and Robert Harris Hoffman were married yesterday in Princeton, N.J.
Mayor Richard Woodbridge of Princeton Township officiated at Russell Hall in the Hun School.
Mrs.
Wagner-Hoffman, 25 years old, graduated from Vassar College and received a master's degree in journalism from Syracuse University.
She is the assistant editor of Latitudes South and Trade Wind magazines in Silver Spring, Md.
She is the daughter of Beatriz M. Wagner of Manalapan, N.J.
Mr.
Hoffman, 26, graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in journalism from Syracuse.
He is a staff assistant at Jewish Monthly magazine in Washington.
He is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot L. Hoffman of New York.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 11, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
LADY BOSS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $5.95.) A woman schemes to get control of a movie studio.
2
12
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
3
7
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Guests from many parts of the world get together in a small Scottish town.
4
2
SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.95.) The ordeals of a female cop assigned to track down a Florida con man.
5
4
THE PRIZE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.50.) In 1066, a Saxon woman marries a Norman warrior.
6
7
THE VOICE OF THE NIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.95.) A reprint of a 1980 novel about a shy boy and his evil best friend.
7
2
THE FIRST MAN IN ROME, by Colleen McCullough. (Avon, $6.95.) The rivalry of two men in the Roman Republic in 110 B.C.
8
29
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) Chinese-American women and their mothers.
9
3
TEXAS!
CHASE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.99.) The romance of a widower and an old friend who was involved in his wife's death.
10 *
43
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
11
6
DYING YOUNG, by Marti Leimbach. (Ivy, $5.95.) While devotedly caring for a man dying of leukemia, a woman has an affair with a stranger.
12
2
THE ASSASSINI, by Thomas Gifford. (Bantam, $5.99.) A lawyer pursues the killer of his sister, a nun, and other critics of forces within the church.
13
1
THE ENCHANTED LAND, by Jude Deveraux. (Avon, $4.95.) A novel, originally published in 1978, about the romance of a Kentucky plantation owner's daughter and a Texas rancher.
14
7
BREATH OF SCANDAL, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) The nightmare a woman suffered in a Southern town and how she gets even.
15 *
8
DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $5.95.) Dirk Pitt tries to save America from an extremist.
16 *
1
BURY ME DEEP, by Christopher Pike. (Archway/Pocket, $3.50.) The eerie experiences of a teen-age girl vacationing in Hawaii.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
12
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
7
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
3
4
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
4
90
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
5
405
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
6
11
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers, though marked by discontinuity and divided energy, are distinguished and rewarding.
7 *
5
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
8
21
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
9
45
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
10
51
FROM BEIRUT TO JERUSALEM, by Thomas L. Friedman. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) The Arab-Israeli conflict over the past decade.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
34
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
2
54
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
3
2
THE FAT-BURNING WORKOUT, by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.95.) A program designed to trim the body and tone muscles.
4
15
THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A regimen for weight loss.
5 *
11
RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1991 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


A Union Man From Harvard
WHICH SIDE ARE YOU ON?
Trying to Be for Labor When It's Flat on Its Back.
By Thomas Geoghegan. 287 pp.
New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.95.


Sports of The Times; Rooting To Stay Clean
John Lucas has purchased the United States Basketball League's Miami franchise, primarily for recovering alcoholics and drug abusers.
The idea came to him, he said, as he watched Lloyd Daniels, a troubled New York City schoolyard legend, labor earlier this summer for the Miami Tropics and Coach Kevin Mackey, who was fired by Cleveland State University after a drug bust and landed at Lucas's after-care program for athletes in Houston.
Now Lucas has Daniels in house, trying to help him stay clean and shed 25 pounds so he can audition for the National Basketball Association.


A Wine Maker Learns His Trade
Lyle Greenfield is a typical New York success story.
He grew up and went to school west of the Hudson River and dreamed of going to the city and making good.
He did.
After college he entered the advertising business in Manhattan and by the time he was 26 years old was a vice president at J. Walter Thompson.
Other ad shops followed, then his own company, Bang Music, which makes commercials for radio and television.


NOWHERE TO GO
No one can fail to be moved by the plight of the Palestinians, and Judith Miller certainly describes it poignantly in her article "Nowhere to Go"(July 21).
But I cannot help feeling that she fails to catch the point that her article reveals time after time.
Miller focuses on the suffering inflicted on the Palestinians by fellow Arabs.
Though Kuwaitis acknowledge that only 10 percent of local Palestinians collaborated with the Iraqi invaders, all Palestinians are mistrusted and persecuted.
They are being replaced as workers in Kuwait, Saudi Arabia and other Persian Gulf countries.
Their refugees have massed in Jordan, where funds to support them have been cut by oil-rich Arab states.
Though many hold Egyptian travel documents, Egypt refuses to admit them, and Lebanon is presently engaged in removing them.
These are hardly the only examples in recent history of Arab brutality toward the Palestinians.
And yet, when all the dust settles, the Palestinians turn all their fury on Israel and only on Israel.
Miller quotes Tawfik Oqal as saying, "You can't imagine what it is not to have a state, to be an eternal guest, threatened and humiliated wherever you go." Actually, as a Jew, I can very easily imagine it.
But Tawfik refuses to acknowledge that those who threaten and humiliate him are his brothers in nationality and religion.
If Palestinians live in squalid camps, it is because Arabs have refused to assimilate them into their society.
RABBI YEHUDA ROSTKER
Brooklyn


Suppose You Had 100 Doors With Goats Behind 99 of Them
To the Editor:
Re "Behind Monty Hall's Doors: Puzzle Debate and Answer?" (front page, July 21): One reason people have trouble understanding the correct solution to the puzzle involving three doors, two with goats behind them and one with a car, is that the problem uses only three doors.
This makes the assumed, but incorrect, probability of picking the car (1 in 2) appear too close to the actual probability (1 in 3) and the solution difficult to arrive at intuitively.


Woes for King Rice
Former North Carolina basketball player KING RICE was charged Friday night with driving while impaired after registering twice the legal level of blood alcohol, according to a Chapel Hill, N.C., police report.
Police said Rice, 22, of Binghamton, N.Y., registered an 0.20 percent blood-alcohol level on a breath analysis test.
The legal limit in North Carolina is 0.10 percent.
Rice was released on a $500 unsecured bond. (AP)


The G-String Murders
TOPLESS
By D. Keith Mano. 240 pp. New York: Random House. $18.


5 Killed When Van Crashes Into Overpass
A van veered off a rural highway about 60 miles north of New York City and slammed into an overpass early today, killing five people, including a woman and her 10-year-old daughter, who had just arrived from Puerto Rico.
Police found the vehicle lying on its side facing north in the southbound lane of Route 9W, according to the New Windsor Police Department.
Detective Sgt.
Michael Truncale said it appeared the van, driven by Angel Rodriguez of Newburgh, traveled for a distance on the center median of the road, went up along the center guardrail, and then struck the base of the overpass.
Police believe that Mr.
Rodriguez may have fallen asleep at the wheel.


Nobody's Paris but His Own
"Let me say right away," writes Julian Green in his short, dreamlike book, PARIS (Marion Boyars/Rizzoli, $21.95), "that I shall be making no mention of the great monuments or any of the places you would expect to find duly described." Fair warning.
His Paris is probably not your Paris -- or anything like it.
Mr.
Green, the author of more than 60 books and plays and a member of the Academie Francaise, was born in Paris in 1900, the son of American parents.
He has spent most of his life in the French capital.
His books deal broadly with man's futile search to comprehend his destiny.
"We're people in a book," he has written, "who don't always know what the author wants." So it's not surprising that Mr.
Green's book of photographs and text -- in a bilingual edition, very ably translated by J. A. Underwood -- is full of philosophical speculations, moody reveries, flights into the past and future.
From time to time the familiar Paris makes an appearance, but it is usually because Mr.
Green has reason to lament or rail.
He mourns the loss of trees, of bird sellers.
He even loathes the Eiffel Tower.
Mostly, though, Julian Green's Paris is mysterious and phantom-filled.
"Come with me down this street," he writes, "and meet the ghosts of our earliest years." Walking through the Palais-Royal is like "entering an enchanted forest." This is the Paris of a searcher who through the years has seemingly looked in every Parisian window, doorway, side street and alley for some sort of answer.


Forgo Virginia Woolf
To the Editor:
Annette Bening may think she is a woman for the 90's, but when it comes to intellectual perceptiveness she sounds more like a leftover from the Neanderthal period  [ "Annette Bening, Hot but Cool," July 7 ] .
She cannot fathom that feminism and humanism are absolutely
not
mutually exclusive, and that neither Henrik Ibsen nor Virginia Woolf would find any divisiveness between the two.
Woolf would probably have been much offended if she heard Ms.
Bening denigrating the women's movement for its "stridency and seriousness and dogmatic humorlessness . . . a real turnoff."


WHAT'S DOING IN: Stowe
From various spots around Stowe, Vt., in summer, it's easy to see how Mount Mansfield's Nosedive trail got its name.
Most skiers who have gone down the trail's upper turns probably think the name alludes to its steepness.
But from lower elevations, when Mount Mansfield is silhouetted against a deep blue summer sky, the profile of a man's face is clearly visible; below his nose is the Nosedive trail.
Summer business here is now estimated to exceed winter business, filling the 5,000 beds in the center village and along the Mountain Road (State Route 108) on most weekends.
As in winter, the focus is on sports and the outdoors.
The warm-weather schedule also includes classical concerts, repertory theater and exhibits at the village art center.


Margaret E. Moritz Weds Jeffrey C. Kane in Boston
Margaret Ellen Moritz and Jeffrey Carl Kane were married yesterday at Marsh Chapel at Boston University.
The Rev.
Robert Watts Thornburg, a Methodist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony.
Ms.
Moritz, who is 34 years old and is keeping her name, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Moritz of Manchester, N.H.
She is a counsel at the Bank of New York.
She graduated from Boston College and received a law degree from Syracuse University and a Master of Laws degree from Boston University.


Review/Jazz; Re-creating Kansas City's Big-Band Sounds
In the 1930's and early 1940's, when Kansas City was a wide-open town, its music was the epitome of elegance.
The swing-band jazz of Benny Moten, Count Basie, Andy Kirk and Jay McShann was streamlined and efficient, rolling out riff after riff to keep dancers in motion, yet never austere because it stayed grounded in the earthy comforts of the blues.
The Classical Jazz concert on Thursday night at Alice Tully Hall brought together longtime swing players and younger musicians to re-create Kansas City big-band music.
David Berger conducted the 15-piece Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra in a sampling of big-band pieces from the height of swing to the verge of be-bop; he also transcribed the music.
There were crisp, clipped arrangements from the Basie orchestra ("Jumpin' at the Woodside," "One O'Clock Jump" and the more obscure but equally hard-riffing "Texas Shuffle"); the Moten band's "Prince of Wales" revolved around the pianist Roland Hanna's precise, two-fisted syncopations.
Ballads like "Blue and Sentimental" featured the tenor saxophone of Todd Williams, who came close to recapturing Herschel Evans's deep tone and roly-poly vibrato.


Fumbles Won't Derail Comeback by Dupree
Running back Marcus Dupree, who is attempting to come back from a knee injury that kept him out of football for five years, got off to an inauspicous beginning in the Rams' preseason opener against Atlanta last week.
On the Rams' first play, Dupree fumbled the ball and Atlanta safety Tracey Eaton picked it up and ran 20 yards for a touchdown.
Dupree fumbled again in the first quarter before leaving the game. (Another fumbled exchange off the handoff was blamed on quarterback Jim Everett.)


BUSINESS DIARY/August 6-11
COMPANIES Seidman Gets Ready to Leave the Headaches Behind


Princeton Bridal For Ms. McGlynn
Margaret Mayo McGlynn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. McGlynn of Jersey City, and Peter Robert Emshwiller, the son of Carol Emshwiller of New York, were married on July 13 in the Princeton University chapel in Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert B. Wardrop, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Emshwiller, 26 years old, graduated from Princeton.
She is a freelance writer.
Her father is a senior partner in the Newark law firm of Stryker Tams &amp; Dill.
Her mother, Victoria McGlynn, is a vice president of Travelong, a travel concern in Summit, N.J.


Time-Lapse Tales: The Human Condition Unfolds
Michael Apted's "7 Up" clan has turned 35.
In 1964, the director was working as a researcher for Granada Television, combing English schools to find 20 children, all age 7, for use in a television documentary.
Three decades later, Mr.
Apted is a successful Hollywood film maker -- "Class Action," with Gene Hackman, is his most recent effort -- and the children are now adults, age 35.


Liz Taylor's Great Society
Hats off to Liz Taylor for her decision to marry a blue-collar man, the construction worker Larry Fortensky.
Other stars talk about grave social problems.
They stud the star-studded benefits.
They assemble in great tuneless choirs to sing to us about the issues of the day.
But Liz, bless her durable little heart, proposes to actually get something done.
The social problem in question is the one that goes by such ungainly terms as "class polarization" or the "shrinking middle class" -- the insidious economic trend that is making the rich richer, the poor poorer and the middle class exceedingly nervous.


The Simple Pleasures of Blueberries
BLUEBERRIES are the least complicated of berries.
It starts with the picking.
There is no uncomfortable stooping and the bushes have no thorns.
Once picked, the berries are less perishable than strawberries, raspberries or blackberries.
The freshest, firmest blueberries have a grayish finish from a kind of natural protective coating that gradually wears off.
Also, their seeds are inconsequentially small so the cooked berries for jam or sauce do not have to be sieved.


Making a Difference; Altus's Mozart of Finance
In spearheading a group of French investors who plan to acquire the beleaguered Executive Life Insurance Company of California, Jean-Francois Henin showed once again that he was not afraid of risks.
Mr.
Henin is president of Altus Finance, a Credit Lyonnais subsidiary that has made a name for itself as a shrewd investor and bottom-fisher.
Indeed, before Thomson, the French electronics group, sold control of Altus to Credit Lyonnais in 1989, Alain Gomez, Thomson's chairman, called the 47-year-old Mr.
Henin the "Mozart of finance."


Lisa C. Fein Is Married
Lisa Carol Fein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Fein of Wayne, N.J., was married last night in Livingston, N.J., to Robert Maurice Yellen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard D. Yellen of Amherst, N.Y.
Rabbi Steven Bayer performed the ceremony at the Livingston Country Club.
Mrs.
Yellen, 25 years old, is a financial planner with the Williams Real Estate Company in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Mr.
Yellen, 27, is an associate in the New York law firm of D'Amato &amp; Lynch.
He graduated from Cornell University and received a law degree from Boston University.


Traffic Alert
Dominican Day Parade: Madison Avenue will be closed today between 39th and 56th Streets from noon to 4 P.M.


Style Makers; Nick Gilman -- Screen Painter
In transcribing reproductions of paintings by the old masters to folding screens, Nick Gilman is not after brush-stroke-for-brush-stroke accuracy.
"My copies wouldn't fool a curator and they're not meant to," he said.
"I use the originals to create something new, something that's between decorative and fine art and also functional."
Mr.
Gilman, the 33-year-old son of a painter and a theater critic, was attracted to screens three years ago in part because of their resemblance to stage sets.
Working in his TriBeCa studio and aided by color reproductions of famous paintings, he concentrates on Spanish still lifes.


Corrections
An article in the Arts and Leisure section on July 28 about the soundtrack recording of "Casino Royale" misstated the first words recorded by Thomas A. Edison for a phonograph.
They were, "Mary had a little lamb." The question "What hath God wrought?" was the first message tapped out by Samuel F. B. Morse on the telegraph.


What to Do in Heat Wave and Deluge
JUST when gardeners thought they were in control, nature showed them up.
First there was the heat wave, when record-breaking temperatures cooked everything.
During this period low marks went to those gardeners who put out lawn sprinklers and let them run all day.
Their object was to keep the grass green.
What would the neighbors think if the grass was brown?
Such needless activity wastes precious water and is a hard habit to break.


In the Nation; A Tale Of Two Faces
Senator Jay Rockefeller has dropped out of a Presidential race he never really wanted to make.
Coming on the heels of Representative Richard Gephardt's decision not to run, this new departure caused a predictable -- but not necessarily warranted -- chorus of moans and groans from Democrats hankering for a candidate.
Mr.
Rockefeller has built a career in West Virginia that seems inevitably pointed toward a Presidential bid.
But he had not planned to make it this early in his career, has plenty of years left and successfully resisted party pressures to force him into what at best would have been a long-shot campaign.


Look at the Big Picture
To the Editor:
Richard Rainwater's statement, "As a capitalist, a generalist, you have to be ready to pick up on any given day and go where the opportunities are" ("Cashing In on Health Care's Troubles," July 21), is a fitting epitaph for our health care system.
As Mr.
Rainwater moves from health care to used cars, he leaves a system in shreds.


Trying to Help Young People Out of the Quagmire of Drugs
AMONG their many concerns, Long Island drug-treatment officials often cite the lack of residential beds for teen-agers as the most pressing.
This summer that concern should be addressed with the opening of a $4 million 40-bed adolescent-treatment center on the outer grounds of the Pilgrim Psychiatric Center in Brentwood.
The treatment center, financed with a $1.2 million state grant and private donations, is the brainchild of the Rev.
Coleman Costello of the Roman Catholic Diocese in Brooklyn.
For the 49-year-old priest, who began counseling teen-agers nearly 20 years ago, it is the second venture in residential drug treatment.
In 1984, he founded a 40-bed center for teen-agers in Ridgewood, Queens.


THE REGION: In Connecticut; Another Week Without Much Hope for a Budget
SIX weeks into its fiscal year, Connecticut is the only state still without a budget, and despite another week of rollercoaster politics it has none in sight.
The end seemed near for a few hours on Wednesday, when Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. vetoed a budget for the third time, saying it, like its predecessors, was not honestly balanced and struck at the poor and middle class by expanding the reach of the state's 8 percent sales tax.


What to Do in Heat Wave and Deluge
JUST when gardeners thought they were in control, nature showed them up.
First there was the heat wave, when record-breaking temperatures cooked everything.
During this period low marks went to those gardeners who put out lawn sprinklers and let them run all day.
Their object was to keep the grass green.
What would the neighbors think if the grass was brown?
Such needless activity wastes precious water and is a hard habit to break.


Managing; When Employees Choose a Charity
Every month, the 22 employees on the Adolph Coors Company's Vice Squad -- the wonderfully pronounceable acronym for Volunteers in Community Enrichment Squad -- decide which projects the Golden, Colo., brewery will support.
The projects vary from cleaning up a weed-choked lot to providing shoes for needy children to doing repairs on an elderly person's home.
But each is proposed, managed and staffed by Coors employees or retirees.
"Letting employees pick and run projects challenges them and shows them respect," said Rosa M. Bunn, Coors's director of economic and public enrichment.


Simple Setting for Authentic Asian Fare
SO fond of Thai food are we that when we spotted a hand-lettered sign on Danbury's Main Street-- it simply said "The Thai and Cambodian Restaurant" and had an arrow pointing to the building's side entrance -- we immediately scuttled other dinner plans.
After parking in the lot facing the Thai and Cambodian Restaurant entrance, we entered the small dining room with some trepidation.
What greeted us were clean white, bare walls (except for two framed photographs of Thailand), the bright glare of neon tubing, a soft-drink machine in one corner and a television set facing the room.
The 11 tables were bare but for condiments and vases of paper flowers.
The less-than-inspiring presence of a young Thai man in a tank top, sitting impassively at a table watching a Thai drama on the television screen (the sound was kept low) evoked the atmosphere of an Edward Hopper painting more than that of a working restaurant.


Advance Notices
Some critics of the director Spike Lee are worried that his next film will portray Malcolm X with no more accuracy and dignity than his farcical "School Daze" lent to education.
A group including the poet Amiri Baraka held a rally in Harlem last weekend to urge Mr.
Lee not to trivialize the life of the martyred black nationalist leader.
Mr.
Baraka said such concerns were justified even though he has not seen the script and the film is not scheduled to begin production until next month.
"Spike Lee is part of a retrograde movement in this country," said Mr.
Baraka, who has had public differences with Mr.
Lee before.
Mr.
Lee, who became involved in the project after arguing that a white director might misinterpret Malcolm's life, said he understood his critics' concerns, but had no intention of having his film made by a committee.
"I think they have a right to have opinions," he said.
"And when the film comes out, I'll gladly take Mr. Baraka's $7.50."


Caitlin Borgmann Married to John Lovi
Caitlin Eve Borgmann, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Albert Borgmann of Missoula, Mont., was married yesterday to John David Lovi, a son of Lucy Lovi of Dover Plains, N.Y., and the late Albert Lovi.
The Rev.
Donald A. Guthrie officiated at Holy Spirit Episcopal Church in Missoula.
Ms.
Borgmann, who is 25 years old and is keeping her name, graduated from Yale University and received a law degree from New York University, where she was an executive editor of The Law Review.
She is a clerk for Judge Robert P. Patterson Jr. of Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Her father is the chairman of the philosophy department at the University of Montana.
Her mother, Nancy Borgmann, is the university's director of affirmative action.


Classic to Offbeat, Minus the Bagpipes
You don't have to be Scottish to be mad for plaid.
Designers as diverse as Oscar de la Renta, Franco Moschino, Byron Lars and Adrienne Vittadini went all out for plaid this fall.
Department store racks are crammed with every variation from classic tartans to bold windowpane patterns.
The mania doesn't end with clothing.
It extends to bags and shoes, hats and hosiery.
Henri Bendel opened a plaid accessory shop on Friday stocked with jewelry, scarfs, gloves, headbands, baseball caps and the like.
Saks Fifth Avenue's fall Folio catalogue has page after page of plaid clothes and accessories ranging from a de la Renta suit for $1,830 to woolen gloves for $25.


Class Not Dismissed: Screenplays With an Attitude
"Regarding Henry" is an upper-crust snob.
"The Doctor" is a middle-class professional.
And "Dying Young" is blue-collar, glad-to-be-here folks.
These identities have nothing to do with the movies' fictional characters, who range from petty thieves to tycoons.
The films themselves exude class attitudes and personalities that ooze out from each director's stance and their scripts' tone.
Imagine these movies as people on Fifth Avenue.
"Dying Young" is buying socks from a street vendor.
"The Doctor" is shopping at Saks.
"Regarding Henry" steps out of his limo and tosses a quarter toward a homeless person while heading to his penthouse with a view of Central Park.
Whom would you most like to drop by and visit?


POSTINGS: New BMW Showroom; A Sparkler in Glass for 11th Avenue
As rising property values in the 80's squeezed out the space-consuming car showrooms that had long operated on Broadway between Times Square and Columbus Circle, 11th Avenue gradually became "Automobile Row."
Now the row is to get a new BMW showroom and service shop that promises to be dazzling, in the literal sense: a six-story structure between 49th and 50th Street, clad in white ceramic glass, with windows of clear glass and smoked white glass.
The two-level showroom at the base of the building will have 23-foot-high walls of glass, with glass mullions.


Canadian Seeks 3d Term Amid Drop in Polls
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, after months of disappointing economic news and declining support in the polls, came to Canada's most populous city this week to fire up his party's faithful and open a campaign for a third five-year term as the national leader.
Yet against the fanfare of his Progressive Conservative Party's convention, the last one before it must face voters within two years, another drama was playing outsidethe hall where protesters were making their own pitch -- to dump the Mr.
Mulroney.


Answering The Mail
Q.
My coffee table has an unfinished black-and-white marble top.
Anything placed on it leaves spots, be it a water glass, a plate and so on.
These spots seem impossible to remove.
Is there any product that will remove them, and is there anything I can put on the marble that will help prevent this problem?
A.
Marble is very porous and stains easily.
Most marble tops have sealers that prevent stains from soaking in.
But even with a sealer, stains have to be mopped up promptly.
Removing stains later on is not easy, because the removal depends on the type of stain and how old it is.
The older the stain, the harder it is to remove.
I suggest you buy a marble-cleaning kit from a marble dealer or a department store.
It will contain various solvents and cleaning agents for different types of stains.
If that does not work, you may have to have a marble dealer polish and refinish the table.
After it is clean, be sure a marble sealer is applied, and then keep the table waxed with a white paste wax.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
GOATWALKING  By Jim Corbett. Viking, $19.95.


Ms. Bartle Weds Charles C. Adair
Alison Richmond Bartle, a daughter of Sheila M. Stone of New York and the late William A. Bartle 3d, was married yesterday to Charles Calvin Adair, a son of Dorothy B. Adair of Tallahassee, Fla., and Dr.
Charles H. Adair of Houston.
Justice Charles R. Alberti of the Superior Court of Massachusetts officiated at the summer home of her mother and stepfather in Williamstown, Mass.
Mrs.
Adair, who is 31 years old and is known as Ali, graduated from Middlebury College.
She is the assistant to the chief financial officer of Apogee Productions, a special effects production company in Van Nuys, Calif.
Her father was a real-estate broker in New York.
Her mother is a former president of the Parents League of New York.
The bride's stepfather, Robert L. Stone, retired as the chairman of the Hertz Corporation.


Franchises Lure Seasoned Executives
WHEN Jeffrey Weiner saw the writing on the wall where he worked, he said, he began to consider going into business for himself.
Mr.
Weiner, a 40-year-old former computer-leasing executive from Purchase, who described himself as the "top sales guy, making in excess of six figures a year for several years," said that he did not like the way his company was being managed and that he "wanted to have control of my own destiny."


Family Undergoing Treatment for Rabies
A New Fair field family is undergoing a series of five rabies immunizations after a baby raccoon they cared for tested positive for rabies, town health officials said.
Catherine Merritt said she and her three children, Elizabeth, 10 years old, Matthew, 7, and Jason, 5, received the first of the immunizations Friday at Danbury Hospital.


Q and A
A Loss on a Home Sale
Question: I own a co-op in Yonkers and want to sell it as soon as possible.
But given the poor condition of the real estate market, I realize that I might have to sell at a substantial loss.
I have been given conflicting information on what the tax implications of such a loss would be.
I have been told that any loss would not be deductible, but in a tax guide I have read that I could be allowed to write off a portion of the loss depending on the percentage of rental apartments in the building when it was converted.
Is this correct? . . .
Jay Rossini, Yonkers
Answer: No.
A spokesman for the New York office of the Internal Revenue Service said that there is no basis for that advice.
Section 165(c) of the I.R.S. code says that you cannot deduct the loss on the sale of a personal residence from taxes owed on your income.
For more information you can refer to I.R.S. publication 523, which deals with the tax implications of the sale of a primary residence.
A copy of the publication can be ordered by calling the I.R.S. at (800) 829-3676.
Courses for Condo Boards
Question: Can you suggest short courses or seminars that would be useful for the members of a New York City condominium board? . . .
Robyn Wright, Manhattan
Answer: Yes.
The Council of New York Cooperatives and the Federation of New York Housing Cooperatives are two nonprofit organizations that serve co-ops and condominiums.
They hold annual information conferences each fall and offer seminars related to co-op and condominium management throughout the year.
For more information call the Council of New York Cooperatives at 496-7400, or the Federation of New York Housing Cooperatives at (718) 353-5080.
You might also courses on real estate management offered by the New York University Real Estate Institute or other local colleges.
While most are designed for people looking to pursue real estate careers, some courses might fit your needs.
Next fall N.Y.U. will offer noncredit workshops including seminars on how to choose service and construction contractors and supervisory skills for building and property managers.
For more information write the N.Y.U.
Real Estate Institute at 11 West 42d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036 or call 790-1346.
Right to a New Kitchen
Question: I live in a rent-stabilized apartment.
My kitchen appliances and cabinets are outdated and old-looking.
If I agree to a rent increase, would the landlord have to replace the fixtures and renovate my kitchen? . . .
Chris Marr, Manhattan
Answer: No.
The New York City Rent Stabilization rules state that your landlord has no obligation to remodel your kitchen cabinets and upgrade your appliances.
The exception would be if your kitchen appliances, like the stove or refrigerator, were worn to the point of not serving their purpose.
Under those circumstances your landlord would be responsible for replacing them.
Landlords who want to add new services, improvements or equipment must get the tenant's written consent to pay the increase.
The owner may charge the tenant a rent increase equal to 1/40th of the cost of the new equipment, including installation costs but not finance charges.
The State Division of Housing and Community Renewal does not have to issue an order for the owner to start collecting the rent increase for these types of improvements.


The 'Golden Age' of the City Council
DESPITE next year's expansion of the New York City Council, the future will probably be, in a Yogi Berra phrase that a councilman would have been proud to invent, one of "deja vu all over again."
While there almost undoubtedly will be an increase in the representation of people of color, the range and flavor of council discourse is likely to remain exactly the same on most issues, with leading candidates overwhelmingly Democratic, middle class and geared to sinecure or constituent service rather than philosophical debate.
Yet it wasn't always this way.
Even the City Council had what Henry Stern, a former member who heads the nonpartisan Citizens Union, calls "a golden age."


On Language; Reach, Crescendo
'DEMANDS TO FIX U.S.
Health Care Reach a Crescendo" was a recent New York Times subhead, under a teasing headline, "Say Ouch."
"Ouch, indeed!" retorts John Bloomfield of New York, who is coming to the end of his patience.
"Can't you do anything about the flagrant and widespread misuse of the word
crescendo
?
I have seen it used to mean 'climax' or 'critical point' in all sorts of respected publications."


Room by Phone At Cape Hostels
American Youth Hostels has added Cape Cod to the areas where travelers can make room reservations in hostels by phone using Visa or Mastercard.
American Youth Hostels operates three hostels on Cape Cod, one on Nantucket and one on Martha's Vineyard, with dormitory-style lodging and self-service kitchens.
Rates are $10 a night for members and $13 for nonmembers.
Members may be given priority for rooms during busy times.


Margaret Yarlott Has a Wedding
Margaret Leland Yarlott, a daughter of Mrs.
Joseph L. Yarlott of Baltimore and the late Mr.
Yarlott, was married yesterday in Baltimore to Richard Harter Brown 3d, a son of Mr.
Brown Jr., of Rockville Centre, L.I., and the late Joan Brown.
The Rev.
Lance A. B. Gifford performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church in the Mount Washington section of Baltimore.
Mrs.
Brown, 32 years old, and the bridegroom, 34, are pilots and lieutenant commanders in the Naval Reserve.
She graduated from Amherst College and is a pilot for Federal Express.


The Right Way to Retool the Soviet Economy; Allies and Partners
To the Editor:
Though your imagination soars bravely in the political-security realm about potential Soviet-American cooperation in "Allies" (editorial, July 28), you stop far short of the long-term economic possibilities.
Soviet integration into the international economy has to signify much more than a stake in a stable world order.
When we look at today's wrecked Communist command system amid empty stores, inflation and rapidly declining gross national product, it is easy to forget the Soviet Union's strengths: tremendous agricultural territories, enormous natural resources (including huge petroleum reserves), a huge pool of literate and skilled workers, and a powerful scientific and technological establishment.
The transformation will be lengthy, uneven and worrisomely uncertain.
Nevertheless, a worldwide economy in which, with luck, a healthy Soviet Union (however renamed) becomes a major player will be radically different.
The three-cornered love-hate competition among the United States, Europe and Japan will open up to all sorts of new combinations and permutations.
Whether the goal is to undercut Persian Gulf oil dominance, to embark on new collaboration in space or to initiate major new technologies, a revived Soviet Union will alter global behavior patterns and business alliances.
The United States can, along with sounder domestic policies, revive its competitive fortunes even as the Soviet Union revives its own.
While imaginatively helping the Soviets on their journey, we should not forget the main future promise for ourselves.
DAVID E. MARK  New York, Aug. 1, 1991


Linguistic Reflections
To the Editor:
I enjoyed reading Roderick Conway Morris's explanation of the origin of Istanbul as the name of the Turkish city.
However, I must question his observation that Mehmet the Conqueror's punning alternative, "Islambol," never caught on.


'THEY'VE GOTTA HAVE US'
Four article should mention the work done by Melvin Van Peebles (Mario's father) and the ground-breaking work done by that Renaissance man, Gordon Parks Sr.
In 1969, Parks wrote, produced, directed and scored the music for "The Learning Tree," the first movie by and about blacks that was backed by a Hollywood studio.
JOHN CAREY
New York, N.Y.


Dancing at the Breakers
The Newport Artillery Company dressed in 18th-century uniforms greeted 600 guests arriving at the Breakers with a roll of drums and a salute of swords.
The former summer mansion of Cornelius Vanderbilt was the setting for the semiannual dinner dance to raise money for the Preservation Society of Newport County.
The guests were greeted by Countess Sylvia Szapary, a great-granddaughter of Mr.
Vanderbilt; Diane Slocum, chairwoman of the evening, and Helen Winslow.
The guest of honor was Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations.
A United States Navy band played ceremonial music during cocktails on the terrace, and a Marine Corps color guard led the guests in for dinner.


At Bard, a Festival Devoted to Mendelssohn
THE Bard Music Festival in Annandale-on-Hudson is focusing this summer on the life and work of Felix Mendelssohn.
"In effect, we are curating a coherent exhibition that makes it possible for our audiences to develop a new way of listening," said Leon Botstein, the conductor.
"As we proved last summer with our Brahms weekends, it is inspiring not just to encounter music in a kind of potpourri, but to have it clarified by its placement within a unified context of time, place and era." He and Sarah Rothenberg, a pianist, are the festival's artistic directors.


Miss Van Wagenen to Wed in Autumn
Mr. and Mrs.
Albert M. Van Wagenen 3d of Old Lyme, Conn., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Katherine Litke Van Wagenen and William Rutherford Sperry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Sperry of New Canaan, Conn.
Miss Van Wagenen, 28 years old, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received an M.B.A. degree from Harvard University.
She is an assistant vice president at GE Capital in New York.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of the Original Trenton Cracker Company in Lambertville, N.J.


Hope Stirs for 2 Americans Who Felt No Fear 5 Years Ago
The two Americans kidnapped by a group called the Revolutionary Justice Organization -- Edward Austin Tracy, a book salesman, and Joseph J. Cicippio, a university official -- were Beirut residents who thought that kidnapping was what happened to others.
The group said today that it would release one of two American hostages in 72 hours because of a United Nations initiative to end the hostage crisis.
A photograph of Mr.
Cicippio, 60 years old, accompanied the statement.


To Haiti, With Love and Squalor
BEST NIGHTMARE ON EARTH
A Life in Haiti.
By Herbert Gold.
Introduction by Jan Morris.  303 pp.
New York:  Prentice Hall Press. $19.95.


R.W. Purcell, 79, Dies; Advised Rockefellers
Robert W. Purcell, a philanthropist and business adviser to the Rockefeller family, died on Friday at his home in New York City.
He was 79 years old.
He died of cancer, his wife, Wendy, said.


Data Bank/Aug. 11, 1991
Consumer Credit
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
--3.0
--2.2
1.9
Producer Price Index
July
June
May
Finished goods, annual rate in percent
--0.2
--0.3
0.6
Auto Sales
In units
778,668
777,286
775,754
3-Month Treasury Bills
Aug. 9
Aug. 2
July 26
Rate in percent
5.32
5.48
5.58
Electric Power
Aug. 2
July 26
July 19
Millions of kilowatt hours, weekly total
63,847
67,382
66,980
Steel Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,625
1,668
1,600
Weekly Jobless Claims
July 26
July 19
July 12
In thousands
400
404
403
Coal Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
20,036
19,372
18,042


New Jersey Network
To the Editor:
Although initially targeted for a 50 percent cut in state appropriations (Letters, July 14), New Jersey Network ended up receiving full funding due to overwhelming legislative and public support.
When put to the test, the value of NJN's programming and our services were found worth supporting and essential, even in a tough budget year.
ROBERT G. OTTENHOFF  Trenton, N.J., July 17
The author is executive director and general manager of New Jersey Network.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Starts
989
1,208
-18.1%
Completions
1,055
1,351
-21.9%
Sales
489
535
- 8.6%
*4*(Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce)
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.64
9.71
10.08
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.26
7.29
8.41
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.49
9.55
9.94
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.20
7.19
8.16
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.57
9.61
10.01
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.09
7.14
8.34
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.78
9.83
10.19
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.66
7.66
8.58
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
6.18
6.29
7.67
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.12
9.12
9.85
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


U.S. RANKED NO. 1 IN WEAPONS SALES
For the first time since 1983, the United States has surpassed the Soviet Union as the biggest supplier of weapons to the third world, and has become the biggest arms supplier to the Middle East, the Congressional Research Service said in a new report.
The nonpartisan research agency, an arm of the Library of Congress, said American arms transfers to the third world reached a record of $18.5 billion last year, up from $7.8 billion in 1989.
By contrast, Soviet arms transfers to the third world declined for the third consecutive year, to $12.1 billion from $12.7 billion in 1989, it said.


BRITISHISMS LYING DOGGO
As an expat Brit who has not entirely forgotten his early grounding in the language, I remember that "loo" was said to be derived from the French "l'eau," as in the expression, "Gardez l'eau" (meaning, look out for the water).
This was a precautionary shout given from the upper windows of a house, before voiding the night's contents of the commode into the street gutter below.
MICHAEL T. WELLS
Greenwich, Conn.


Errant Sprinkler System Washes Out Ballet at Joyce
The dancers of the Feld Ballet's New York company had planned to spend yesterday morning loosening up for two performances.
Instead, they spent it mopping up.
Early yesterday morning, the sprinkler system at the Joyce Theater, where the company opened its summer preview last week, switched on for no apparent reason and flooded the stage, lobby, workrooms, costumes, sets and several rows of seats.


Pitching, Pitching And More Pitching
There are 12 teams in the American League that have outscored the Toronto Blue Jays, 12 that have better fielding percentages, 11 that have more home runs.
So why, you might ask, are the Blue Jays the dominant team in the American League East?
And why are they the one division leader in all of baseball actually threatening to put to rest the notion that there will be a race to be had come September?


End of Captivity Unleashes Whirlwind of New Traumas
The unusually long confinement of John McCarthy and others held hostage in Lebanon is not expected to be the deciding factor in how well they recover from their captivity.
Far more important, say experts who have studied the trauma of captivity, are the inherent vulnerability and resiliency of the hostages and the way their families and society treat them on their return.
"While the length of captivity has to be a factor, the response to stress depends more on the individual's perception of that stress and the individual's coping capacity," said Dr.
Julius Segal, former director of the National Institute of Mental Health, who has helped evaluate the 52 American hostages released by Iran a decade ago.
"A brief period of captivity for one individual may be as traumatic as a lengthy captivity for another."


Fall in 30-Year Yields Is Not Expected Soon
Investors and economists still expect bond yields to fall eventually from the current level of 8.22 percent for 30-year Treasury issues, but they are not optimistic that the drop will come soon.
Yields on Treasury bonds are much more influenced by traders who are looking for a quick profit in response to immediate reports on inflation and the economy than by long-term forecasts about the attractiveness of today's yields compared with predictions that next year's inflation will be below 4 percent.


Face of Protests in Wichita Is Religious and Undoubting
For three days, David Spear drove the 1,700 miles here from his home in San Francisco as fast as his old car would go.
He made the trip with little food, sleep or money, he said, because "the Holy Spirit led me here" to join what has become a monthlong assault on the city's three abortion clinics.


What Cattle Grazing Does to Public Land
To the Editor:
"The Myth of the Welfare Rancher" by Sharman Apt Russell (Op-Ed, July 19), on the fees for grazing cattle on Federal land, didn't mention what the ranchers do to public lands.
Subsidized or not, grazing cattle on Western public lands is destructive; cattle were bred to graze less fragile terrain.
The proof is on the trails.


Houston Burial For Gymnast, 18
An 18-year-old Houston gymnast, once ranked 13th in the nation, was buried over the weekend following a three-year coma.


Kenya Teaches Its Citizens Lawlessness
To the Editor:
"Kenyans Do Some Soul-Searching After the Rape of 71 Schoolgirls" (front page, July 29), on the events in Meru, is very distressing.
Never in my days as a student in a boy's boarding school in Kenya could anything so atrocious have been contemplated.
Indeed, such nefarious acts have until now been the sole preserve of the police and paramilitary forces, who have raided women's hostels at the universities while "quelling" student disturbances.


INSIDE
Killings in a Buddhist Temple The authorities searched for clues to the shooting deaths of nine people in a Buddhist temple near Phoenix.
Thai worshipers gathered outside, unable to enter to mourn the dead.
Page A10.
Trying to Save a Spacecraft


Ralph W. Zwicker, 88, General And Figure in McCarthy Censure
Ralph W. Zwicker, a retired Army major general who was a central figure in the Senate's censure of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy in 1954, died at a nursing home at Fort Belvoir, Va.
He was 88 years old.
General Zwicker died of a heart ailment, The Associated Press reported.


How to Recover the China Fumble
Zhang Weiguo, a leading journalist who spent 20 months in jail after the Tiananmen Square massacre, was reportedly picked up again late last month.
While Washington remains locked in a futile symbolic debate over China's access to "most favored nation" trading privileges, Beijing goes on persecuting democrats.
It's time to seek new approaches aimed at recovering America's squandered leverage.
President Bush and his Congressional critics have both contributed to the loss of American influence, but Mr.
Bush deserves the larger share of blame.
The President has often seemed to go out of his way to signal Chinese authorities that however flagrantly they offend American opinion, he will protect them against retaliation.


Miscellany
*
The Joan Evans Marketing Group has been formed at Taylor-Gordon, Aarons &amp; Company, New York.
The new unit, headed by Joan Evans, a psychologist, will focus on product development, market research and account planning. *
Two Washington advertising agencies, Abramson Associates Inc. and Erlich-Manes Associates, have merged.
The new shop, called Abramson Ehrlich Manes, will be at the offices of Abramson Associates.
David Abramson has been named president and chief executive; Nella Manes has been named chairman.


Brooklynite Leaving Party Is Shot to Death in Holdup That Nets $2
A young man leaving a party in Brooklyn early yesterday was held up by three men, and after turning over the only money he had -- $2 -- he was shot to death, the police said.
The victim, Kevin Jones, 20 years old, of 657 East 2lst Street in the Kensington section, was one of a number of people who have been wounded or killed at or near sites of social gatherings recently.


Elizabeth Berger Wed To Frederick Kaufman
Elizabeth Harrie Berger, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ramon F. Berger of Providence, R.I., was married yesterday in New York to Frederick Leonard Kaufman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Millard Kaufman of Los Angeles.
Judge Stella Schindler of Family Court in Manhattan officiated at Tatou, a restaurant.
The bride, 31 years old, and the bridegroom, 30, are 1982 graduates of Yale University.
She is the government relations adviser for the New York law firm of Lord Day &amp; Lord, Barrett Smith.
Her father is a business broker.
Her mother, Anita H. Berger, is a clinical psychotherapist.


1994 World Cup: Take the A Train?
Officials of FIFA, the international governing body for soccer, are expected to make an inspection tour of Yankee Stadium tomorrow to determine if the ball park is acceptable as a possible site for World Cup games in 1994. . . .
Fame isn't always fleeting: JOHNNY PETRAGLIA , a hall of fame bowler, has a new honor -- successor to Gov.
JIM FLORIO as grand marshall of the Columbus Day Parade in New Brunswick, N.J.
The 44-year-old Petraglia, who was born in Brooklyn, made his mark as a bowler while living in New Jersey, where he also was voted to that state's hall of fame.
ERNIE HARWELL is ending his career as the voice of the Detroit Tigers, which has spanned 32 seasons.
SAL MARCHIANO , the broadcaster, describes Harwell's style as "honey-combed, gentle and reverential toward baseball." Harwell has been selected for the American Sportscasters Association Hall of Fame.
His first big-league gig was with the Brooklyn Dodgers after he was actually traded from the Atlanta Crackers in exchange for a minor league manager in 1948. . . .
And noshers at the Roxy Deli on Broadway and West 47th Street have voted JOE DiMAGGIO as America's greatest pop legend over JAMES DEAN .
MARILYN MONROE finished third.


2 Arrested in Slaying Of a Retired Detective
Two Staten Island stepbrothers have been arrested in the killing of a retired New York City police detective during a failed robbery attempt in May at the flower shop he owned on Staten Island, the police said yesterday.
Roberto Gonzalez, 25 years old, was arrested late Saturday night, and his stepbrother, Steven Morales, 29, was arrested yesterday morning outside their home at 810 Henderson Avenue in West New Brighton, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Nick Vreeland.
They were each charged with second-degree murder, attempted armed robbery and criminal possession of a handgun.


Julia Faber and John Goldberg Marry
Julia Schuster Faber, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter L. Faber of New York, was married yesterday at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden to John Carlo Paul Goldberg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Homer Goldberg of Setauket, L.I.
Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn performed the ceremony.
The bride, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from Bowdoin College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in politics from Princeton University.
She is to begin law studies at Harvard University in September.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler.
Her mother, Joan S. Faber, is a tax consultant at Ernst &amp; Young in New York.


Sabatini Now Has Own Scent
ELIZABETH TAYLOR has one, and so do PRISCILLA PRESLEY and JULIO IGLESIAS .
And now, so does GABRIELA SABATINI .
The defending United States Open tennis champion is uncorking a "fragrance" (they don't call it "perfume" these days) called, fittingly, "Gabriela Sabatini."


Don't Blame Blue Cross
Anger greeted the request by New York State's largest health insurer to boost its rates by between 20 and 50 percent for individual policyholders and high-risk employees of small businesses.
Small-business owners denounced the request.
So did representatives of AIDS and cancer patients.
And New York City's Consumer Affairs Commissioner accused Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield of waste and mismanagement, including paying its chairman a gaudy $600,000 salary.
But the villain in this story isn't Empire.
The chairman's salary may be excessive and Empire may be doing a lousy job controlling costs.
But even if these mistakes were corrected, Empire would still be crushed by a system stacked in favor of its commercial competitors.


Review/Opera; Premiere of a Translated and Tightened 'Fidelio'
"It's grim stuff for a summer evening," said one operagoer on Saturday during the intermission of the first performance of Jonathan Miller's production of "Fidelio" at Glimmerglass Opera.
This opera's action can be grim stuff for any evening, of course, when presented as uncompromisingly and effectively as it was here.
In a scintillating preperformance talk, Mr.
Miller cited the work's essential blackness as the factor that drove him once again, as at the Kent Opera in England a decade ago, to a Goya-esque decor.
But what might that dour operagoer have been hearing?
For Beethoven countered this sober drama with an irrepressible score, perhaps the most luminous and ennobling that has ever graced an operatic stage.
On this topic, Mr.
Miller's discussion fell back on seemingly inevitable terms like lift-off, launching and flying.


Robert Kazmayer, Business Analyst, 82
Robert Kazmayer, a former minister who became a business analyst and publisher, died at his home in Mariposa, Calif., on Aug. 4.
He was 82 years old and died of lung cancer, his son, Robert, said.


Market Place; Plan for MIPS Confuses Experts
ANALYSTS talking about MIPS Computer Systems say they love MIPS's technology, which has made it a strong second to Sun Microsystems in the race to develop computers based on a simplified microprocessor design called RISC, for reduced instruction set computing.
But the company's business plan still leaves many of them confused.
Recent events have put the MIPS dichotomy, superior technology but poor operating results, in sharp focus.
In April, a new consortium linking Compaq Computer, Digital Equipment, Microsoft and other major companies chose the MIPS microprocessor to be at the heart of a new desktop computer standard called ACE, for advanced computing environment.
The selection of MIPS is similar to the way I.B.M. blessed Intel when it adopted that company's chip for its original personal computer.
Indeed, some industry observers called MIPS the next Intel.


Today, Class, Vouchers and Multiculturalism; A Shell Game
To the Editor:
A July 24 article outlined some of the best arguments against the voucher plan proposed for New York State, but missed the most compelling public policy considerations that must be weighed against this form of aid to private schools.


With 8 Weeks to Go, Leaders Are in Peril
When the New York Giants awoke 40 years ago today, they were 13 games behind the Brooklyn Dodgers in the National League standing.
Today the San Francisco Giants stand six games behind the Los Angeles Dodgers.
Can the current Giants, who already have staged a rapid ascent, duplicate the stunning feat of their ancestors, who began their charge on this date in 1951, and snatch a championship from the Dodgers' grasp?
Can any of the 18 teams that are 13 or fewer games from first place come from behind and finish ahead of today's division leaders?


Bridge
What do high-ranked tournament players do when they retire from competition?
In New York City some of them compete with equal vigor, for high stakes, at the Regency Whist Club in Manhattan.
On the diagramed deal the North cards were held by Sam Stayman, a legend as a player and a theorist.
His partner was Alan Greenberg, known as Ace, whose short tournament career included a national victory in the Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams.


A Day of Dominican Pride


CHRONICLE
The death styles of the rich and famous will be explored by NEIL MERON and CRAIG ZADAN, television film producers.
Details of the wills of such celebrated people as W. H. Auden, Truman Capote, Perry Ellis and Andy Warhol will be presented as a television special.
The documentary is being financed by Spectacor Films.


Waterbury Killing Puzzles Teen-Age Suspects' Friends
Mischief accented their lives.
But apparently none of them dreamed it would turn deadly.
Friends said the crime was supposed to have been a trifling act of bravado, a manly demonstration of how easy it was to pull off a petty robbery.
There were even overtures to their buddies to stop by and watch the action.


Labor Cuts by New York City Are Fewer Than Anticipated
To Diane Tripp, New York City's fiscal crisis has been a personal betrayal.
Her job as a Health Department contract administrator gone, she worries about paying her $764-a-month rent in Flatbush and supporting her 7-year-old son.
She broods about relocating to "a place that is up-and-coming fiscally, like New York used to be."
But so far, the pain from the city's fiscal troubles has flowed deep, but not wide.
A month after the tumultuous adoption of a $28.7 billion recession-driven budget, just over one in 100 city workers has lost a job, far fewer than the Dinkins administration had predicted.
And the most onerous service cuts have yet to be carried out.


Today, Class, Vouchers and Multiculturalism; Books Needed
To the Editor:
Your July 31 article on the inclusion of Hispanic history in school curriculums raises a problem I, and many others, face.
As a librarian in a school with a large Puerto Rican population, I need materials about Puerto Rico, its history and culture, famous Puerto Ricans and fiction about children who happen to be Puerto Rican.
This is true also for Mexican, Cuban and Hispanic history.


Claudia Marozas Is Married
Claudia Marozas, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Marozas of Hinsdale, Ill., was married yesterday to Christopher Ross Buchanan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray E. Buchanan of Marion, N.C.
The Rev.
Daniel Freitas performed the ceremony at the First United Methodist Church in Chatham, Mass.
The bride, 27 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Phillips, Nizer, Benjamin, Krim &amp; Ballon.
She graduated from Smith College and Brooklyn Law School.
The bridegroom, 27, is the director of acquisitions for the home video division of Columbia Pictures in New York.
He graduated from Harvard University.


Sorrow and Frustration On Trails of the Missing
On a hot June morning in 1978, Steven Mark Hicks left his home here in northeast Ohio to hitchhike to a rock music concert at nearby Chippewa Lake Park.
Mr.
Hicks, a recent graduate of Coventry High School, did not come home that night, but he was known to stay out late and his parents presumed he had simply forgotten to call.


World-Class Fraud: How B.C.C.I. Pulled It Off -- A special report.; At the End of a Twisted Trail, Piggy Bank for a Favored Few
During his decade as an internal auditor for the Bank of Credit and Commerce International here, Vivian Ambrose knew all too well the bank's unwritten rules.
Some loan documents, for example, were off limits to the bank inspectors, including him.
Instead, they were handled personally and confidentially by the inner circle of two dozen executives who kept the bank's secrets.


Metro Matters; Giuliani Defends Past in Assessing Political Future
Rudolph W. Giuliani is a man of fewer and fewer convictions.
Bess Myerson and Imelda Marcos were acquitted.
Guilty verdicts against former Representative Robert Garcia and E. Robert Wallach in the Wedtech case, against a reputed organized-crime boss, Anthony Salerno, and against several Wall Street firms and traders were reversed on appeal.


Giants Get Out the Brooms As Dodger Lead Is Cut to 1 1/2
San Francisco completed a three-game sweep of the first-place Los Angeles Dodgers as Darren Lewis's run-scoring infield single in the seventh inning snapped a tie, giving the Giants a 4-3 victory today.
The victory pulled the Giants to .500 for the first time since they were 6-6 on April 21, and to within six games of the Dodgers, the closest San Francisco has been to first place since they were five and one-half games back on May 11.
The Giants have won 12 straight games at Candlestick Park.
The San Francisco victory, coupled with Atlanta's defeat of Houston moved the Braves to within one and one-half game of the Dodgers in the National League West.


Outside Publishing Centers, A Giant Bookstore Prospers
Great bookstores, like great restaurants, are usually associated with great cities, where they provide the world-weary with a respite from urban grit.
Yet what may be America's largest bookstore sits not in midtown Manhattan or Chicago's South Side, but on the slope of a hill near a brewery here in the nation's 32d-largest city.


Thanks, but No Thanks
Less than 24 hours after being suspended by the Pan American Baseball Confederation, Dan Pedersen, one of two American umpires selected to officiate in the baseball competition, has been reinstated.
But Pedersen, who was suspended on Saturday in the aftermath of a brawl between the Canadian and Mexican baseball teams, says he's going home anyway.


Italy's Handling of Albanians Is Drawing Criticism
As fighting and tension intensified between Albanian refugees and Italian security forces in the southern port of Bari, criticism mounted in Italy today over the authorities' handling of the Albanians, whose visions of a new life in Italy have collided abruptly with official determination to send them back home.
Pope John Paul II today commented on the Albanians' reception in this country by saying, "No one can remain indifferent before the dramatic scenes of men, women and entire families." Analysts took the remark as implicit criticism of the oft-repeated and hard-line official position aimed at discouraging more Albanians from seeking refuge here.


U.S. Accuses Eritrea on Food Relief
Bush Administration officials say that in the aftermath of Ethiopia's civil war the new provisional government of the separatist province of Eritrea is playing politics with food relief to assert its independence before a planned referendum to decide its sovereignty.
The officials, who deal with aid programs, said the Eritrean authorities had increased dock fees for some ships by more than tenfold, which they said could deter shipping companies under contract to deliver food.
And they said Eritrean officials had diverted foreign relief aid for the rest of Ethiopia to their own people as a way of increasing their control and popular support.


Bernay Sacks Marries Jonathan S. Kaufman
Bernay Steva Sacks, daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Sacks of Fresh Meadows, Queens, was married yesterday to Jonathan Seth Kaufman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Kaufman of Leesburg, Fla.
Rabbi Morris S. Friedman performed the ceremony at Temple Hillel in North Woodmere, L.I.


Going Here, There And Everywhere
For 20 years, thoroughbred jockeys and harness drivers have done two-a-days if the price was right: compete in an afternoon race somewhere, then fly to an evening event.
But on Saturday, JOHN CAMPBELL and JACK MOISEYEV may have set a one-day, ride-drive-fly record.
The harness drivers, who are running neck and neck for national money-winning honors, went by jet and helicopter to three tracks in three states.


Did We Almost Lose the Army?
Fifty years ago, on Aug. 12, 1941, the House passed a measure that the press called "the draft extension bill." The vote was 203 to 202.
For a half-century, reputable historians have misstated the bill's purpose and exaggerated its importance.
The Selective Service Act of 1940 provided that a drafted man should serve for one year and then spend 10 years in the reserves, subject to call-up in case of war.
In August 1941, the Army persuaded President Roosevelt to support a bill lengthening every draftee's service from one year to two and a half years.


Suspect Seized In Bias Arson In Canarsie
A day after holding a watermelon aloft to taunt black protesters in Canarsie, a 20-year-old white man was charged with the firebombing that had made his neighborhood the latest focus for New York City's racial tensions, the police said.
Tips from neighbors led to the arrest of the man, Brian Fining, in the July 27 firebombing of a real-estate office that sold homes to black families in the south Brooklyn section, the police said.


Lenore Good Marries
Lenore Jeanne Good, the daughter of Jay F. Good of Miami and the late Stephanie W. Good, was married yesterday to Kenneth Michaels, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Michaels of New York.
Rabbi Jerome Epstein officiated at Alger House in New York.
Mrs.
Michaels, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is an assistant vice president of the First Boston Corporation in New York.
The bridegroom, 27, graduated from Vassar College and is a law student at Yeshiva University in New York.


Black and Dodger Blue All Over
Despite more than 100 collisions at home plate -- the closest baseball comes to being a contact sport -- MIKE SCIOSCIA has played more games than any other catcher in Dodgers history.
He may also have another record, which is recorded in black-and-blue: blocking home plate and putting the tag on the runner.


Honors
*
Marcio Moreira, chief creative officer-international at McCann-Erickson Worldwide, New York, has been named adman of the 1980's in Brazil by an association of that country's advertising columnists.
Mr.
Moreira, who has worked in New York for the last decade, was born in Brazil.


Abroad at Home; Thornburgh Puzzle
As he leaves the office of Attorney General, Dick Thornburgh leaves behind a puzzle.
Why has he used that great office to denigrate the rights of Americans?
It is an urgent question.
This year is the 200th anniversary of our Bill of Rights, the first 10 amendments to the Constitution.
But it is a hard time for constitutional rights.
The public, stressed by crime, is impatient with the idea of rights for the accused.


Spectacular Drives by Long Shot Stun Golf's Best
Playing with a fearless ease that bespoke destiny, a 25-year-old rookie golfer named John Daly completed an underdog story of Rocky-like proportions today, winning the P.G.A.
Championship before an adoring crowd that until Thursday hardly knew his name.
Before today, the wispy-mustached Daly had never finished better than third in a Professional Golf Association Tour event.
He was the final man accepted into the championship field and had to drive all night from Memphis just to get here in time to tee off on Thursday in place of Nick Price, who dropped out when his wife went into labor.


PAN AMERICAN GAMES: Sports of The Times; Bay of Pigs Explains the Games
WHEN Agustin Marrero Ferrer fell at the Bay of Pigs, he was carrying a photograph of Fidel Castro in his wallet.
That wallet is now in a display case at the earnest little museum where the fighting took place in April 1961.
Castro himself is still in power, performing the wave and standing at attention for the American anthem at the Pan American Games after 30 years of hostility between the nations.
So perhaps we should never say "never" about anything.


Cleveland's Gift to the Giants: A Wakeup Call
The Giants may be the champions of pro football, but on Saturday night they were not even the champions of Cleveland Stadium.
And that bothered Coach Ray Handley and many of his players, although they seemed to feel the team might turn a negative into a positive.
In the second exhibition game for both teams, the Browns, a 3-13 team last year, upset the Giants, 16-10.
The most popular man in the stadium was Michael Jackson.


Today, Class, Vouchers and Multiculturalism
To the Editor:
I hope eight members of the New York State Board of Regents can sleep at night after denying 5,000 low-income students an opportunity to escape their public schools with the aid of a $2,500 voucher from the state (news article, July 27).


Federal Government Must Respond Decisively to Violent Crime
To the Editor:
"Mr. D'Amato Gets Reckless On Crime" (editorial, July 25), criticizing my amendments to the Senate crime bill, is mistaken.
Tough sanctions against those who use guns to commit crimes are not reckless, but essential if we are to stem our nation's burgeoning crime epidemic and restore domestic tranquillity.


South African Rightists Defend Actions
The white supremacist Afrikaner Resistance Movement, bloodied by its violent clash with the police Friday night, vowed today to accelerate paramilitary preparations for what its leader said would be an inevitable civil war in South Africa.
"We are preparing ourselves for the coming revolution," said Eugene TerreBlanche, the leader of the neo-Nazi movement.


PAN AM CREDITORS BACK $1.7 BILLION OFFER FROM DELTA
The creditors of Pan American World Airways agreed early this morning to a new offer from Delta Air Lines for Pan Am's most prized assets.
The creditors' about-face came after Delta agreed to raise its bid sharply and to help finance a reorganization of the struggling Pan Am, which would survive as much smaller carrier primarily serving Latin America from the United States.


Luci Staller Weds Stuart M. Altman
Luci Staller, a daughter of Edith Staller of North Wildwood, N.J., and the late Bernard Staller, was married yesterday in Westbury, L.I., to Stuart Mark Altman, the son of Marilyn Altman of Boca Raton, Fla., and Herb Altman of New York.
Rabbi Ronald Brown performed the ceremony at the Chateau Briand.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is to join the New York office of the Chicago law firm of Sonnenschein Nath &amp; Rosenthal as an associate in September.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; The Market For Reruns Is Slumping
For years, the broadcast networks have looked to the profits of the syndication market as a way to ease their financial troubles.
But like the rest of the television industry, the syndication market in reruns has hit a slump.
Sales of commercial time have been slow for local stations, just as they have been for the networks.
As a result, stations have not had the kind of cash to spend on hit comedies that they had in the late 1980's, when "The Cosby Show" became the most successful program in the history of television syndication, raking in estimated sales in excess of $600 million, or more than $4 million for each rerun episode.


Meet the Mess: A Team Set to Fail
Bud Harrelson, saying that he did not fear for his job as manager of the Mets, said today that he would soon request a meeting with management to clarify his status both for the remainder of this season and with respect to a new contract for next year.
The Mets, in an endlessly agonizing effort, then went out and further sank Harrelson's feelings, if not his fortunes, by losing, 3-2, to the Cubs in 14 innings.
George Bell, leading off the 14th against rookie reliever Pete Schourek, homered into the bleachers in left-center field.


Teheran Offers to Help On Assassination Case
Iran said today that it was ready to cooperate in investigating the slaying of Shahpur Bakhtiar, a former Prime Minister, who was stabbed to death at his home in a suburb of Paris on Thursday.
There was no official comment on the release of an American hostage and a French relief worker by pro-Iranian Shiite Muslim kidnappers in Lebanon.


For $18 Million, Call Me Mike
MICHAEL and MAGIC and WILT , CAZZIE and OSCAR and KAREEM .
Now add a new first name to that pantheon of basketball heroes whose first name was all they ever needed:
Mike.


Poland's Central Bank Is Rattled by Scandal
A financial scandal has rocked Poland's central bank, resulting in the suspension of its president and the arrest of its deputy president and five other banking officials.
The actions came late last week amid allegations that a private Polish company was involved in a money-transfer scheme to earn interest on its funds at several banks at the same time.
The suspected fraud totaled at least $130 million, according to Polish press reports.


U.S. Team Is Bounced To Bronze
For the first time in nine years, a United States women's basketball team left a major international competition without a gold medal.
Instead, the team is going home with the bronze.
The United States beat Canada, 92-61, today to take third place in the Pan American Games.


NASA Tries to Salvage Space Mission
Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory here are making a desperate attempt to rescue a spacecraft 146 million miles away, the $1.4 billion Galileo, which is bound for Jupiter but crippled by a malfunctioning antenna.
Failure to repair the antenna, a project official said, would be "devastating" to the most advanced planetary mission now under way.


Chemical Makers Identify A New Hazard: Their Image
The nation's chemical makers, troubled that the public associates them with toxic-waste dumps, poisonous spills and carcinogens, are cranking up a $10 million advertising and communications campaign to convince people that chemical plants are run by friendly, responsible people.
It is part of an industrywide effort led by the Chemical Manufacturers Association to rebuild the industry's image.
The trade group, which represents the makers of 95 percent of the chemicals produced in the United States, has begun a "responsible care" program that requires manufacturers to clean up their problems or leave the group.


Today, Class, Vouchers and Multiculturalism; Hispanic History
To the Editor:
Re "In Truth, Hispanic Groups Aim to Rewrite History" (Education page, July 31):


CHRONICLE
"Riding Through My Life," the autobiography of PRINCESS ANNE, is to be published in October in Britain, after a delay of a year.
A spokesman for her publisher, Pelham Books, explained that the delay was caused by a change in plans.
The Princess had planned to write the book with a co-author.
Then, she decided to write it herself and has been seen tapping away on a lap-top computer.


A Twist in Fair-Trade Case: Japanese Charge U.S. Rival
In an aging factory near the airport here, hundreds of young women from Singapore and neighboring Malaysia are assembling an American classic known to generations of students: the portable Smith Corona typewriter.
Across the globe in Bartlett, Tenn., 400 American workers in a similar factory are building competing typewriters for a Japanese company, Brother Industries Ltd.
From those simple facts arises one of the strangest and most politically charged trade disputes in recent times.


Books of The Times; Sandburg, Champion of the Powerless
Carl Sandburg A Biography  By Penelope Niven Illustrated. 843 pages.
A Robert Stewart Book/Scribner's. $35.
During the first six decades of the 20th century, Carl Sandburg (1878-1967) wrote the story of his life and told much of the history of his times in more than a score of books, inventive poems, newspaper columns, lecture-recitals and pronunciamentos in the press.
Because Sandburg was an outspoken liberal and political activist who campaigned for Eugene V. Debs, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Adlai E. Stevenson, he was falsely branded a security risk in the Federal Bureau of Investigation dossier kept on him for almost a lifetime, even though he received a Presidential Medal of Freedom.
He and his brilliant wife, Lilian Paula Steichen, a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of the University of Chicago, first met as Social Democratic Party organizers when the century was young.


E. Tamu Bess Is Dead; Political Aide Was 39
E.
Tamu Bess, a former special assistant to Basil Patterson when he was deputy mayor of New York City and New York State Secretary of State, died on Aug. 1 in Midway Hospital Medical Center in Los Angeles.
She was 39 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
Ms.
Bess died in surgery after being shot in an attempted robbery in front of the home of a colleague, the Los Angeles police said.


Lithuanians Protest Against Elite Soviet Troops


Review/Jazz; Hearing Coltrane Through Young Ears and Old
"Coltrane Serenade," the Friday night concert at Alice Tully Hall, broke away from the format of previous Classical Jazz tributes, choosing revisionism over re-creation.
It didn't try to replicate the great saxophonist's impassioned performances, although transcriptions of Coltrane solos are available.
Instead, younger and older musicians, including some of Coltrane's own sidemen, played their interpretations of Coltrane compositions.
The selection of pieces drew on Coltrane's most complex post-bop tunes ("Giant Steps," "Countdown"), his modal jazz influenced by Asian and African music ("Miles's Mode," "India") and, for one selection ("The Drum Thing"), the unfettered free jazz that filled his last albums before his death in 1967.
The sets regularly returned to Coltrane's versions of the blues, from "Mr. Day" (1960) to "Up 'Gainst the Wall" (1962) to "Transition" (1965), which levels the blues progression down to a one-chord vamp.
As his music evolved, Coltrane cut away harmonic strictures, giving the soloists more space for passionate incantation.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Bank of New York filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $175 million of convertible subordinated debentures to be offered through Goldman, Sachs and Merrill Lynch.


Anthony A. Bliss, Is Dead at 78; An Executive in Opera and Dance
Anthony A. Bliss, a patrician New York lawyer who stood at the center of the city's opera and dance worlds for four decades, died on Saturday on Prince Edward Island, Canada, He was 78 years old and lived in Oyster Bay, L.I.
He died of a brain hemorrhage and pneumonia, said David Reuben, a spokesman for the Metropolitan Opera.


Treasury to Auction Only Bills This Week
After completing its $38 billion auction of notes and bonds last week, the Treasury has scheduled only its regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills this week, totaling $20.8 billion.
By late Friday the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.32 percent and the six-month bill at 5.38 percent.


Quotation of the Day
"I'm really happy to see a tree, hear an airplane, hear an automobile. I can't find words. I must find words." -- Edward Austin Tracy shortly after he was freed in Lebanon.  [ A1:4. ]


Ms. Frankel Wed To H. C. Joselson
Nancy Olivia Frankel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley A. Frankel of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Henry C. Joselson, a son of Denise and Morton Joselson of Rye, N.Y.
Rabbi Norton Shargell performed the ceremony at Sunningdale Country Club in Scarsdale.
Mrs.
Joselson is a manager of the A.T.&amp;T.
Info Quest Center, a science and technology exhibition center in New York.
A graduate of Princeton University, she studied at the Art Students League and received a certificate in fine arts from the Boston Museum School.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of the Ogden Corporation, a diversified industrial company in New York.


Issues Linger in Europe's Japan Auto Pact
The recent agreement between the European Community and Japan to limit Japanese car imports may be the most important quota arrangement in the history of global trade.
The accord will restrict sales of Japanese cars for seven years in what will become by far the world's largest auto market once the European Community removes its internal trade barriers by the end of 1992.


T. J. Scherer Weds Georgia Nugent at Princeton
Susan Georgia Nugent, an assistant professor of classics at Brown University, was married yesterday in Princeton, N.J., to Thomas James Scherer, a lawyer in New York.
The Rev.
Howard V. O'Shea, the Roman Catholic chaplain at Brown, performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel.
The bride, 40 years old, is known as Georgia and is keeping her name.
She graduated from Princeton and received a doctorate in classics from Cornell University.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George Nugent of Miami.


Putting Natural Food in the Pet Bowl
Elizabeth Bilodeau plucked a can from the supermarket shelf and scowled after reading a list of ingredients that included the chemical preservative sodium nitrite along with beef, bacon and cheese.
"I don't see why they need to put this stuff in," Ms.
Bilodeau said, referring to chemicals and artificial colors.
"I worry that it could cause cancer."
Family dinner for the little ones?
Baby food for a new arrival?
Not exactly.
She was in a Food Emporium in Manhattan looking for dog food for her Chihuahua puppy, Pepita, slung in a knapsack over her shoulder.


Under Desert Sun, Mourners Pray for 9 Killed at Temple
As police investigators were inside a Thai Buddhist temple today searching for clues to the shooting deaths of nine people, Thai worshipers gathered on the hot desert road outside, unable to enter to mourn their dead.
Except for the crackle of police radios, the plain red-roofed temple was silent, one day after what investigators called the methodical but unexplained killings early Saturday of six monks, a nun and two young acolytes.


Atlantis Mission Ends in Smooth Florida Landing
After nearly nine days in orbit, the space shuttle Atlantis returned to earth here today without mishap, and the Kennedy Space Center returned to service as a regular landing site for shuttle missions.
"Well done, Atlantis," mission control told the crew of four men and one woman, commanded by Col.
John E. Blaha of the Air Force, seconds after the craft touched down at 8:23 A.M.


CHRONICLE
After a 25-year career in films, JEAN-PAUL BELMONDO has bought a theater in Paris, so he can act on his own stage from time to time.
The actor purchased the Theatre des Varietes last week, Le Figaro reported.


Helmick Praises Cubans As Hosts and Competitors
Saying he was satisfied with the United States' performance and attendance at the Pan American Games, Robert M. Helmick, the president of the United States Olympic Committee, today praised the Cubans as hosts as well as competitors.
He also said he did not see any pattern of favoritism among judges, most of them Cuban, despite complaints from United States athletes.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON DECOLONIZATION -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
PREPARATORY COMMISSION FOR THE INTERNATIONAL SEABED AUTHORITY AND THE INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE LAW OF THE SEA -- 3 P.M.


Freed U.S. Hostage Emerges A Frail and Disoriented Man
Edward Austin Tracy, the 60-year-old American freed by kidnappers in Lebanon, emerged from his ordeal today thankful for his freedom amid concern about his physical and mental well-being.
He was described by Syrian officials who met with him as "sick, disoriented and confused," but precise details on his medical condition were not available.


Tenuous Cease-Fire Keeps an Uneasy Peace in Croatia


Today, Class, Vouchers and Multiculturalism; Race as Perception
To the Editor:
They become socially black, not physically black.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week: American Health Corp., two million shares.
J.
C.
Bradford, Nashville, Tenn.
American Medical Holdings Inc., 16.2 million shares.
First Boston Corp.
Aydin Corp., 500,000 shares.
Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
BMC West Corp., 1.95 million shares.
Salomon Brothers.
Community First Bankshares, 1.7 million shares, Piper, Jaffray &amp; Hopwood Inc.
Constitution Re Corp., 10.6 million shares.
Salomon Brothers.
Dastek International, 2.73 million shares.
Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
Digital Biometrics. one million shares.
John G. Kinnard, Minneapolis.
Ezcorp Inc., 1.8 million class A nonvoting shares.
Kidder, Peabody.
Fischer Imaging Corp.. two million shares.
Piper, Jaffray.
K Mart Corp., 15 million depositary shares of preferred equity redemption cumulative stock.
Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
Rabco Health Services Inc., 8.2 million shares.
Salomon Brothers.
Sybase Inc., 3.5 million shares.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Washington Mutual Savings Bank, two million shares.
Salomon Brothers.
Zenith Laboratories Inc., 1.6 million.
Kidder, Peabody.
Zeos International Ltd., 2.4 million shares.
Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons.
Source: MCM CorporateWatch


In Guggenheim Restoration, Wright Laughs Last
Did the Guggenheim Museum -- whose innovative spiral structure opened to a bemused public in 1959 -- do wrong by its architect, Frank Lloyd Wright?
Yes, say Guggenheim officials, who promise that when the museum reopens in February after a $24 million renovation, Wright and his vision will be vindicated.
"We are restoring a monument," said Thomas Krens, the Guggenheim's director.
"It was Wright's last and some say most original building, and our aim is to give it back to the public, reveal it in a way never seen before, consistent with Wright's original architectural concepts."


Harry Helmsley: Unfit for Trial, but Fit for Business?
The people who worked with him are already beginning to talk about Harry Helmsley in the past tense, and the United States Attorney in Manhattan has dropped tax-evasion charges against him, citing what he regards as Mr.
Helmsley's mental incompetence.
The man who was a kingpin of New York real estate for more than five decades has receded from public view to the point of vanishing.
Yet Mr.
Helmsley's immense real-estate operation is still moving along, shrunk in size, less vigorous, but possessing the many complex partnerships and service contracts that have been the foundation of his wealth.
And despite the possible prison term that his wife, Leona, faces for tax evasion and his court-determined incompetence to stand trial, Mr.
Helmsley appears to continue at the head of his companies.  'He Gives Us His Input'
"All major decisions are made by Mr. Helmsley," said Gerald N. Schrager, the Helmsleys' real-estate lawyer and chief legal adviser and, since the legal and business troubles involving him and his wife began, the Helmsley spokesman.
"He gives us his input every time he thinks it is appropriate."


Jane Piper Dies at 74; Was Acclaimed Artist
Jane Piper, a prominent Philadelphia painter, died on Thursday at her home in the Center City section of the city.
She was 74 years old.
She died of cancer, a friend of the family said.


At Saratoga, a Floating Serenade and Symbol
Mrs.
Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney parks her yellow 1964 Jaguar on the grass outside the clubhouse gate at the 127-year-old Saratoga Race Course, and steps toward the paddock in a wide-brimmed summer hat and white dress with huge red polka dots and matching parasol, looking for all the world like a belle being cast for the Ascot Gavotte scene in "My Fair Lady."
The small combo serenading the racing fans outside the gate spots her and promptly strikes up the old tune "Mary Lou."


500 Rally to Support Controversial CUNY Professor
About 500 people marched through Harlem yesterday to voice their support for Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., the City College professor who has been strongly criticized for making racially charged remarks at a state-sponsored lecture last month.
"The people trying to silence our teachers' voices are trying to silence our voices," one of the rally's organizers, James Small, told the boisterous, chanting crowd that marched to the Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
State Office Building on West 125th Street.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-9
An American hostage was released after being held captive in Lebanon for nearly five years.
The release of Edward Tracy, only hours after a Frenchman was freed, raised hopes of more releases soon.
Page A1
Mr.
Tracy emerged from his ordeal thankful for his freedom but there was concern about his physical and mental well-being.
Syrian officials who met him said he was "sick, disoriented and confused." A1
The French relief worker flew home, three days after being kidnapped in Lebanon.
He said his captors never told him of threats to kill him if other hostagers were freed.
A8
Israel would discuss freeing Arabs it has imprisoned if it could learn the fate of seven Israeli soldiers missing in Lebanon, officials said, responding to pleas for releasing the prisoners to help free Western hostages.
A9
B.C.C.I. was seen as a shady bank, one that dealt with shadowy customers, though there was never any hard evidence of wrongdoing.
But now a good deal of evidence has tumbled into public view.
A1
The conversion of the Soviet economy to a free market is being guided by Vladimir Shcherbakov, a former auto plant manager who became DeputyPrime Minister.
He insists the economy is moving, though slowly.
A6
Italy's treatment of the Albanians seeking refuge there was criticized as fighting and tension intensified be-tween the refugees and Italian security forces.
A5
Poland's central bank is rattled by scandal D2
Paris Journal: The library is big, and so is the brouhaha A4
The separatist province of Eritrea in Ethiopia has been playing politics with food relief to assert its independence before a planned referendum to decide its sovereignty, Bush Administration officials say.
A3
South African rightists defend actions A3
Kidnappings in Brazil have soared to the rate of two a week, earning Rio the title of "Kidnap Capital." In the first half of 1991, 79 people were kidnapped by criminal gangs looking for an easy way to make money.
A7
Japan plan would free broker fees D1
News Analysis: Issues linger in Europe's Japan auto pact D1 NATIONAL A10-13
The anti-abortion protests in Wichita have drawn supporters from around the nation.
They go to Kansas as "warriors of prayer," as one man said, in a civil war over abortion.
A1
The slaying of six Buddhist monks, a nun and two young acolytes at a temple has devastated the Thai community in Arizona.
The killings aroused fear that anti-Asian racism was involved.
A10
The American Bar Association meeting has no panels on what may be the most important issue facing American lawyers: the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
But the silence is misleading.
A10
A planned memorial to black soldiers of the Union Army in the Civil War was unveiled in Washington.
The memorial would include a wall inscribed with the names of 185,000 soldiers and a statue.
A12
Repairs to the Galileo spacecraft are aimed at repairing a malfunctioning antenna and reviving hope that the exploration of Jupiter and an asteroid will go as planned.
A11
The space Shuttle Atlantis returned to earth without mishap after nine days in orbit, and the Kennedy Space Center returned to service as a regular landing site for the shuttle.
A11
The first man believed to be killed by Jeffrey L. Dahmer, the Milwaukee man who is a suspect in 17 murders, was one of thousands of people reported missing.
The cases are often discouraging for the families of the missing and for the police.
A13
California wants to keep businesses in the state, a concern that has grown after a number of companies fled to cheaper places like Pueblo, Colo.
Worry over more desertions has jolted the state into action.
A12
The market for television reruns is slumping D1
A trade dispute over typewriters has arisen between an American company in Asia, and a Japanese company with a plant in Tennessee.
The Japanese company charged Smith Corona with selling below market prices in the United States.
D1
Pan Am creditors back $1.7 billion offer from Delta A1
Steel hits hard times again D1
Putting natural food in the pet bowl D1
Chemical makers identify a new hazard: their image D7 REGIONAL B1-7
Pain from the city's fiscal troubles has flowed deep, but not wide.
Just over one in 100 city workers has lost a job, far fewer than the Dinkins administration had expected.
A1
A man was charged with firebombing a Canarsie real-estate agency, a day after he held up a watermelon to taunt black protesters in Canarsie, the police said.
Tips from some of his neighbors led to the arrest.
B1
A march for a City College professor was held in Harlem.
Marchers voiced support for Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., the professor who has been strongly criticized for making racially charged statements at a lecture.
B3
A man leaving a party was killed after being held up by three men, the police said.
When he turned over the only money he had -- $2 -- the men killed him.
B7 The youths who killed a delivery man of a Chinese restaurant in Waterbury, Conn., were portrayed as bored troublemakers.
Friends said they were probably looking for fun, not for someone to kill.
B1
Harry Helmsley is almost invisible these days after lording over New York real estate for more than five decades.
But he still rules his empire, his spokesman says, even though a court has declared him incompetent to stand trial for tax evasion.
B1
New York at Work: The tax assessor in Orangetown pleads with townspeople to understand: Reassessments do not raise taxes; budgets do.
But Josette J. Polzella has still been booed, harassed and even flashed.
B1
Washington Heights Journal: A subway tunnel for the brave B3 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Sports C1-9
A 25-year-old rookie golfer completed an underdog story of Rocky-like proportions, winning the P.G.A.
Championship before an adoring crowd.
John Daly played with an ease that bespoke destiny.
A1
Baseball: Pennant races getting tighter C1
Yanks sweep doubleheader from the Tigers C1
No-hitter for Alvarez of White Sox C1
Harrelson wants status clarified; Mets lose again C3
Negro leaguers reminisce at Cooperstown C3
Giants complete sweep of Dodgers C4
Column: Vecsey on Cuba and Pan American Games C7
Football: Inconsistent effort as Giants lost to Browns C9
Coslet positive despite another Jet loss C9
Horse Racing: Saratoga society C2
Pan American Games: Cuba beats U.S. in baseball C7
U.S. women settle for bronze in basketball C7
U.S.O.C. head praises Cubans C7 Arts/Entertainment
Wright laughs last at the Guggenheim C11
Music: "Fidelio" in translation C11
Dance: Students present their skills C13
Word and Image: Yehudi Menuhin and family C11
A biography of Carl Sandburg C13
Cattle grazing vs. the land C14 Obituaries B10
Anthony A. Bliss, opera and dance executive Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A14
More danger than defense
Don't blame Blue Cross
A step back for judicial ethics
Recovering the China fumble


More Danger Than Defense
The Senate found a strange way to celebrate the recent signing of a landmark treaty with the Soviet Union to cut nuclear arms.
Within days it voted to deploy anti-missile defenses that could now spur the Soviets to reverse course and build additional arms.
That needlessly risks U.S. security and calls for heavy new expenditures.
And to what end?
To counter unlikely nightmare scenarios, like unauthorized nuclear launches by renegade Soviet republics or attacks by third world dictators armed with long-range nuclear missiles.
The House, which will address the issue after the current recess, would be wise to vote against deployment.


Review/Television; The Poignant Leitmotifs Of the Menuhin Family
Yehudi Menuhin was only 9 years old when his violin playing had drawn sufficient attention for him to be the subject of a newsreel.
The year was 1925, and the film was silent.
But Yehudi was shown alternately playing his fiddle and riding on a swing, with breathless quotations from reviews in the San Francisco newspapers punctuating the scenes.
When he made his New York debut two years later, playing the Beethoven Violin Concerto with the New York Philharmonic, he was already a national celebrity.
The newsreel is included, along with other archival gems and more recent rehearsal, performance and interview film, in "Menuhin: A Family Portrait," to be shown as part of the "American Masters" series on Channel 13 tonight at 9.
But Mr.
Menuhin's nearly seven-decade career as a violinist and conductor is only one strand of this two-hour documentary by Tony Palmer, and not the strand that makes the deepest impression.
Indeed, watching the film, one can understand why Mr.
Menuhin has been fighting to prevent Mr.
Palmer from publishing a book that expands on the material he collected.


2 MORE HOSTAGES ARE FREED AND HOPE GROWS FOR A SWAP OF ALL CAPTIVES IN MIDEAST
An American held captive in Lebanon for nearly five years was freed by his kidnappers yesterday, hours after a Frenchman abducted only last week was released as well.
The release of Edward Austin Tracy and Jerome Leyraud, coming after a British hostage was freed on Thursday, raised hopes that the 10 Westerners still held in Lebanon might soon be freed, and President Bush made it clear that he wanted Israel to keep up the momentum by releasing Arab captives to encourage the release of the remaining Western hostages.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 12


Lois Marla Kohn Is Married
Lois Marla Kohn, daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Kohn of Louisville, Ky., was married last evening to Gary Edward Claar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick S. Claar of Harrison, N.Y.
Rabbi Marvin Feigenbaum performed the ceremony at Keneseth Israel Synagogue in Louisville.
The bride, 25 years old, is retaining her name.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received a master's degree in education.
The bridegroom, 24, also graduated from Penn and received a law degree from New York University.


Israel Demands News on Its Own Men
Responding to overseas appeals that it release Arab prisoners to help free Western hostages, Israel said today that it was prepared to discuss such a move if it could learn the fate of seven Israeli soldiers missing in Lebanon.
The statement did not acknowledge reports from Western diplomats that the Israeli Government has already mentioned this condition in United Nations-mediated talks with the Party of God, the umbrella organization for the groups believed to hold 10 Westerners hostage in Lebanon.


Dividend Meetings1
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of August 11, 1991:  MONDAY FPL Group Inc Minn Mng &amp; Mfg Co Marion Merrell Dow Inc


Cigarette Ad Specialists Moving to New Jobs
Three advertising executives with experience on cigarette accounts are moving to new jobs.
Two of them, who worked as a team at Young &amp; Rubicam in New York, have resigned their positions there and are considering opening their own agency.
They are Bill Brown, 43 years old, who was a senior vice president and group account director, and John Mezzina, 42, who was a senior vice president and group creative director.


New Campaigns
*
In its first campaign for the Gerber Products Company, Grey Advertising, New York, is introducing a new slogan, "Because we know you only want the best for your baby." Television and print advertising, to begin appearing today, gives more emphasis to the relationship between parents and their babies than campaigns by Gerber's previous agency, J. Walter Thompson, Chicago, which stressed product quality.


Yankees Turn Sour Into Sweep
All day long, the Yankees had disguised the truth about Don Mattingly and his stiff back.
Questions about his availability for the two games against Detroit yesterday were greeted with vague responses.
Were the Yankees placing him on the disabled list?
Could he pinch-hit?
After more than seven hours of doubleheader drama at Yankee Stadium, everyone found out the answers to the questions were no and yes.
And the yes wound up burying Detroit when Mattingly stroked a two-run single as a pinch-hitter in the ninth to tie the second game and set the stage for Mel Hall's two-run homer in the 10th that won it, 10-8.
New York won the opener, 12-6.


Charges in Child's Drowning
A woman pleaded no contest to involuntary-manslaughter charges on Friday in the death of her 17-month-old son, who was left alone in a bathtub and drowned after hitting his head.
The defendant, Gia K. Webb, 21, is expected to be placed on probation when she is sentenced Sept. 10, Deputy District Attorney Herbert R. Lapin said.


Rejoicing, Urgently, For Times Long Gone
Joe Black is young enough to have missed the full ramifications of institutionalized segregation in major league baseball, as his pitching career with the Dodgers attests.
At 67, he is also old enough to remember what his predecessors endured in an era when blacks were called Negro or colored and were banned from crossing many lines, including those that outlined every major league and minor league playing field.


Steel Hits Hard Times Again
In the late 1980's, when steel producers were seeing some of their most robust times in years, industry executives boasted that their companies had become so lean that they could make money running at 60 to 65 percent of capacity.
Now, American steel plants are running at 70 percent capacity, and many industry analysts expect the steelmakers' losses to exceed $1 billion for the first half of this year.


Memorial Planned for Civil War's Black Soldiers
In a small park at a Metro subway station, in an area that was once the center of Washington's black community, a memorial has been proposed to commemorate the role of blacks in the Union Army in the Civil War.
It would be the only memorial in the country dedicated to all black veterans of the Union Army, those involved say.
A memorial in Boston commemorates the 54th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry, the black regiment celebrated in the film "Glory."


Corrections
A picture in The Home Section on Thursday with an article about the Manhattan garden of Michael Straus was published in error.
It showed David Goodman, a floral and landscape designer who is the subject of a future article.


Sylvia Petit Maples, Executive, 45
Sylvia Petit Maples, the director of community services at the National Association of Drug Abuse Problems in New York, died on Friday at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 45 years old and died of liver cancer, according to a statement from the association.


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING  Driver Killed in Race John Delphus (J. D.) McDuffie, a longtime stock-car racer, was killed yesterday when his car became airborne and smashed into a tirewall and guardrail just five laps into the Budweiser at the Glen Nascar Winston Cup race in Watkins Glen, N.Y.
In television replays it appeared that McDuffie's left front tire came off, triggering a 160-mile-per-hour slide off the Watkins Glen International track at the end of the long straightaway -- the fastest part of the 2.428-mile, seven-turn road course.
His car skidded through the grassy area in turn five, losing little speed, if any.
The Pontiac flipped into the air and the passenger side slammed into the tirewall and adjoining guardrail before coming to rest on its roof.
The 52-year-old driver from Sanford, N.C., was pronounced dead at the scene.
McDuffie was married with two children.
The race was won by Ernie Irvan.
Ricky Rudd was second. (AP)


Brother Albert B. McKenna, Educator, 77
Brother Albert Bernard McKenna, whose career as a Roman Catholic educator in New York and New Jersey spanned 54 years, died on Saturday in Lincroft, N.J.
He was 77 years old and died of heart failure after several strokes, said associates at the Christian Brothers residence hall, a retirement home where he had been living.


Tambrands Will Switch To BBDO Worldwide
Tambrands Inc. announced on Friday that its United States advertising account would move to BBDO Worldwide, New York, from Ally &amp; Gargano, New York, after a review that began in May.
In the review, which had been unexpected, BBDO bested Ally and McCann-Erickson, New York.
The account, which has been one of Ally's largest, had billings last year estimated at $15 million.
Industry executives say the Lake Success, L.I., marketer of personal-care products plans to increase its annual ad spending substantially, perhaps to as much as $30 million.


Review/Television; The Grazing of Cattle Vs. Welfare of the Land
It is not hard to understand why cattle ranchers are kicking up dust over "The New Range Wars." The Audubon Society documentary, at 8 tonight on Channel 13, takes aim at the Federal policy of selling grazing rights, at below-market prices, to hundreds of millions of acres of publicly owned land in the Southwest.
The argument, forcefully advanced by a passel of ecologists and backed up by pictures of devastated areas, is that overgrazing by cattle, which require enormous amounts of forage, has endangered many forms of wildlife, exhausted the soil, polluted waters and possibly harmed the ozone layer.
The program jumps around quite a bit as it makes the case that ranchers are being rewarded at taxpayer expense for causing what one scientist calls "an unnatural disaster."


Washington Heights Journal; A Subway Passageway Just for the Courageous
Earlier this year, the Transit Authority closed some long, dark pedestrian tunnels in the subways.
One of the longest and darkest, the three-block tunnel connecting Broadway and 190th Street with the 191st Street IRT station at St.
Nicholas Avenue, stayed open.
In one of those only-in-New York bureaucratic oddities, the 79-year-old tunnel is not part of the subway system.
It is considered a city street.


Soviet Planning Minister Tries to Sell a New Plan
Sometimes the watchful eyes of the Soviet Deputy Prime Minister, Vladimir I. Shcherbakov, betray an odd merriment at his task of leading the nation from the morass of central economic planning, as if he were searching for some capitalist unicorn to replace the wheezing drayhorse of Communism.
"I see the ironies, of course," said Mr.
Shcherbakov, who is President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's deputy in charge of undoing economic devastation by reforming the sort of central ministry that he now leads.


Japanese Study Shift On Brokers
After a week of floating proposals for new rules to clean up Japan's scandal-ridden stock market, several leading figures in the ruling party have suggested for the first time that the best solution may be to permit more competition in the protected financial markets.
The head of a top policy-making council in the Liberal Democratic Party, Mutsuki Kato, and three party groups formed to evaluate financial reforms have separately called for the removal of fixed commission rates on large stock transactions, according to reports in newspapers and on television here.
Under such a plan, market forces would determine what large institutions would pay for the execution of stock-trading orders.


CHRONICLE
KURT MASUR will get a big welcome when he conducts his first concert as the new music director of the New York Philharmonic on Sept. 11.
The opening night festivities after the concert will include a dinner dance, to benefit the orchestra, in an air-conditioned tent in Damrosch Park.


Today, Class, Vouchers and Multiculturalism; Moral Economics?
To the Editor:
"Hooligans and the Neighbors' Cow" (editorial, July 29) examines the legacy of socialist-style envy, that is, "wishing your neighbor's cow would die." You trace this to the economics lessons long taught in Eastern Europe: "It is a crime to make a profit . . . Interest is usury. Personal ambition is antisocial."


CHRONICLE
SYLVESTER STALLONE is to receive a special achievement award from the National Italian American Foundation, for his accomplishments in film.
The award will be presented at the organization's dinner on Oct. 5 at the Washington Hilton hotel.


Venezuela to Chicago's South Side, Alvarez Has That No-Hit Knack
Wilson Alvarez had thrown no-hitters before.
Twelve of them.
But his masterpiece against the Baltimore Orioles today was dramatically different from the others.
The 21-year-old left-hander, making only his second major league appearance, pitched the sixth no-hitter of the season to lead the Chicago White Sox to a 7-0 victory.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
More than a million depositors worldwide stand to lose heavily from the seizure of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Recent revelations portray B.C.C.I. as a personal piggy bank for its Arab and Pakistani owners and favored customers.
Millions of dollars were advanced, often without documentation and sometimes in violation of its own limits.  [ Page A1. ]


Don A. Lautman, 61; Helped Track Sputnik
Don A. Lautman, an astronomer who helped track and project the path of the Soviet satellite Sputnik in the pioneering days of space exploration, died Friday at the age of 61.


As Times Get Tougher for California, Its Leaders Push Harder to Save Jobs
For decades, California could just lie back and rely on its seemingly irresistible lures to companies and people.
If one plant shut or left, two more seemed to blossom amid the palms, and the state's economy consistently outpaced the nation's.
But suddenly California's political and business leaders have been jolted into action.
They have belatedly started to mount a rear-guard action intended not to attract new industry but to prevent businesses from running away.
Colorado, Nevada, Utah, Arizona, Oklahoma, Oregon, Idaho and other states, have found easy pickings in California, as has nearby Mexico.
And this week, the Commissioner of Economic Development of the United States Virgin Islands, Eric Dawson, plans to make a pitch to business leaders here.
Radio Advertisements
The sales pitches are not restricted to small groups.
Commuters on Southern California's freeways often hear this advertisement on the radio: "If your business is based in California, then you already know it means putting up with traffic congestion, smog, doneover regulation, high costs and an irritable work force that result in lost revenues. . . . Now is the right time to cash out of California and go to Pueblo, Colorado."
Pueblo has attracted five plants from California.
"All these companies are leaving, and nobody is listening in the Legislature -- I just smile," said Harold E. Mabie, who runs the one-man California office of the Pueblo Economic Development Corporation.
"I've been working on a lot of companies the last six months."
Now California has begun to strike back.
The California Chamber of Commerce recently organized a Task Force on Saving California Jobs, which has urged the state to ease what it considers the excessive burdens of taxation, environmental regulation and workers' compensation insurance.
Gov.
Pete Wilson made job retention a priority in the recent legislative negotiations to erase a $14.3 billion budget deficit, asking for new rules to reduce abusive claims for workers' compensation.
The Governor was only able to win minor changes.
At the same time, the state's Office of Business Development has increased efforts to keep companies in California, partly by building an "early warning" system of potential defections.
Southern California Edison, the electric utility, is offering special assistance to keep its industrial customers from moving away.
And in Los Angeles County, probably the most vulnerable part of the state, the Economic Development Corporation of Los Angeles County, a private not-for-profit group, has a new president and a new mission.
"Over the last 10 years, there was no effort to retain jobs or bring them in," said the development group's chief economist, Jack Kyser.
"In the meantime, Oklahoma opened an office in Irvine. It was just like a candy store to them. We've never had to work for growth in the past. Something at last is happening."
But the task is complicated by strong feelings among many Californians that the state's recent growth has come at the cost of bad air and water and congestion.
While few are explicitly anti-business, many do not put a high premium on retaining heavy industry.
"Californians have a big conflict over this," said Phillip E. Vincent, senior economist at First Interstate Bancorp in Los Angeles.
"Some people do not want any more people here."
Despite the outward trickle of jobs, the California economy remains comparatively vibrant.
In 1990, California, already the most populous state, gained more than 16,000 residents a day, growing at more than twice the national average.
The state's economy was bolstered over the last decade by growth in manufacturing jobs, particularly in defense and aerospace industries, not to mention the garment and furniture industries.
As New York and other Eastern states were losing manufacturing jobs in the 1980's, California was posting gains.
By 1989 the seven counties of Southern California accounted for nearly a fifth of the nation's military contracts and 1.4 million manufacturing jobs, more than the entire states of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut combined.
Loss of Jobs
But in the last year, the trend reversed, with California losing manufacturing jobs at a slightly greater rate than the nation as a whole, nearly 100,000 jobs since last July.
The General Motors Corporation recently announced it would permanently shut its automobile plant in the Van Nuys area of Los Angeles by next August, putting 2,000 assembly-line workers out of work.
The loss of such high-paying manufacturing jobs has been offset in part by growth in lower-paying service jobs in health care, hotels, restaurants and trade.
Economists say the loss of manufacturing jobs can be attributed both to the national recession and to cuts in military spending.
But they also say that the state's comparative business disadvantages -- including high rents and housing costs -- have become increasingly powerful factors in corporate location decisions.
According to a recent survey for the California Business Roundtable, a group of corporate executives, 14 percent of California's business leaders said they planned to relocate outside the state and 41 percent said they planned to expand operations out of state.
"We are attempting to face this head on," said Carl Covitz, the state's Secretary of Business, Transportation and Housing.
"There's no need to be defensive about it. By recognizing that California is losing its competitive advantage, at least people will understand the implications. We do have serious problems doing business."
That is what Bernie and Sheila Gurstein, native Californians, decided when they uprooted their small family business, U.S.
Products, and moved from Agoura, Calif., a suburb of Los Angeles, to Coeur d'Alene, a city in northern Idaho, in 1988.
The company, which makes carpet cleaning machinery, wanted to expand but found that the cost of utilities, insurance and labor too high.
So the company moved to Idaho, where workers' compensation rates are only $2.60 for each $100 salary, compared with $7.90 in California.
The company has 20 employees.
"In California, I had to interview 30 people to find one questionable employee," said their son, Russ Gurstein, a co-owner.
"They had an attitude problem. And when the surf's up, you said goodbye to half your employees." Mr.
Gurstein added: "Officials listen to you here. Even the Governor came out to welcome us when we arrived."
Still, California retains some major advantages: a huge market, good ports, top-flight universities, a marvelous climate and proximity to Japan and other Pacific nations.
"Firms who have the ability to relocate to lower-cost states often choose to do so," said Fred Cannon, chief economist at the Bank of America in San Francisco.
"But it is a relatively small share of firms. We are close to a very large market, well positioned on the Pacific Rim. One reason for the high costs is so many people want to live here."
The man leading the Chamber of Commerce's Task Force on Saving California Jobs is Wilford D. Godbald Jr., chairman of the Zero Corporation, a Los Angeles-based manufacturer of aircraft cargo containers, camera cases and industrial cabinets.
Educational Program
He said he was trying to organize a "grass-roots educational program" to show the Legislature how smothering layers of rules were affecting jobs.
The goal, he added, is not to lower environmental standards but to make them easier to comply with.
But even as Mr.
Godbald campaigns to keep jobs in California, he is exporting them.
Zero recently transferred its Zero Halliburton division, which makes camera cases, from Pacoima, Calif., to North Salt Lake City, Utah, shifting 300 jobs.
And he soon plans to move the company's Burbank plant, which makes cases to house electronic equipment, to Utah with another 450 jobs.
Mr.
Godbald said he would like to keep the company's remaining seven California plants in the state.
"I would very much like to stay," he said.
"We are nearer the Pacific Basin, we like the environment and the California economy has been more vibrant than the nation over the years. But if the rules become more and more harsh, that will be overshadowed."
In Utah, Mr.
Godbald said, the company was able to determine what permits were needed in a few days, a process that could take months or years in California.
Indeed, Utah has been particularly aggressive in attracting California companies.
Nearly two dozen have relocated some or all of their operations there in the last two years, including Black Diamond, Lucas Western, Great American West Insurance and Standard Communications.
Probably no company has been more alarmed at the exodus than Southern California Edison, because the loss of major industrial customers means higher rates in its 50,000-square-mile service area.
In the last five years, Barry R. Sedlik, Edison's manager of customer planning services, said that 60 manufacturers had either moved or expanded to Nevada, 44 to Arizona and 284 to Mexico.
Some say California should not try to prevent the decline of manufacturing, that it should allow its economy to evolve into one based more on services, trade, culture and research.
"We are moving toward a service economy," said Mr.
Vincent, the economist at First Interstate Bancorp.
"Manufacturing is not the be all and end all."


Lori Silverstein Is Married
Lori Hope Silverstein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence I. Silverstein of Clifton, N.J., was married yesterday to Jerome Howard Solomon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hillel Solomon of Elizabeth, N.J.
Rabbis Joseph Herman and Oscar Kline performed the ceremony at Loew's Glenpoint Hotel in Teaneck, N.J.
The bride, 28 years old, is an assistant vice president of the Republic National Bank of New York.
She graduated from Drew University and received a master's degree in public administration from Columbia University.
The bridegroom, 28, is an analyst for the New York City Office of Management and Budget.
He graduated from Temple University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Virginia.


Public Service Campaigns Ran at Record Pace in '90
LAST year turned out to be a fine year for advertising -- unpaid advertising, that is.
Final figures compiled for the Advertising Council show that the organization, which coordinates national public service ad campaigns on issues from illiteracy to cancer prevention to Smokey Bear's crusade against forest fires, received a record $1.35 billion worth of media time and space during 1990.
That is up 30.3 percent from $1.04 billion in 1989, and up 10.2 percent from $1.23 billion in 1988, the previous record.


World Economies


Hila Eibschutz, Student, Is Wed
Hila Eibschutz, a daughter of Dr.
Ghitta Eibschutz and and Dr.
Marcu Eibschutz of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday to William Lawrence Robbins, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanton I. Robbins of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Ronald Hoffberg performed the ceremony at Temple Sharey Tefilo-Israel in South Orange, N.J.
He was assisted by Cantors Theodore L. Aronson and Ralph Nussbaum.
Mrs.
Robbins, 23 years old, graduated from Clark University and is a dentistry student at the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a physicist at Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J.
Her mother is a pediatrician in Westfield.


Small Fax Newspaper Shakes Up Its Press Rivals
In two small Illinois towns, a one-page fax newspaper called Fax Today has challenged the local daily with some success, prompting predictions that similar fax papers could spread like a virus across the country and pose a threat to newspapers.
In recent years, a number of newspapers have experimented with delivering news via facsimile machines in various formats, but thus far with only limited commercial success.


Less Pride Than Pain by Black Lawyers on Thomas
Clarence Thomas is not listed among the 10,771 lawyers who have registered for the American Bar Association's annual meeting here.
His name appears nowhere on the official program, which includes panels on agricultural law and Alzheimer's disease but none on what may be the most important issue facing American lawyers: Judge Thomas's nomination to the United States Supreme Court.
The bar association's silence is not entirely surprising.
The business of the bar group is primarily business, and while a subcommittee is evaluating Judge Thomas, the bar association is remaining scrupulously and ostentatiously neutral.


New York at Work; Tax Assessor Seeks Value, Not Revenue
Reassessments do not raise taxes. Budgets do.
That is the message Josette J. Polzella, the 32-year-old tax assessor here, has been trying to get across to the people living in her taxable kingdom of 15,000 properties.
So don't blame, imprison, heckle or flash her when the tax bill comes.
Frankly, she says, such behavior just isn't fair.


John Wilkie, 87, Dies; Led Electric Company
John Wilkie, a former president and chairman of Central Hudson Gas and Electric Corporation, died on Saturday at Northern Westchester Hospital in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 87 years old and lived in Katonah, N.Y.
He died of complications after surgery, his wife said.


U.S. vs. Cuba: This Was Elite Baseball
It's become a fact of competition here that every time an American meets a Cuban, the event is tinged with an emotion that goes beyond who wins and who loses.
But nothing that has happened between the two countries in the last eight days compares with the supercharged atmosphere at Latino-American Stadium this afternoon when Cuba and the United States -- the most powerful amateur baseball teams in this hemisphere -- met for the first time.


Despite Jets' Second Loss, Coslet Sees Positive Signs
Coach Bruce Coslet said he didn't know how to feel after Saturday night's 19-10 loss to Kansas City in the Jets' second exhibition game.
The ambivalence was understandable.
Coslet couldn't be happy over all, because the Jets lost.
He expressed disappointment over the fact that the defense surrendered big plays (30- and 77-yard touchdown receptions by Tim Barnett), the offense turned the ball over five times (two fumbles and three interceptions), and the offensive line suffered periodic breakdowns.


People
*
Paul DuCharme, vice president and director of print media at Grey Advertising, New York, is switching sides: He will become senior vice president and director of corporate marketing, a new position at Hachette Magazines, New York.
Also at Hachette, Gerald S. Rowe will become senior vice president and director of cross-media sales, a new position.
The appointments follow the departure last month of Hachette's senior vice president of sales and marketing, Anthony F. Incalcatera.
At Grey, a search for Mr.
DuCharme's successor is under way. *
Simon Bax has been promoted to executive vice president at Chiat/ Day/Mojo, Los Angeles, from senior vice president.
He continues as chief financial officer.


Review/Dance; Students Show What They Can Do
The Emergency Fund for Student Dancers was established last year by five Manhattan modern dance and ballet schools to provide loans and other assistance for students who come from outside New York and who are faced with sudden crises.
One part of the project is a benefit held twice a year in which choreography by selected dancers and guests from the participating schools, which are now six, is presented in an informal but fully produced performance.
Danced by professional-level or advanced students from the school, the performances have great warmth, spirit and camaraderie.
They are also good workshop showcases for developing choreographic talent.


Frenchman Says Captors Didn't Give a Reason
Jerome Leyraud, the French relief worker who was held hostage in Lebanon for 60 hours, flew back to France tonight and said his captors had never told him of their threats to kill him if other hostages were freed.
Mr.
Leyraud, the 26-year-old head of the Beirut office of the Doctors of the World, was released near dawn today after the Syrian and Lebanese authorities launched an intensive manhunt.
He was found blindfolded with his hands tied behind his back after his captors pushed him out of a car in West Beirut, Lebanese officials said.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are this week's scheduled release dates for major economic indicators.
Monday Home Completions . . .
June


Departure at Ingalls
Bruce L. Kelley, 42, president and director of client services at Ingalls, Quinn &amp; Johnson, Boston, has joined J. Walter Thompson New York as senior vice president and management director.
He succeeds Steve Dworin, 37, who left Thompson to become president of a smaller agency, Deutsch Inc., New York.


Rio's Rich Grow Fearful as Kidnappings Soar
It is a scene about as familiar here as the ones on Rio's postcards: framed by the balcony of a beach-front apartment, a released kidnapping victim gives a weary thumbs-up sign.
The ritual has become a staple of the evening news as Brazil's reported kidnappings have mushroomed.
In the first half of 1991, more people were kidnapped in Brazil -- 79 -- than in Italy during the height of its kidnapping scourge -- 75 people in 1977.


Yachtsman Win Bit of the Bubbly
Even proper yachtsman will stretch a point if the prize is champagne.
Consider the international Admiral's Cup sailboat series, contested off Cowes, England.


Miss Newhouse, A Teacher, Weds
Katherine Irene Newhouse, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald E. Newhouse of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Joseph Patrick Mele, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominic Mele of Elizabeth, N.J.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel performed the ceremony at Greenlands Farm in Harbourton, N.J., the country home of the bride's family.
Mrs.
Mele, 28 years old, is a teacher at the Town School in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in education from Lesley College.
Her father is the president of Advance Publications in Grasmere, S.I., and of The Star-Ledger of Newark.
She is a granddaughter of the late Samuel I. Newhouse, the publisher, and the late Mitzi E. Newhouse, a philanthropist.


Paris Journal; The New Library Is Bid, and So Is the Brouhaha
Looking for ways of dramatizing the housing shortage in Paris, the Right to a Home Association seemed to score a publicity coup recently when it installed 60 immigrant families in tents next to the Left Bank plot of land chosen for France's new national library.
In no time, French journalists were busily recording the appearance of what seemed to resemble an African village on the banks of the Seine.
And when the city government halted excavation work at the library site for safety reasons, more headlines duly followed.


A Step Back for Judicial Ethics
With little public attention or regard for the past, the American Bar Association has taken a backward step in judicial ethics.
Two decades ago, the A.B.A. adopted a high standard for deciding when a judge could be disqualified from a case because of a personal interest.
Last year, the association relaxed its model code.
Several state courts and legislatures may now follow suit.
Those who emulate the A.B.A. would follow one faulty step with another.
The 1972 canons called for judges to excuse themselves -- recusal is the legal term -- whenever their impartiality might reasonably be questioned.
Recusal was especially important when the judge had a financial interest, "however small," in the litigation.
The new code provides an exception for a small or "de minimis" interest.


Joyce Theater Trying To Reopen Tonight
Dance performances at the Joyce Theater, which were canceled over the weekend after the sprinkler system flooded the stage early Saturday morning, are expected to resume tonight, Lisa Lawer, the executive director of the theater, said late yesterday.
But she said ticket-holders should call the box office, (212) 242-0800, this afternoon to confirm that the performance will take place.
The reason for the sprinkler system's malfunction is not known.
It is to be repaired this morning and then inspected by the Fire Department.
If the work takes longer than expected, tonight's performance will be canceled, she said.


2 Arrested in Canarsie In a Bias-Related Case
In what the police have labeled a bias incident, a white man was arrested and charged with physically harassing a black man who was walking with four acquaintances in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn yesterday afternoon, the police said early this morning.
The case is the 14th bias incident reported in Canarsie in recent weeks.


Review/Fashion; For the Beach, Monotones or Vivid Prints
Next year's swimsuits made their debut last week in three major shows that moved from minimalist to rococo in spirit.
Minimalist refers to mood, not coverage.
While one-piece suits share equal billing on the runway with two-piece styles, the latter are not quite as revealing as they have been in the past.
And cover-ups are an integral part of the beach theme, even if they are no more than sheer T-shirts.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11
A day of diplomacy over the hostages ended with no evidence of a breakthrough.
But Israel found itself in the unwanted position of emerging as the key to a comprehensive settlement of the hostage crisis.
Page A1


DELTA'S PAN AM BID APPROVED IN COURT
Pan American World Airways won court permission yesterday to sell some of its prized assets to Delta Air Lines Inc. in a $1.7 billion deal.
The agreement, reached barely 14 hours after Pan Am's creditors embraced it, should allow the bankrupt Pan Am to survive for now as a smaller carrier serving Latin America.
The reorganized airline would be 45 percent owned by Delta and 55 percent owned by Pan Am creditors.


Jets to Start With Taylor Against Giants
Jet Coach Bruce Coslet opened training camp by saying that quarterback Ken O'Brien, an eight-year veteran and starter since midway through the 1984 season, was "the starter until he gets beat out."
That statement, loaded with ambiguity, has left the quarterback situation open to interpretation.
It also has given Coslet enough latitude to determine whether he wants O'Brien or Troy Taylor as the starter on opening day.


Shoe Industry's Split Personality
Dozens of shoe manufacturers and store buyers are gathering in midtown Manhattan this week, as they have for years, making choices that will determine whether Americans wear high or low heels, tassels or wingtips, suede or fabric.
But next summer, the two main groups of the nation's most influential cobblers will no longer coordinate their main showings.
Instead they have unsheathed their stilettos in a duel that could limit consumers' choices of designs and brands and raise prices for what is available.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Beauty Labs Inc., Hauppauge, L.I., which makes specialty beauty products, named Richard Russano president and chief operating officer. *
Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., Culver City, Calif., a subsidiary of Sony Corp., appointed Mark Gill senior vice president of publicity, promotion and field operations.


People
*
Steve Hamburg has been named senior vice president and creative director at RWR Non-Prescription Advertising, a health products advertising subsidiary of Nelson Communications, New York.
He had previously been senior vice president and associate creative director at Kallir, Philips, Ross, New York. *
Philip Davidson has been appointed vice president and senior copy writer at Cadwell Davis Partners, New York, from senior vice president and associate creative director at Avrett, Free &amp; Ginsberg, New York.


The Next Thing for Daly To Drive Is Hard Bargain
John Daly's stunning victory at the P.G.A.
Championship was the 25-year-old rookie's first giant leap toward endorsement heaven.
Now all he must do is prove he won't bogey his way back to anonymity.
"Consistency," said Daisy Sinclair, casting director of Ogilvy &amp; Mather, the advertising agency, "will give him a long life of endorsements ahead."


F.D.I.C. Is Getting New Chief
President Bush has decided to nominate William Taylor as the next chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to succeed L. William Seidman, Administration officials said today.
The appointment of Mr.
Taylor, a career official who is now the Federal Reserve Board's top banking regulator, is expected to be announced this week by the White House.
Mr.
Seidman told the President last Tuesday that he would be stepping down from the agency that oversees the nation's banks at the end of his six-year term on Oct. 16.


Mongolians Take Card
The American Express Company announced yesterday that its card was now accepted at Mongolian establishments including hotels, travel agencies and Mongolian Airlines, the company said.
American Express traveler's checks are also sold and can be used in Mongolia.
In addition, under an agreement with Juulchin, Mongolia's foreign tourism corporation, two Juulchin offices in the capital city, Ulan Bator, will offer American Express travel, financial and emergency services, according to a news release.


Deere Planning German Deal
Deere &amp; Company, the maker of lawn, farm and construction equipment, announced plans to acquire a majority of the outstanding shares of a German lawn-mower maker.
Deere did not disclose terms of the transaction for SABO Maschinenfabrik A.G., which makes consumer and commercial lawn mowers for European markets.


New York Should Cap Hiring of City Workers
To the Editor:
Every few years, New York City goes through such a budget crisis as we have now.
The scenario seems the same.
Recession sets in, therefore receipts to the city decrease, thereby causing layoffs of city workers.
After the good times return, politicians hire workers back in greater numbers than before the crisis.
In our recent crisis we have 50,000 more workers than we had at the end of the last crisis, in the late 1970's.


Mount Unzen in Japan Erupts Again


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 13


U.N. Observers Set Up Outpost in El Salvador
On a day when the Salvadoran Army and guerrillas fought battles in several places around the country, the United Nations opened an outpost here recently at the edge of a war zone in anticipation of the peace that may still be far away.
Nguyen Huu Dong, who left his native Vietnam 29 years ago to study and work abroad, set up offices in a spacious house from which he and three other civilians and four military and police officers in blue berets will roam El Salvador's eastern mountains and valleys as human rights monitors.


PBS Cancels Act-Up Film
A "P.O.V." film about a 1989 demonstration by Act-Up, the AIDS advocacy and protest group, at St.
Patrick's Cathedral has been canceled.
The Public Broadcasting Service told its stations that PBS and "P.O.V.," the documentary series, decided independently to pull the 24-minute film, "Stop the Church," from a program called "Short Notice," scheduled for Aug. 27.


Review/Television; Ron Reagan Adds His Voice to Late-Night Chitchat
"The Ron Reagan Show," the latest late-night television offering, which started last night at 11:30 on Channel 5 seems unsure of the tack it wants to take.
The opener found the scion of the well-known show-biz family in amusingly mischievous form.
Tonight, he turns in a much flatter performance as the good boy deferring to his betters.
On opening night he took on religion in a program called "Oh God!" The six guests were easy marks.
Two of them were new-age prophets, three were old-time evangelists, and one, who seemed a little surprised to be in this company, was a Jewish movie maker.
Mr.
Reagan, popping up here and there amid the studio audience, had the most fun with the new-agers: Brother Charles, described as a meditation expert, who wore a sort of skullcap and talked about syncreticity, nondualistic philosophy and equality consciousness, and Elizabeth Clare Prophet, the relentlessly smiling leader of the Church Universal and Triumphant, which is building bomb shelters on its ranch in Montana because Ms.
Prophet has prophesied a superpower nukedown by the year 2,002.
"Glasnost doesn't cut it with you, huh?" asked Mr.
Reagan.


We Need a Single-Payer Health-Care System
To the Editor:
You are mistaken in your July 22 editorial endorsing Alain Enthoven's "managed competition" plan as the fix for our broken health care system.
Mr.
Enthoven's plan would force all but the wealthy into an insurance company-run health maintenance organization chosen by the employer or government "sponsor."


We Need a Single-Payer Health-Care System; Finding the Providers
To the Editor:
Managed competition to control health care costs, improve care and guarantee coverage to every American (editorial, July 22) is an interesting idea, which hinges on contracting with providers who can offer quality care at affordable rates.
The problem is how to identify such providers.


Excerpts From the Demands: Free 'All Detainees Throughout the World'
Following are excerpts from a statement by Islamic Holy War, the pro-Iranian Lebanese group that released a British hostage, John McCarthy, last week.
The statement, addressed to Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations, was delivered to him on Sunday and released in translation by the United Nations today.
Why has the United Nations been given an effective and important role to play in solving the crisis that arose in the gulf while it has been prevented from playing any role in helping to find a just solution to the question of the Muslim people in Palestine in spite of the fact that more than 50 years have passed since the Israeli enemy usurped the land of Palestine?


Williams Out $150,000
DICK WILLIAMS'S home in Las Vegas, Nev., was ransacked by thieves who carted away over $150,000 in sports memorabilia, jewelry and other keepsakes, the former major league manager said.
Williams was taking part in an old-timers game in Arlington, Tex., when the theft occurred sometime after 11 P.M.
Saturday, he said yesterday. (AP)


Gorkuo Journal; Is Food Going to Orphans or Future Sudan Rebels?
In one of the most inaccessible parts of Africa, reachable only by wading through the oozing mud of malarial swamps, 10,000 young boys watched as large white sacks, stamped as a gift from the United States and packed with corn and beans, floated down from the sky under parachutes.
Some of the bags dropped from the low-flying C-130 transport burst as they thud to the ground, sending hundreds of boys scurrying to scavenge the scattered grains.
Their daily survival rations had arrived.


CHRONICLE
A two-year legal fight over the movie rights to "Love in the Time of Cholera" may have ended, in San Francisco.
The United States Court of Appeals ruled that GABRIEL GARCIA MARQUEZ, the Nobel Prize-winning author, did not agree to sell the movie rights to the producer RICHARD ROTH.
The court rejected the claim that the author had entered into a binding $2 million contract.


Employee Phone Records Examined In Company's Search for News Leaks
Law-enforcement authorities in Ohio, acting on a complaint by the Procter &amp; Gamble Company, have obtained the telephone records of employees who the company said disclosed trade secrets to a reporter from The Wall Street Journal.
The Journal, which reported the investigation yesterday, said it resulted from two articles the newspaper published in June.
One article quoted unidentified "company insiders" as the sources of reports that B. Jurgen Hintz, the executive vice president in charge of the Procter &amp; Gamble's food division, was being pressured to resign.
The second quoted "current and former" company managers as saying that the company might sell some unprofitable or low-profit food brands, including Citrus Hill orange juice and Crisco shortenings.


The Two Newarks; Boom Amid Bust -- A Special Report; In Newark, Downtown Glitter Battles Neighborhood Gloom
Newark has a future.
On that most people agree.
Its location makes it the transportation hub of northern New Jersey, and $6 billion in new office construction over the last five years has revived confidence in the city.
But whether that future will take the form of a city where people want to live is a question with no clear answer.
Newark presents two different images to visitors: one of gleaming steel and glass towers, the other of 100-year-old railroad shacks and multifamily wood frame houses in neighborhoods with few stores or amenities, not even a movie theater.


U.N. Using U.S. Spy Planes to Monitor Iraqi Arms
Surprised by disclosures that Iraq conducted clandestine nuclear and biological research despite international monitoring, the United Nations said today that it had started using United States-owned high-altitude spy planes to survey Iraq for nuclear, chemical and biological weapons sites.
A United Nations spokesman said that U-2 flights over Iraq began last weekend under the guidance of the United Nations special commission charged with identifying and eliminating Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.
The commission was set up after Iraq's defeat in the Persian Gulf war.


Santa Barbara Journal; Cool Can Be Legal, Patrol Car Shows
It's Saturday night, and Steve Garcia is cruising the strip in his blue custom low rider with air-brushed murals and metallic sparkle.
"Bad car," whoops a group of Mexican-American teen-agers dressed in black as Mr.
Garcia glides by, nods and cranks up the bass on his six-speaker stereo.
Is this another rowdy cruiser looking for a rumble with the police?
No, Mr.
Garcia is the police.


Applause for Bank Mergers
Wall Street loves bank mergers, seeing less competition and higher profits.
Market Place, page D1.
The California deal puts merger pressure on two competitors, First Interstate and Wells Fargo.
Page D1.


Two Product Symbols To Gain Exposure
Two highly visible advertising symbols, a soft-drink slogan and a battery bunny, are getting wider exposure via unusual new promotions.
The Pepsi-Cola Company is adding the word "Uh-huh" on packaging for Diet Pepsi, a spokesman, Andrew Giangola, said yesterday.
The word caps the catchy jingle sung by Ray Charles that has been used since January in advertising created by BBDO Worldwide, New York: "You've got the right one, baby, uh-huh!"


ABORTION PROTEST BRINGS JAIL TERM
In a hearing that lasted through much of the day, a Federal judge today sentenced one abortion protester to four months in prison for blocking the entrance to a clinic, and freed 10 others.
He left one case to be decided Tuesday.
The judge, Patrick F. Kelly, of Federal District Court here, sentenced Richard A. Czekaj of Santa Barbara, Calif., to four months for taking a leadership role and directing protesters to block a car in front of a clinic.
But the judge freed three other protesters when they promised to obey his order against blocking the clinic.


Self-Preservation (and Money) Kept Howard Out, but Now He's Back
Erik Howard joined the Giants on the practice field today, 27 days late and $40,500 lighter.
The two-year contract he signed last year is still in effect, but he indicated that he had helped himself by missing most of the preseason and thus preserving his body.
He seemed to be in good condition.
He looked like the Erik Howard of old, except that his ponytail was a little longer and his Fu Manchu moustache was gone.
He reported at his assigned weight of 295 pounds, the same weight he carried most of last season.


'Mirror Image' Chemistry Yielding New Products
LEGIONS of chemists are invading a looking-glass world of mirror-image molecules, and a boom in chemical research is producing new drugs, pesticides and even perfumes that exploit the differences between these molecular twins.
Scientists believe that mirror-image chemistry may also shed light on the nature and origin of life itself.
On earth at least, the building blocks of life are mostly left-handed molecules rather than the random mixture of left-handed and right-handed molecules found in extraterrestrial objects like meteorites.


Apathy Leads in Arizona Race for Udall Seat
The race for the Congressional seat held for 30 years by Morris K. Udall has apparently stirred little interest among voters.
"It's going to be a very, very low turnout," Bruce Merrill, a poll taker at Arizona State University, said of Tuesday's special primaries.


Ranges Of Animals And Plants Head North
THE woodland deer mouse, with its long tail, big ears and powder-white belly, once was so common in the cold forests of northern Michigan that trapping it for study was hardly more difficult than collecting moths and mosquitoes.
Sometime in the last 20 to 40 years, though, the deer mouse all but vanished from the woods here, its range retreating north to Michigan's upper peninsula, 30 miles away.
By itself, the deer mouse's disappearance would not have caused much of a stir along the shores of Douglas Lake, where the University of Michigan has maintained a 10,000-acre biological field station for most of the century.
But a team of Michigan researchers has documented other striking changes in the geographic distribution of a dozen other plants and animals in this region.


One Deal Maker Finds No Letup in Demand
Donald A. Moore is an investment banker who is much in demand these days.
A managing director of Morgan Stanley, he specializes in bank deals, and lately he has not had much free time.
He has been involved in nearly every major bank merger or acquisition announced this year, including representing the Bank of America in its acquisition of Security Pacific.
Mr.
Moore also represented Manufacturers Hanover in its merger with Chemical Bank, and he represented NCNB when it agreed to merge with C&amp;S/Sovran.


Manager Of Spoleto Will Quit In Dispute
The general manager of the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston, S.C., who has been engaged in a bitter dispute for the last year with Gian Carlo Menotti, the founder of the festival, announced yesterday that he would resign at the end of the season on Sept. 30.
Although the precise reasons Mr.
Menotti turned against the general manager, Nigel Redden, remain somewhat hazy, that conflict and related ones between the founder and two other festival officials have attracted almost as much attention as any of the productions at this year's festival.


Those Who Can Bring Peace to Cyprus
To the Editor:
Your editorial call for action on Cyprus (July 19) is useful even if it omits some essential facts for understanding the divided island.
For 17 years, Cyprus has waited for justice, while the Vietnam War ended, the European Community moved toward a single market, the cold war subsided and the Berlin Wall fell.
But the aspirations of the Cypriots have been forgotten as Greek and Turkish intransigence was blamed.


Judge Rejects Milli Vanilli Refund Plan
A judge on Monday rejected a proposed settlement of a lawsuit against Arista Records over the lip-synching duo Milli Vanilli, calling it unfair because consumers would have to make additional purchases to get a refund.
The Los Angeles-based record company had offered a $3 refund on future purchases to anyone who had bought a Milli Vanilli compact disk, $2 for a tape or record, or $1 for a single.
Arista said the settlement would have cost it $25 million or more.


Israel's Move in the Hostage Game
One's heart goes out to Edward Austin Tracy, the apolitical American expatriate who was liberated on Sunday after nearly five years of Lebanese captivity.
"He was incoherent," said a Syrian journalist who interviewed him in Damascus.
"He would start talking about something and then he would talk about something completely different." Mr.
Austin's confusion is altogether forgivable; the incoherent and outrageous demands of his captors are not.
Hopes raised by last week's release of John McCarthy were chilled by the message the British hostage carried from his captors to Javier Perez de Cuellar, the United Nations Secretary General.
Buried in this discursive tirade was a nebulous sentence in which the Islamic Holy War organization struggled to express a concrete demand:


Music in Review
Peter Serkin Mostly Mozart Avery Fisher Hall
Even its title -- "Gallimathias Musicum" -- reflects a 10-year-old's delight in invading the world of adult rhetoric.
Mozart's 18-part exercise, written in 1766, is, indeed, a catalogue of style, a sample-case of contemporary musical products assembled with amazing precocity.


Observer; Not Half Likely
Surely President Bush will not run for re-election.
To do so would make little or no sense, and the President, like him or not, is eminently sensible.
He is far too sensible, for instance, to reveal such an explosive decision until the country's most formidable Democrats finish reading themselves out of the contest.
When political opponents are busy knocking themselves out, why intervene?


Bank Stocks Lift Market; Dow Rises 5.14, to 3,001.34
Buoyed by bank stocks, the stock market overcame early losses yesterday to post a gain at the close, with the Dow Jones industrial average again bouncing just past 3,000.
The announcement of the agreement for the $4 billion acquisition of the Security Pacific Corporation by the BankAmerica Corporation sent some big bank stocks sharply higher, but the rest of the market was weak.
But in early trading only over-the-counter stocks posted gains, and even a firm bond market could not turn stocks around until the bank news hit.


Captors, in Letter, Demand Freedom for Their 'Fighters'
In a letter to the United Nations, a pro-Iranian kidnapping ring in Lebanon has linked the release of its Western hostages to that of "freedom fighters from prisons in occupied Palestine and Europe." But the Secretary General of the United Nations sought today to limit the scope of any future negotiations to Palestinians and Lebanese detained by Israel.
The letter from the pro-Iranian group, Islamic Holy War, included an offer to free the two other Westeners that it is holding, but only "within the framework of a comprehensive solution to secure the release of all detainees throughout the world."


Bentley Model Offered in U.S.
Bentley Motors, the British maker of luxury cars that is owned by Rolls-Royce Motor Cars Ltd., introduced its latest model in the United States yesterday, the first in more than 40 years that has not shared the same body as a Rolls.
The Continental R, as the new Bentley is called, is a sleek, two-door, turbocharged automobile that will list for $249,800, not including sales tax and dealer's prep.


Amoco Bid Backed
The Amoco Corporation won approval from the Federal Trade Commission to acquire an interest in the GE Capital Corporation, the financing subsidiary of the General Electric Company.
The F.T.C. granted an early termination on Friday of the required waiting period under antitrust laws, the agency said.
Under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act, companies that plan to acquire assets of $15 million or more or a minimum 15 percent stake in another company must notify the F.T.C.
The share price of Amoco rose 50 cents today, to $52.125, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Cocaine Is Again Surging Out of Panama
In most of the world, drug smuggling is a sneaky nighttime affair.
But in Panama, nearly two years after President Bush sent in troops to capture Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega and crush the cocaine trade, traffickers are boldly hauling drugs at all hours.
On clear mornings, private pilots and others say light planes can be seen circling over Panama's Atlantic and Pacific coasts while crewmen toss bundles of cocaine to waiting cabin cruisers and fishing boats.


Bridge
When Blackwood is not available, the Gerber convention often provides the necessary substitute.
The commonest case occurs after an opening bid of one no-trump, when a raise to four no-trump is a natural slam invitation rather than an ace inquiry.
If both hands are balanced and total 33 points in high cards there is no need to find out about aces: the opposition cannot have two.
But if the responding hand is relying on a long suit to compensate for a slight lack of high cards, a Gerber jump to four clubs is desirable.


Miscellany
*
Burger King Corp., Miami, has been selected by Walt Disney Co. as a partner in promoting the release later this year of a new animated film, "Beauty and the Beast." A spokeswoman for Disney, which long has had a similar relationship with McDonald's Corp., told Reuters that the agreement was for that one film.


Daly Made Long Drives, Against Long Odds
"Cinderella story, outta nowhere," the sports announcer intones in a stage whisper.
"Tears in his eyes, I guess, as he lines up this last shot," he continues.
"He's got about 195 yards left. Looks like he's got about an 8-iron."
Those words are usually recognized by golfers as Bill Murray's send up of a glory-starved greenskeeper living his fantasy of winning the Masters in the movie "Caddyshack." But from now on, right down to the monster 8-iron, a person couldn't be blamed for thinking he was hearing a retelling of the legend of John Daly.


Police Say 2 Connecticut Rape Suspects Filmed Assault
As a video camera that they set up recorded the scene, two college students repeatedly raped and beat a 19-year-old woman for several hours in a Danbury, Conn., apartment over the weekend, the police said yesterday.
They then tried to blackmail the Bethel woman by showing her the tape and telling her that they would release it if she went to the authorities, the police said.


No Escape Clause Seen In Tyson-Holyfield Deal
If the special grand jury in Indianapolis that is to be convened today indicts Mike Tyson on a sexual-assault charge, would there be any legal basis for stopping the Nov. 8 heavyweight title fight between Tyson and the champion, Evander Holyfield?
"I don't see a contractual defense to stop it," said Neil Gerst, a Long Island-based attorney who frequently litigates boxing matters.
"There are contractual defenses such as frustration of purpose -- the entire purpose of the contract has been frustrated by external events -- or impossibility of performance. Both of those defenses do no apply here."


Diocese in India Offers New Post To Father Ritter
The Rev.
Bruce Ritter, who resigned as the head of Covenant House last year amid allegations of financial and sexual misconduct, has left his Franciscan religious order and is moving to a diocese in India, religious officials said yesterday.
Father Ritter, who built Covenant House from two apartments in lower Manhattan into the nation's largest shelter network for runaway youths, applied for a dispensation from the Immaculate Conception Province last month.
It was granted after a review by top-ranking officials of the order, which Father Ritter joined as a young priest more than 40 years ago.


Books of The Times; A Poet's Life Through a Sexual Lens
Anne Sexton A Biography  By Diane Wood Middlebrook Illustrated. 488 pages.
Houghton Mifflin. $24.95.
Diane Wood Middlebrook's new biography of Anne Sexton made headlines last month, when it was disclosed that the book relied heavily on material from the poet's private therapy sessions.
Sexton, who committed suicide in 1974, saw the psychiatrist, Dr.
Martin Orne, from 1956 to 1964 (the period in which she first began writing poetry and swiftly gained public recognition), and in 1960 he began taping their sessions as a means of helping her deal with her frequent memory lapses.
With the permission of Sexton's older daughter and literary executor, Linda Gray Sexton, Dr.
Orne turned over more than 300 tapes (as well as some unpublished poems) to Ms.
Middlebrook for use in this biography.


LEBANESE CAPTORS ADD TO PRESSURE FOR ISRAELI MOVE
On a fast-paced day of diplomatic overtures and new demands from Muslim kidnappers in Lebanon, Israel found itself today in the unwanted position of emerging as the key to a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East hostage crisis.
There were several unconfirmed news reports from Lebanon that secret deals had been struck as well as signs that delicate diplomatic maneuvering over Israel's role was under way.


Phoenix Asking if Bias Played Role in 9 Killings
Without a clear motive in the slayings of nine people at a Thai Buddhist temple last weekend, residents of this desert city were left to confront the question of whether this was an anti-Asian hate crime.
Officials said they were still pursuing all possible motives in the crime, and offered no evidence that racism was behind the killings of the six monks, one nun and two disciples at the rural temple early Saturday.


Deep Quakes Show Speed Under Pressure
CALIFORNIA scientists have found that deep earthquakes, those below 185 miles, develop as much as twice as fast as shallower ones.
It is the first physical evidence that deep earthquakes are different from shallower ones.
Shallower earthquakes, like those along the San Andreas fault in California, occur when strain across a section of rock causes it to snap and slide in a shearing motion.
Scientists have long known that deep earthquakes could not occur in the same way because of high pressures deep underground.
But they were unable to find any evidence of a difference.


Milken Seeks to Block Lawyers Hired by U.S.
Michael R. Milken today asked a Federal judge to disqualify a leading Wall Street law firm, Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, from representing savings-and-loan regulators in their sweeping civil lawsuits against him because the firm had worked for Drexel Burnham Lambert and many companies that issued high-yield junk bonds.
Mr.
Milken, the former head of Drexel's high-yield bond unit, is serving a 10-year sentence in a minimum-security prison in California after pleading guilty to six felony violations of Federal securities law.


U.S. to Appeal on V.M.I.'s Men-Only Rule
The Justice Department said today it would appeal a Federal judge's ruling that the Virginia Military Institute can exclude women.
Federal District Judge Jackson Kiser of Roanoke ruled in June that the tax-supported military college in Lexington, Va., could keep its doors closed to women because coeducation would thwart its military curriculum.


A Mystery of Nature: Mangroves Full of Fireflies Blinking in Unison
MATHEMATICIANS are embroiled in a new round of debate as they try to explain one of the leading mysteries in nature: why do trees full of Southeast Asian fireflies flash in unison?
The unusual insects, beetles of the family Lampyridae, have long fascinated scientists.
Experts hope greater understanding of the insects' strange ways will help explain a number of analogous phenomena, including the synchronous firing of cells in the human heart's natural "pacemaker," the brain cells that emit electric signals in rhythm and the cells in the pancreas that control the release of insulin.
A recent study of such pancreas cells has shown that they produce coordinated signals only when working in a group of 50 or more.


Officials Divided on Troubled Weather Radar Plan
Top officials within the Commerce Department are sharply divided over whether to abandon a troubled project to build a national weather radar system and begin again with a new contractor.
On Aug. 1, the Government officials supervising the project met with Commerce Secretary Robert A. Mosbacher.
They had agreed to give him an explanation of an additional $240 million in the cost of completing the project, which was originally to cost $700 million.


2 at Cable Company Helped to Form Firm Involved With Bank
The founder and chairman of Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable company, and the company's senior vice president were involved in a company that was integrally involved with the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
Bob Magness, the 67-year-old founder of Tele-Communications, and Larry Rommell, 51, were among six businessmen who formed Capcom Financial Services Ltd. in 1984.
Both men served on Capcom's board from its founding in 1984 until 1988 when the company was indicted in Tampa, Fla., for conspiracy to deal cocaine and launder money with B.C.C.I.'s Tampa office.


Lord, Dentsu Creating Post Of President on West Coast
TO help strengthen its operations after a frantic first few months filled with personnel and account changes, Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners is creating a position of president and chief operating officer, to be based at its Los Angeles office.
And an executive well known in California ad circles has accepted the job.
Effective tomorrow, Leonard Pearlstein, who was a co-founder, president and chief executive of Keye/Donna/Pearlstein, a Los Angeles shop highly regarded for its creative work, will take the post, placing him second in command behind Richard J. Lord, chairman and chief executive.


The N.H.L. Is Holding Up Devils-Blues Negotiations
After the Blues signed free agent Brendan Shanahan of the Devils to a multiyear contract on July 24, St.
Louis was supposed to begin negotiations with New Jersey over the player the Devils would get as compensation.
The National Hockey League has not yet given the teams permission to start negotiations because the league has not approved Shanahan's contract with the Blues.
Although Gary Meagher, the league's executive director of communications, would not give a reason for the three-week delay, it apparently involves conflicting reports about the length and value of Shanahan's contract.


Universities Become Full Partners to Cities in South
When the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa opened an extension here in 1936, it was designed to be just that -- a small offshoot in the city, offering courses to students who could not attend the main campus.
But today, it is the University of Alabama at Birmingham, not its parent institution, that is the state's hotbed of ideas and progress.


U.S. Backs Bid By Mitsubishi
The Mitsubishi Motors Corporation received approval from the Federal Trade Commission to acquire the Chrysler Corporation's interest in Diamond Star Motors, their joint venture.
Diamond-Star Motors was established in 1985.
Mitsubishi now controls 35 percent of Diamond Star, and other Mitsubishi Group interests hold another 15 percent.


Ferranti Posts A Pretax Loss
Ferranti International P.L.C., a British military electronics company, today reported a pretax loss of $:98.1 million ($167 million) for the year that ended March 31.
The British company, the victim of a stock-manipulation scheme uncovered in 1989, said it sold assets worth $:95.7 million ($162.9 million) last year and planned further sales.


Market Place; For Wall St., a Bigger Bank Is Better
Wall Street loves bank mergers because it hopes competition will vanish, or at least get a lot less vigorous.
"Scale gives you market heft," said one investment banker yesterday, speaking on condition he not be named.
"All of a sudden you have an 800-pound gorilla in some of these markets."


Music in Review
'La Boheme'
New York City Opera New York State Theater
While the New York City Opera looks for a fresh and powerful voice of its own, it continues a traditional part-time job: serviceable presentations of popular operatic icons.
They serve both sides of the footlights, though not always opera's highest standards.
Listeners, many at the entry level of operagoing, get affordable Puccini; young American singers have the chance to step out in professional productions.


'Ghost Trial' Is Greek Daytime Drama
To call it a ghost trial, as some Greeks have, may be going a little far, but in the most notorious corruption trial of modern Greece, the principal defendant has refused to come to court.
He has even declined to send a lawyer to represent him.
The defendant is Andreas Papandreou, the former Prime Minister of Greece, who stands indicted by Parliament on charges of bribery and accepting stolen money.


Lions' Sanders Signs Contract Extension
Running back BARRY SANDERS, who led the National Football League in rushing last season, signed a contract extension yesterday that ends his holdout with the Detroit Lions.
The Lions reportedly compromised with a plan that will pay Sanders a signing bonus in exchange for adding a year to his existing three-year contract.


Dykstra's Game-Winning Hit Propels Phils to 13th Straight
The Philadelphia Phillies tied a franchise record tonight with their 13th victory in a row, beating the Montreal Expos, 2-1, on Lenny Dykstra's tie-breaking single in the seventh inning.
The Phillies matched their mark of 13 consecutive victories, set in 1977.
Philadelphia will try to break the record Tuesday night in Pittsburgh.


We Need a Single-Payer Health-Care System; A Plan That Works
To the Editor:
Re your July 22 editorial extolling the virtues of "managed competition" in health care:


Seaweed Clog in Water Pipe Halts Florida Nuclear Plant
A mass of seaweed clogged the water intake pipes at a nuclear power plant and a coal-fired plant, forcing the Florida Power Corporation to shut off the plants, which serve a million households in the Tampa Bay area.
The utility urged customers to conserve electricity, but a spokesman, Rick Janka, said the company could probably buy enough electricity to avoid blackouts.


Dollar Mixed in Light Day While Gold Prices Decline
The dollar finished mixed against major currencies yesterday in light trading as investors took a wait-and-see approach to changes in German interest rates to be announced this week.
Gold prices moved lower.
In New York, gold for current delivery fell 90 cents a troy ounce, to $357.50, on the Commodity Exchange.
The Republic National Bank in New York quoted an after-hours bid for gold at $357.45 an ounce, down $1.05 from late Friday.


Governors Urge U.S. to Take Over Health Care Costs
The National Governors' Association has drafted a policy statement saying that health care should be available to all Americans within 10 years and that the Federal Government should eventually take over all the costs of long-term care now borne by the states.
The statement was developed by a bipartisan group of 15 governors for the organization's semiannual meeting, which begins Saturday in Seattle.


Algae Bloom Adds to Puzzle of Global Warming
SCIENTISTS have discovered a previously unsuspected spring-time blossoming of algae in the Greenland Sea, raising new questions about the workings of the global carbon cycle, a primary governor of global climate.
Carbon dioxide, which traps heat in the atmosphere and helps regulate the planet's surface temperature, is constantly being exchanged between the atmosphere, on one hand, and the oceans and terrestrial plants on the other.
The more algae and land plants there are to absorb carbon dioxide, the less of it stays in the atmosphere.


3 Killed in Traffic Argument
A 23-year-old man has been charged with murder in the deaths of three men who were shot in an argument over a minor traffic accident, the police said.
The man, Ray Ojeda, of San Antonio, was being held in Bexar County Jail today in lieu of $300,000 bond, the officials said.
Detectives said Mr.
Ojeda shot a motorist in an argument early Sunday, and then shot two bystanders who tried to stop him.
"It was all in the span of a few seconds," Detective Rudy Garcia said.


New-Found Pathways Between Eye and Brain Offer Clues to Glaucoma
A 55-YEAR-OLD man pulls into his driveway one night and notices that he is having trouble seeing the back door to his own house.
A 62-year-old woman opens her bedroom closet and realizes that she can barely tell one piece of clothing from another.


Beyond Tender Loving Care, Nurses Are a Force in Research
THE Florence Nightingales of the nation are busily adding a Louis Pasteur research component to their profession.
And nursing's distinctly human, low-tech studies are bringing better and less costly medical care to millions of patients as well as helping relatives who care for them at home.
In the five years since Congress established the National Center for Nursing Research over President Reagan's veto, federally financed studies by nurses have made important strides toward closing gaps in patient care that often lead to physical and emotional complications, prolonged hospital stays or failure to adapt to disease or its treatment.


Quotation of the Day
"Newark is experiencing one of the biggest inner-city developments anywhere. But the problem is there's no trickle down. Go five blocks from the core of the business district and you find some of the worst urban conditions in the United States." -- Norman J. Glickman, director of the Center for Urban Policy Research at Rutgers.  [ A1:6. ]


Ella Haith Weaver, 80, Speech Therapy Expert
Ella Haith Weaver, who directed the Speech Therapy Training Program at Brooklyn College for 18 years and was the wife of Robert C. Weaver, a Cabinet member during the Johnson Administration, died on Saturday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 80 years old.
She died of emphysema, her husband said.


Raiders Seize 10 as Leaders Of 'Kill' Gang
The founder of one of New York City's most violent Asian gangs and nine of his leaders were arrested yesterday in raids in Brooklyn and on Long Island, the police said.
They said the reputed founder, 35-year-old David Thai, had created Born to Kill, an all-Vietnamese gang, in 1988 after breaking off from the Flying Dragons, a Chinese gang.


Travers Hits Town, Excitement Follows
These are the best of times and the worst of times in horse racing, and nobody in the business seems to know how to keep the former from being obliterated by the latter.
They are the best of times at Saratoga Race Course because this is Travers Week, the week of the 122d running of the Travers Stakes, "the midsummer Derby."


Peruvian Ex-Leader's Ties to Bank Are Examined
For the first time in its modern history, the Peruvian Congress is scheduled to begin proceedings that could strip a former President of his immunity from prosection and open a criminal investigation by the nation's Supreme Court.
Alan Garcia, who as a former President is a Senator for life, faces accusations in Peru's House of Delegates that he illegally enriched himself while in office and participated in a plan to place a third of Peru's central bank reserves in the Panamanian branch of the scandal-plagued Bank of Credit and Commerce International in return for $3 million in bribes.


John J. Abt, Lawyer, Dies at 87; Communist Party Counsel in U.S.
John J. Abt, a lawyer who spent most of his career as chief counsel to the Communist Party in the United States, died on Saturday at the Columbia-Greene Medical Center in Hudson, N.Y.
He was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died as a result of a stroke, his family said.


Bureaucratic Snags Blocked B.C.C.I. Inquiry in '88
After a money-laundering indictment here against the Bank of Credit and Commerce International nearly three years ago, Federal agents wanted to go further to determine whether B.C.C.I. secretly controlled some American banks.
But they got nowhere because of a series of missteps by Government regulators.
What transpired was a three-way bureaucratic paralysis involving the Customs Service, the Internal Revenue Service and the Federal Reserve Board.
Customs and the I.R.S. had preliminary evidence that B.C.C.I. controlled First American Bankshares Inc., Washington's leading banking institution, where Clark M. Clifford, the prominent lawyer and lobbyist, is chairman.


Celtics Re-sign McHale
The Boston Celtics announced yesterday they had extended forward KEVIN McHALE'S contract through the 1992-93 season.
The Celtics did not release terms of the agreement.
McHale is entering his 12th season with the Celtics.
Over the last 11 seasons, he has averaged 18.7 points and 7.6 rebounds a game.


Drawing New Faces for an Old Favorite
GOODBYE, Peter Norton.
Farewell, Paul Mace.
So long, PC Tools and XTree.
Now that MS-DOS 5.0 is out, with its greatly improved file handling, our problems with the operating system have been solved.
In particular, we can throw out our independent shell and utility programs.
Not so fast.


Yugoslav Republic Fears It Could Become Pawn
If all-out civil war breaks out in Yugoslavia, the republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina would lie squarely in its path, a victim of its volatile ethnic mix of Serbs, Croats and Muslims.
But for many here, in particular the Muslims, there is another prospect, not as awful but still troubling: a peace patched together with parts of this republic, redistributed as booty in the feud between Serbia and Croatia.


Pair Fails to Qualify
Neither STEVE SCOTT nor JOHN TRAUTMAN succeeded in their attempts Saturday night to qualify for the United States team that will compete later this month in Tokyo in the world championships.
Scott, who needed a time of 3 minutes 37 seconds in the men's 1,500 meters, missed by nearly 11 seconds, finishing a race in Portland, Ore., in 3:47.93.
Trautman also missed by a wide margin, finishing in 14:09.88 when he needed a 13:27.30.


Prices of Treasury Securities Rise
Prices of Treasury securities rose in sluggish trading yesterday, pushing interest rates slightly lower.
"The market is in very good technical shape," one government bond trader said.
"Of the refunding issues sold last week, only the bond is poorly distributed. As long as the economic numbers hold up this week, the market should do fine."


Artificial Sun Showers


Hans Weigel, Writer, 83
Hans Weigel, a leading literary figure in Austria and a critic of anti-Semitism, died today at his home here.
He was 83 years old.
He died of heart disease, Austrian state television reported.


Patterns
Beyond the Sea
It was a week of stiletto mules and maillots, as models wobbled around designer showrooms in bathing suits, cover-ups and "swimdresses." (You always wear high heels when you go to the beach, don't you?)


The Opera Revisionist Who Decided 'Cav' and 'Pag' Belonged in Little Italy
"I knew there would be a faction that would think my production was disrespectful of the original works, but I don't think that's the case," said Jonathan Eaton a few days after the premiere of his New York City Opera staging of Mascagni's "Cavalleria Rusticana" and Leoncavallo's "Pagliacci."
Mr.
Eaton, a tall, slightly graying, 36-year-old Englishman, has transported the works from their natural habitats in southern Italy to the grimy tenements of Little Italy, in lower Manhattan.
For some operagoers, this is an unpardonably violent abduction.
These are, after all, prime examples of verismo opera, a school that prized realism in text and music, and Mascagni's and Leoncavallo's scores are so thoroughly drenched in the warmth and coloration of the Italian countryside that moving the works can seem inconceivable.


On My Mind; This Ugly Echo
I have never actually met Prof.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. but I have heard him speak in many parts of the world.
For instance, when he was an Indian civil servant I heard him at a dinner party in New Delhi saying that no Hindu could ever trust a Muslim cook because they were taught from childhood how to poison Hindus, slowly, slowly, over the years.


East Europeans in U.S. Reclaiming Lost Estates
In nearly four decades as an American, James Cioromski has clung to the memories of a previous life shattered by World War II.
He was raised among the aristocracy of Poland, spending much of his youth at a 24-room mansion with soaring staircases and Baroque furniture that had been home to generations of his relatives.
But the Nazis and then the Communists took his family's property.
After fighting with the anti-Communist underground, Mr.
Cioromski was imprisoned for two years and finally fled, worn out and penniless, to the United States in 1950.


Let In More Light on Intelligence
Now that the cold war is over, can the intelligence budget safely decline?
Americans have no way to begin to address that question because the amount of money the U.S. spends on intelligence activities remains top secret.
The Senate Select Committee on Intelligence has approved a bill that would wisely begin to change that.
The panel seeks to reveal the aggregate amounts requested by the President and appropriated by Congress in the coming fiscal year and the amount actually spent this year.
That won't provide enough detail for the public to base a judgment on, but at least it's a start, enabling outsiders to make some judgments about overall budget trends.


Washington State Bonds Are Priced
The State of Washington's $641,635,000 in general obligation refunding bonds were tentatively priced early yesterday by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company, the lead underwriter.
But later in the day there was some indication the pricing might be changed.
The largest part of the total amount of bonds issued consists of $470,095,000 designated for various purposes.
The long-term maturity dated 2012 received a coupon rate of 6 1/4 percent and was priced below par at 93.898 to yield about 6.80 percent.


Maxwell Stake In Israeli Daily
The publisher Robert Maxwell said today that he had reached a private agreement with the publisher and other shareholders of Israel's Ma'ariv-Modin Group to acquire the majority of shares in the company, which owns the Israeli daily Ma'ariv.
Ma'ariv is published in Hebrew in Tel Aviv.
Financial details were not given.
A statement said Mr.
Maxwell would be the chairman and publisher and hold more than 70 percent of the shares.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE BANK MERGER
BankAmerica said it would acquire Security Pacific in a transaction worth more than $4 billion, the latest development in a wave of mergers sweeping the nation's largest banks.
The combination of the two largest banks in the West will create a huge bank, approaching Citicorp as the nation's largest.  [ Page A1. ]
First Interstate and Wells Fargo, California's two other leading banking companies, now have little choice but to forge a merger of their own, analysts and industry executives say.  [ D1. ]


Agencies Await Effect Of Plan to Merge Banks
A proposed merger between two giant banks on the West Coast could have a significant impact on their advertising agencies.
With yesterday's announcement of the BankAmerica Corporation's deal to acquire the Security Pacific Corporation, two agencies -- Ketchum Advertising San Francisco and D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Los Angeles -- found themselves in limbo as to which could handle the merged banking company's account.
Executives said yesterday that it was too early to discuss the post-merger ad picture.


Belated Tribute to Baseball's Negro Leagues
"That's my glove, that's my glove."
Albertus A. (Cliffie) Fennar, a slightly built man of regal standing, touched the arms of several fellow players, and quietly pointed out, to those who already understood, the significance of the display before them.


Dealing With Employment Discrimination
To the Editor:
Re "Workers Find It Tough Going Filing Lawsuits Over Job Bias" (front page, July 24):


BankAmerica in $4 Billion Deal To Acquire Rival Security Pacific
The BankAmerica Corporation said today that it would acquire its California rival, the Security Pacific Corporation, in a deal worth more than $4 billion, the latest in a wave of mergers sweeping the nation's largest banks.
The combination of the two largest banks in the West will create a huge bank, approaching the size of Citicorp, the nation's largest.


Toy Baby Bottles Recalled Because of Choking Danger
A San Antonio company is recalling 60,000 toy nursing bottles because children could choke on the nipples, the Government said today.
The bottles, distributed by Esco Imports of Texas Inc., are three inches long with rubber nipples and either pink or blue caps.
Some are marked "Bottle Baby" and all are labeled "Polythene Nursing Bottle, Esco, 3-211, Made in China."


INSIDE
F.D.I.C. Nominee Set
President Bush has decided to name William Taylor to head the agency that oversees the nation's banks, Administration officials said.
Page D1.


Review/Fashion; Fireworks From Mizrahi
Isaac Mizrahi jumped to the head of the resort class last week with an exuberant collection of warm-weather clothes that captured the special charm of American sportswear.
Mr.
Mizrahi was one of the few designers who chose to have formal presentations for their new collections.
Calvin Klein and Donna Karan held a series of small shows to introduce their low-keyed resort clothes.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.49
5.59
8.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.31
5.32
7.41
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.39
5.38
7.31
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.77
7.80
8.54
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
8.21
8.22
8.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.14
9.15
9.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.05
7.05
7.46
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Volcanoes and Life
Studies of the production of phosphates from volcanic gases have led Japanese scientists to conclude that widespread volcanic eruptions may have been a key factor in the origin of life on earth.
Phosphates are believed to have been essential compounds in the evolution of early life on the primitive earth.
The first self-replicating molecule to have appeared was probably a precursor of the nucleic acid RNA, and the formation of RNA depends on the availability of water-soluble phosphates.


Judge in Queens Questions Charge Against Officer in Suspect's Death
A Queens judge said yesterday that prosecutors acted improperly and erroneously in a grand jury investigation that led to a manslaughter charge against the last remaining New York City police officer charged in the death of a car-theft suspect.
The judge, who is considering whether to retain or dismiss the charge, ordered further arguments on whether the prosecution actions had been "prejudicial" to the officer and thus required dismissal of the charge.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Jarryd Upset by No. 184 Steve Bryan, ranked 184th in the world, upset 11th-seeded Anders Jarryd, 7-6, 6-1, yesterday in the opening round of the United States Hardcourts tournament in Indianapolis.
The top eight seeded players, including defending champion Boris Becker, who has won the tournament two of the last three years, received first-round byes.
Ronald Agenor of Haiti was another seeded player given an early exit from play at the Indianapolis Sports Center.
Brett Steven of New Zealand eliminated Agenor, seeded 13th, 6-4, 4-6, 7-6, winning the tie breaker, 13-11.
No. 12 Patrick McEnroe and No. 16 Christian Bergstrom both advanced, along with unseeded Aaron Krickstein.
McEnroe beat Brad Pearce, 7-5, 6-1; Bergstrom defeated Wayne Ferreira, 6-3, 6-3; and Krickstein topped Jonathon Stark, 6-3, 4-6, 6-4.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Ashton-Tate Co., Torrance, Calif., a holding company, said it had signed a distribution contract with the consumer products unit of Merisel Inc., Inglewood, Calif., a microcomputer distributor. *
Eljer Industries, Plano, Tex., a maker of plumbing and heating fixtures, said that it had received a notice from Jacuzzi Inc., Little Rock, Ark., stating that Jacuzzi does not feel it can make a proposal to buy Eljer at this time.


Automatic Nag in Space
ASTRONAUTS aboard the space shuttle Atlantis last week worked under a hectic schedule, but then, don't we all?
Theirs was certainly a more exotic office, but one appliance was familiar: a portable computer.
An Apple Macintosh Portable, making its second flight into space and liberally patched with Velcro to keep it from drifting away, was used in tests that will eventually result in new computer designs for future space missions.
But it had more immediate duties, too.


Lindros Asks $3 Million
ERIC LINDROS, the first choice in the National Hockey League draft, has asked for a salary of more than $3 million per year from the Nordiques in hope of forcing them to trade him, according to a published report in Quebec.
"The numbers would make you dizzy," Nordiques President MARCEL AUBUTwas quoted Monday as telling Le Soleil.
"I wasn't expecting that." (AP)


Kodak Plans To Cut 3,000 From Payroll
The Eastman Kodak Company yesterday announced its third work-force reduction in the last five years, citing plans to focus more closely on its core photography business.
Kodak said that it would eliminate 3,000 employees from its domestic work force of 80,000, some by layoffs if the total could not be reached by an early-retirement program.


CHRONICLE
The singer JAMES BROWN is suing KENNETH COLE after his shoe company pictured and referred to Mr.
Brown and his recent prison term in an advertisement.
The ad has side-by-side pictures: one of James Brown and the other of a Kenneth Cole keyhole shoe and key.
The caption reads, "Two great things with sole under lock and key."


PSYCHE OF CAPTIVE IS NOT DISCUSSED
The head of an American military hospital here said today that Edward Austin Tracy had emerged from five years of captivity in Lebanon in good physical condition, but that for reasons of privacy he could not divulge the former hostage's psychological state.
"Captivity, living as a hostage, is an extremely stressful situation," said Col.
Earl W. Ferguson, who heads the United States Air Force's Wiesbaden Medical Center.
"Every hostage is affected by that experience, and every hostage adjusts in a different way."


Reimer Is Suspended
Texas Rangers outfielder KEVIN REIMER was suspended for three games by American League president BOBBY BROWN yesterday for charging Milwaukee pitcher CHRIS BOSIO on Aug. 4. after being hit on the leg by a pitched ball.


NBC Anchor Update: Gardner's Back in View
Gayle Gardner nearly disappeared last year.
The NBC sports broadcaster thinks she anchors studio shows adeptly enough so that viewers regard her as the equal of her male counterparts.
But she had become an anchor with nothing to anchor.


Tide of Albanian Refugees Is Turned Back by Italy


Policy Is Born From Diversity on Board of Education
Dr.
Irene Impellizzeri, a second-generation Italian-American, is a vocal proponent of multiculturalism and bilingual education.
H.
Carl McCall grew up in a Boston welfare family but later graduated from Dartmouth and went on to become a minister before venturing into Harlem politics.
Dr.
Luis O. Reyes, a devout Catholic, once took vows of poverty and chastity, but now supports the condom distribution program.
Behind the colorless title of the New York City Board of Education reside seven distinctly chiseled personalities who together set policies for a system of 956,000 students, the nation's largest.


U.S. Wrestler Upsets Cuban Champion
The United States wrestling team dominated the freestyle competition as expected this evening, winning seven gold medals, one silver and one bronze.
But what was unexpected was the victory by Brad Penrith, who upset Alejandro Puerto of Cuba, the defending world champion in the 125 1/2-pound weight division.
Penrith defeated Puerto, 6-4, spending the last moments of the bout looking at the clock as the Cuban attempted a comeback.


Sports of The Times; Is Baseball Slap Happy On Fines?
MAYBE it's the recession.
Eight years ago George Steinbrenner made disparaging comments about National League umpires, and Bowie Kuhn, then the commissioner, fined him $50,000.
Last week Lou Piniella questioned a National League umpire's integrity, and Bill White, the National League president, fined him $1,000.
If White's action was a slap on the wrist, what was the $500 fine he levied against Rob Dibble for throwing a baseball at a batter running to first base?
Given Dibble's previous transgressions -- he has served seven games' worth of suspensions for two incidents earlier this season -- White's fine was a wag of the finger that said: "Now, Robby, you did a naughty thing so you be a good boy and don't do it again."


Dr. Frances Dell, 69, Pace English Professor
Dr.
Frances G. Dell, a retired English professor at Pace University, died on Sunday in Beverly Hospital in Beverly, Mass.
She was 69 years old and had lived in White Plains until a recent move to Wenham, Mass.
She died of congestive heart failure, a university spokesman said.


Business Scene; Taxpayer's Role In Bank Bailouts
FOR months, the national debate over bailing out failed banks has rested on the assumption that the banking industry itself -- not the taxpayers -- would eventually pay the costs of reimbursing depositors who lose money.
Now a House Banking Committee report is unraveling this assumption, mostly by illustrating rather starkly that the rules of deposit insurance have quietly been altered.
Until the report appeared in June, Congress had been proceeding with a rather standard strategy: It would advance $70 billion to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to get the nearly broke agency through the current wave of bank failures.
The banks, however, would continue their decades-old practice of covering the cost of deposit insurance by paying annual premiums to the F.D.I.C.
And they would eventually repay the $70 billion taxpayer advance -- thus preserving deposit insurance as a private, industry-financed affair.


Yankees' Youngsters Should Get More Time
There are less than two months left in the season and a stretch of 16 losses in the last 22 games has toppled the Yankees to fourth place.
The Blue Jays may yet stumble, but New York is not the team likely to catch them.
The Yankees should use the remnants of the schedule to evaluate the club for next year.
Though Manager Stump Merrill knows this, he resists.
Maybe flirting with the .500 mark and creeping within eight and one-half games of first place in late July altered his senses.
Before the Yankees swept a doubleheader from the Tigers Sunday, Merrill adamantly said he was not tossing in the pine-tar rag this soon.


Q&amp;A
Feline Rabies
Q.
Why do I have to have my cat vaccinated against rabies if it never goes out?


Thomas F. Anderson, 80, Pioneer Of Electron Microscope Methods
Thomas F. Anderson, a biophysical chemist and geneticist who developed techniques for using electron microscopes, died Sunday at Jeanes Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 80 years old and lived in Fox Chase, Pa.
He died after a series of strokes, his wife, Wilma, said.


Fall in Soybeans and Cotton Expected After Crop Report
Crop analysts predicted lower prices for soybean futures after the Agriculture Department yesterday projected a larger harvest than most experts had expected.
The department's crop report, issued after the market's close, was considered neutral for corn prices but extremely bearish for the cotton market, where futures prices were expected to open sharply lower today.


Where the Sickle Meets the Saddle
While V. I. Lenin's name is disappearing from some places in the Soviet Union, it lives here, at the site of a sport not normally thought of as a proletarian diversion.
Here in Lenin Park today, it really could have been the Hamptons, New Jersey horse country, West Palm Beach, whatever.
In the bright sunshine, there were the dashing riding slacks, the bright green and red jackets, the boots and the black helmets.


Scant Landing Damage to Shuttle
The shuttle Atlantis sustained hardly any damage during its nine days in space and return to Kennedy Space Center, the main landing site for the mission, NASA said today.
"I guess the bottom line is Kennedy is in the landing business, and we're glad to see it," said Robert Hill, a shuttle manager.


Careers; Management Accountant's Wider Role
IN a sign of the times, the National Association of Accountants recently changed its name to the Institute of Management Accountants.
Along with the name change, there is a new importance attached to the title of C.M.A., for certified management accountant, that the institute bestows since management accountants, who work within corporations, are being given wider responsibilities.
To get the title, they must have management accounting experience and pass examinations.
Many companies, including Johnson &amp; Johnson and I.B.M., provide study programs for the test for their employees.


Spinning Prisms
As anyone who has watched a seed from a maple tree flying as if it were a little helicopter is aware, irregularly shaped objects spin as they fall, and the spinning enables them to stay aloft and travel some distance.
But a South African engineer has discovered that prism-shaped objects tend to spin when they fall only if they have fewer than eight faces.
Dr.
B.
W.
Skews of the University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg reported in the current issue of the journal Nature that the number of sides of a falling prism determined its tendency to spin, and that spin caused the prism to fall at a specific slant rather than straight down.


Broadway's New Feature: Cornstalks
Someone, working with obvious devotion and care, has raised a small crop of corn on Broadway at 153d Street -- 131 stalks, some nearly six feet tall, capped with tassels and sprouting cigar-sized ears.
The question remains: Who?
"I first noticed it a few weeks ago," Mildred Duran, the district manager of Community Board 9, said yesterday.
"I said, 'Oh, my God, corn on Upper Broadway!' I don't know who planted it, but it seems to be planted well. It just makes you curious."


Not Even the Doc Can Get Mets on Their Feet
Dwight Gooden's stare in the locker room today wasn't one of scorn or even heartfelt disappointment.
Those emotions had faded over the last month, when the Mets pleaded no contest after being offered a fair fight by the slipping Pirates.
No, the look, shocking to see in a man with a career record in the major leagues of 131-52, was the one that was worn by every other Met after today's 3-2 failure in 10 innings against the Cubs.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a brief report yesterday in the Sidelines column of SportsMonday referred incorrectly to an inspection tour of Yankee Stadium to determine its suitability for soccer.
The inspection is to be made Wednesday by consultants to World Cup USA 1994.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
AL -- Suspended Kevin Reimer, Texas Rangers outfielder, for three games for charging the mound against Milwaukee on Aug. 4.


CHRONICLE
Few figures in the Watergate affair have stayed in the public eye as long as FRED THOMPSON,the minority counsel to the Senate Watergate committee.
It was his questioning of ALEXANDER P. BUTTERFIELD, a White House aide, in July 1973 that revealed that conversations in the Oval Office were routinely taped.
His height (6 feet 5 inches), gruff intensity and sonorous voice belied his youth (he was barely 30 then).
After the hearings, he returned to private law practice and started a second career.
He has had supporting roles in 12 films, including three yet to be released: "Cape Fear," "Curly Sue" and "Aces."


'Can't Take a Joke?' The Bigot Asks
To the Editor:
Joseph Epstein, editor of The American Scholar, in his jocular defense of his own bigotry (letter, July 30), repeats the crude remarks he published elsewhere under the guise of "humor," and criticizes feminists for their "humorlessness."


The Historical High Points
The Bank of America was founded in 1904 as the Bank of Italy by A. P. Giannini, who stressed service to "the little fellow" and lent money from a pier after the 1906 San Francisco earthquake to help the city rebuild.
The Bank of America name, adopted in 1930, came from a bank acquired by the Bank of Italy.
Mr.
Giannini began expanding nationwide, but in 1958 the Government forced the divestiture of the banks outside California into what is today First Interstate.


LTV Told to Add to Pension Fund
A Federal agency yesterday ordered the LTV Corporation to put money immediately into a pension plan covering 70,000 current and retired employees.
The agency said it issued the order because the fund was short $1.5 billion and was in danger of running out of money in October.
The action was the latest in a long struggle between the Government, which wants LTV's retirees paid at the levels that prevailed before the company filed a Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition in 1986, and LTV's many creditors, who say the pension funds are getting too rich a share of LTV's assets.


Chess
Gata Kamsky, a 17-year-old emigre from the Soviet Union, won the United States Invitational Championship on Friday by defeating Joel Benjamin by 2 1/2-1 1/2 in a match at the LAX Marriott Hotel in Los Angeles.
Kamsky, who arrived in this country two years ago and lives in Brooklyn, won the first and third games and clinched the match by holding the fourth game to a draw.
He was awarded the $10,000 prize donated by the Game Keeper, a retail game chain.
Kamsky is the world's youngest grandmaster, and the youngest player to become United States champion since Bobby Fischer did so at 14 in 1957.


CHINA PREPARING FOR PARTY PARLEY
China's leadership is beginning preparations for a Communist Party congress next year that is expected to provoke a major power struggle among officials hoping to serve on the next Politburo and Central Committee.
Already, the hard-liners appear to have taken the initiative to insure that the 14th Party Congress goes as they would like.
Two Chinese knowledgable about party activities said that a committee had already been formed to begin work on the congress, and that two hard-liners were heading it.


Accounts
*
Helmsley Hotels to Robinson, Yesawich &amp; Pepperdine, Orlando, Fla., for its six New York hotels.
The company said that the account had billings between $3 million and $4 million.
There were two other finalists in the review: Smith/Greenland Inc.
Advertising, the incumbent, and Follis/ DeVito/Verdi, both in New York.


Keeping Families Off Foster Care
Imagine a New York City family with a mother who is on drugs and only sporadically employed.
Stress and strain cause her to abuse her three children, who are eventually placed in foster care.
Now imagine that same family receiving intense help for a month from a trained social worker who secures drug treatment and job training for the mother.
As a result she learns how to cope with stress without abusing her children, and the family stays together.
Officials of New York City's Human Resources Administration are betting that they can reduce the number of children placed in foster care by offering such concentrated services to troubled families before they reach the breaking point.
It's a major -- and promising -- shift in emphasis that could save lives and money.


An Officer Moves Up At Kaiser Permanente
Dr.
David M. Lawrence, the new chief executive of Kaiser Permanente, a California-based health maintenance organization that is the nation's largest provider of health services, says that helping patients to be better informed about their needs is "one of the fundamental issues that we are all grappling with." Dr.
Lawrence, 50 years old, succeeds James A. Vohs as chief executive of the Kaiser Foundation Health Plan Inc. and Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, which, with the Permanente Medical Group, serve 6.5 million members.


By Design; The Ubiquitous Tote Bag
Consider the tote bag.
It's surely one of life's little necessities for carrying paper work, reading material, workout gear, extra shoes, an umbrella -- all those things many women can't get through the day without.
But why shouldn't a tote bag be attractive as well as practical?
This cotton canvas bag in Ferragamo's signature pattern of antique shoes fills the bill on both scores.
It could supplement a handbag or even replace one.
It zips closed, has a matching cosmetic bag securely attached to the interior and measures a roomy 18 by 22 inches.
As a carry-on bag on a recent flight, it held a clutch bag, two books, magazines, a toiletries kit, reading glasses and sunglasses, a scarf and a straw hat.


A Relic Called Rent Control
In the last decade, 155,000 New York City tenants have become homeowners, bringing the proportion of families who own homes to a record 30 percent.
That in turn adds a powerful new voice to efforts to revamp the city's destructive and costly rent control laws.
The owners of real property, including co-ops and condominiums, have a natural interest in seeing that renters pay a fair share in real estate taxes -- especially now that Mayor David Dinkins has felt obliged to increase those taxes sharply to meet the budget deficit.


Pressure Growing on Others in California
Banking analysts and industry executives said today that the BankAmerica Corporation's planned acquisition of the Security Pacific Corporation left California's two other major banking companies, the First Interstate Bancorp and Wells Fargo &amp; Company, with little choice but to forge a merger of their own.
The big California banks have been in a mating dance of various permutations for five years, looking for the right combination of strengths and personalities.
First Interstate at one point proposed buying BankAmerica.
Wells Fargo and Security Pacific held talks late last year.


Music in Review
Il Re Pastore'  Glimmerglass Opera Cooperstown, N.Y.
The program note Mark Lamos provides for his production of the Mozart opera "Il Re Pastore" (1775), which opened at the Glimmerglass Opera on Friday and was repeated this afternoon, is deceptively dry.
It goes on about the libretto, which was written for the birthday of the Empress Maria Theresa in 1751 and first performed by her five children.


Our Towns
This town has a high threshold for the bizarre.
With neo-Bohemians and counterculturalists perpetually drawn to the town for which the celebrated 1969 rock fest was named, residents here have long accepted the fact that offbeat behavior is as essential to their historic community as the startling beauty of the surrounding Catskills.


Review/Rock; Howls of Rage, 9 Hours' Worth, At Waterloo Village
Like a megawatt medicine show, the Lollapalooza Festival rolled into Waterloo Village today, greeted by a field of 15,000 fans pumping their fists.
Instead of simply playing the arena circuit, Jane's Addiction decided to line up six diverse bands for a package tour: Living Colour, Nine-Inch Nails, Ice-T, the Butthole Surfers, the Rollins Band and Siouxsie and the Banshees, which didn't perform today because of illness.
Even without Siouxsie, the festival lasted nearly nine hours.
The tour is carrying a yellow-striped circus tent, where local artists and advocacy groups handed out literature and did a brisk business in buttons and T-shirts.
The groups included the National Abortion Rights Action League, Refuse and Resist, Handgun Control Inc. and the Hyacinth Foundation (a New Jersey AIDS service group).
Between sets, a display above the stage flashed statistics in the style of the Harper's Index, on topics from textbook censorship to the Persian Gulf war.


Fine the Suppliers Of Illegal Peddlers
To the Editor:
The New York State Legislature has passed an amendment eliminating the right of physically disabled veterans to peddle merchandise without regard to restrictive city regulations (news article, July 4).
When you urged this legislation in a June 18 editorial, you questioned the observation in my 1989 decision, and of the affirming appellate court, that permitting disabled veterans to sell at any location would not significantly congest city sidewalks.


Confident Jets Set Out To Keep O'Brien Covered
Over, under or around.
The Giants will try every path to get to Ken O'Brien on Saturday night in an exhibition game at Giants Stadium.
The Jets' quarterback has been so sackable in his career that he has gone through entire seasons falling on the exact same place on his elbow or shoulder, suffering stoically with injuries that get no chance to heal.


Are Public Schools Legal if Only for One Sex?
Whether Detroit can open the nation's first public schools for black boys is likely to depend on whether it can prove that the new schools serve an important government purpose, according to lawyers who have handled cases involving public school sex discrimination.
The United States Supreme Court created that legal test in a 1982 case, Mississippi University for Women v.
Hogan, in which a male student sought and won admission to the Mississippi School of Nursing, a women's school.


Giants' Running Game Goes on Steady Course
It did not come as a notice of demotion to his fullback, nor was it taken as a shocking break from previously stated intentions.
But when Coach Ray Handley said today that he planned to use Ottis Anderson and Rodney Hampton together in the Giants' backfield this season, eyebrows and questions were raised.
What would this mean for Maurice Carthon, the steady, reliable blocker, and Jarrod Bunch, the top draft pick trying to unseat him?
What about Lewis Tillman and Dave Meggett, if he signs a contract?


'I Felt Privileged to Be in the Peace Corps'
To the Editor:
It could be that what P. F. Kluge calls his "problem with the Peace Corps" ("Wrestling With the Peace Corps," Op-Ed, July 30) is actually a problem with his country, or perhaps his Government.
Being a guest in another country while officially representing your own is not a responsibility that one tends to take lightly.
Like Mr.
Kluge, I was a Peace Corps volunteer in Micronesia (in the Truk Islands), although I followed in his place by about a decade.
As an American, I had the uncomfortable experience of being given both credit and blame for the rights and wrongs of my country.


Judge Criticizes Bishop Over Abortion Protest
A Federal district judge berated a Roman Catholic Bishop today for refusing to tell priests and nuns to stop blocking entrances to clinics that offer abortions.
The criticism by the judge, Patrick F. Kelly, was directed at the Rev.
Eugene Gerber, Bishop of the Wichita Diocese, in a hearing at which the judge sentenced an anti-abortion protester for contempt of court.


Arkansas Chief Seeks to Lead Democrats to Middle Ground
It is an article of faith in the Democratic Party that the nation's domestic problems will someday be the party's ticket back to the White House.
But some strategists argue that the Democrats must first deal with the baggage they have acquired over the past generation: the notion, so devastatingly purveyed by the Republicans, that Democrats are addicted to bloated, inefficient "giveaway" programs, financed on the backs of the middle class.
Only a rethinking of liberal orthodoxy and a fresh vision of government will reclaim the voters, these strategists say.
Symbol of New South
Enter Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who for some in the party is becoming the great moderate hope of the 1992 race for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
Mr.
Clinton, now testing the waters for a campaign, talks about helping the poor, but also about requiring "that everybody who can go to work do it." He takes pains to note that the Democratic promise of "opportunity for all" includes the middle class.
He calls for a more active Federal Government, working on a number of domestic problems, but also for a new emphasis on values, particularly the value of personal responsiblity.
He argues that the party must counter the impression "that we think there's a program for every problem that automatically solves it."
In a party desperate for Presidential options, Mr.
Clinton, a soft-spoken, fifth-generation Arkansan and one of the Governors emblematic of the New South, has drawn more and more attention in recent weeks.
But the 44-year-old Mr.
Clinton carries some baggage of his own.
He faces the perennial problem of governors: a resume gap on foreign policy, which could be all the more glaring against a President who revels in his role as Commander in Chief.
He comes from a small state and will probably pay a price for it in fund raising.
He is known by only a tiny proportion of the electorate, according to public opinion polls.
While many party stalwarts know him well, not all are fans: Mr.
Clinton is chairman of the Democratic Leadership Council, a group that has antagonized some in their party as it seeks to push the party toward what it considers the center.
Insulated by his years in Arkansas, and considering the start of his first national campaign very late in the game, Mr.
Clinton shows signs of still finding his sea legs.
Frustrated by a rumor campaign pushed by political opponents in Arkansas, Mr.
Clinton caused a small stir a few weeks ago when he suggested that there were some questions from the press that an elected official should not have to answer.
Unanswerable Questions
"While public officials had to be willing to deal with personal issues if they become relevant in the campaign, I didn't think that 'have you ever' questions should necessarily be answered," he said in a later interview.
"And I believe if you go back and check in 1988 the majority of people who ran then essentially said the same thing."
On the stump, Mr.
Clinton has a far more understated style than the full-throated populism of Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, another potential candidate, who has been rousing the party faithful with a call to return to traditional Democratic values.
Mr.
Clinton's allies say he has taken on the hard task of rethinking the Democratic message for the 1990's.
"He may not win the nomination, he may not win the general election, but he does have the potential to remake the party," says Elaine Kamarck, a senior fellow at the Progressive Policy Institute, an offshoot of the leadership council.
"And I think that's important this time around, because you can't let the party keep repeating the same old hackneyed mistakes and lose one more generation of voters."
In a recent New Hampshire appearance on behalf of the leadership council, Mr.
Clinton talked softly and intensely about the party's obligation to bring make government work better.
"A lot of people don't think we can be trusted with their tax dollars, or that we'll ever stand up to our own bureaucracies," he said.
"And I'll tell you that just as Richard Nixon was the only person who could go to China in 1972 because he spent all his time being an anti-Communist, it's only the Democratic Party that can reform government, because we believe in government. You think the Republicans want to fix it? If they fixed it, what would they run against?"
Mr.
Clinton paints a portrait of a country adrift, neglected by a President "who has a more detailed domestic plan for the Soviet Union than he does for New Hampshire or Arkansas or any other part of the country." He talks about the need to develop "world class skills" in the United States: expanding Head Start, establishing a national apprenticeship program for young people not bound for college, creating new loan programs for those who are.
"This idea that the Bush Administration has, that the Reagan Administration had before it, of cutting middle-class people out of Federal aid for college is nuts," he says.
These kinds of "investments," Mr.
Clinton said in an interview, are "fairly limited" in cost, could be paid for by rearranging Federal spending and would pay off richly down the road.
He makes the standard Democratic plea for more aid to poor children, but says Democrats also have to be tough-minded and aggressive about enforcing child support.
"One of the worst social developments in this country in the last several years is the willingness of so many people -- mostly fathers but sometimes mothers -- to bring a child into the world and then abandon them for the government to raise," Mr.
Clinton says.
But he is quick to segue to a blast at the high-rolling corporate executives and financiers of the 80's: "The biggest flight from personal responsiblity in the 1980's came from the people at the top of the totem pole, not at the bottom."
Mr.
Clinton, a graduate of Georgetown University and Yale University School of Law and a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University, has been on the radar screen of national politics since he was elected Governor of Arkansas in 1978 at the age of 32.
Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia once introduced him as "the only politician to be a rising star in three decades."
He has had his rocky moments: He lost a re-election bid in 1980 but returned to ofice in 1982.
His nominating speech for Michael S. Dukakis at the 1988 Democratic National Convention was so long that delegates cheered when he said, "In conclusion." But he has long been a leader in improving education, , both nationally and in his state, and he is a past chairman of both the National Governors' Association and the Democratic Governors' Association.
Poll a Mixed Blessing
Mr.
Clinton says he is eager to run on his record as Governor.
In a Newsweek poll this summer, his fellow governors voted him the most effective governor in the country ---- not necessarily an indicator of success in national politics, however, since Mr.
Dukakis received a similar honor in 1986.
Mr.
Clinton won national attention for the education program he pushed through his Legislature beginning in 1983, which included higher standards for public schools, competency testing for teachers and an increase in the sales tax to help pay for it all.
He came close to seeking the Democratic nomination in 1987.
But he said he decided against it because he felt that neither he, his daughter -- he and his wife, Hillary, have one child, Chelsea, now 11 years old -- nor his administration were ready for it.
When he ran for re-election last year, he promised to serve out his four-year term.
Now, he asserts, more and more Arkansas politicians are urging him to run for the Democratic nomination.
He said he expects to make a decision "pretty soon."
Mr.
Clinton told reporters in Little Rock on Monday that he could announce the formation of an exploratory committee soon; he has said, on other occasions, that if he runs he would resign as chairman of the leadership council.
Eddie Mahe, a prominent Republican strategist, scoffs that Mr.
Clinton has "zero, and I underscore zero," background in foreign policy.
The Governor says he realizes he will be held "to a high level of scrutiny" on foreign policy if he runs.
"And," Mr.
Clinton adds, "if people don't feel I can be trusted to defend national security, then they shouldn't vote for me, because that's the first job of a President."
Mr.
Clinton asserts that he spends little time worrying about whether Mr.
Bush is invincible.
"People want an election in '92 that is an honest discussion of the problems that concern everyone so much," he says, adding that at the very least that kind of election will make Mr.
Bush a better President in his second term.


Charge Denied By Ex-Official
A former Bank of Credit and Commerce International executive has denied accepting millions of dollars in bribes to keep quiet about the bank's affairs, The Financial Times newspaper has reported.
Syed Ziauddin Ali Akbar, former head of B.C.C.I.'s treasury department, accused other former executives of a cover-up designed to put much of the blame for the bank's closing on him.


CHRONICLE
Along with the cake and balloons at the 50th birthday party for ELIZABETH HOLTZMAN, the New York City Comptroller, and her brother, ROBERT, there was some affectionate joshing of the twins from Mayor DAVID N. DINKINS.
The Mayor was unable to attend the party Sunday at the twins' parents' home in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn.
But he sent a letter noting that while Robert, 30 minutes older, had managed to stay a step ahead of his sister from the time they ran for president and vice president, respectively, of their class at Lincoln High School in Brooklyn under the slogan "Win With the Twins," Ms.
Holtzman has finally come into her own.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY COMMITTEE -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.


Bush Names New Head of F.D.I.C.
President Bush, as expected, nominated William Taylor today to succeed L. William Seidman as chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
If confirmed by the Senate, Mr.
Taylor, the top banking regulator at the Federal Reserve Board, will also assume the title of chairman of the Resolution Trust Corporation, the agency overseeing the savings and loan bailout.


Defendant Sane At Time of Fire, Doctor Testifies
A psychiatrist for the prosecution in the Happy Land Social Club murder trial said yesterday that Julio Gonzalez knew what he was doing when he set the blaze that killed 87 people.
In testimony designed to discredit claims by two defense psychiatrists that Mr.
Gonzalez had heard voices telling him to set the blaze, Robert Berger, the deputy director of the forensic psychiatry unit at Bellevue Hospital Center, said that people who hear voices do not generally get detailed instructions on how to act.


Apple Is Planning Research Center
Apple Computer Inc. will build a $102 million research and development center on a site now occupied by Motorola Inc.
Apple said in a quarterly report to the Securities and Exchange Commission that the center would include 856,000 square feet in six buildings, which will be used for general research on hardware and software.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A3-9
The chance of a prisoner exchange in the Middle East, which would include freedom for the 10 remaining Western hostages in Lebanon, was the focus of growing optimism as fresh reports outlined some possible settlements.
Page A1
News Analysis: The abrupt progress toward freeing the Western hostages springs in part from a powerful confluence of national interests, Middle East specialists say.
A8


Corrections
A report in the Science Watch column of Science Times yesterday about deep earthquakes misstated an affiliation of two scientists, Dr.
Heidi Houston and Dr.
Quentin Williams.
They are geophysicists at the University of California at Santa Cruz, not the university's Davis campus.


Salomon Officers Sued for Fraud
Investors filed a class-action lawsuit on Monday accusing officers of Salomon Brothers Inc. of fraud.
The suit, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, said Salomon officers knew, but failed to tell investors, that employees had violated Federal and state laws and regulations.
It seeks unspecified damages for people who bought Salomon shares since December.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
It is a truly hot August day and the streets of Brooklyn are practically deserted, except for Ernie Schachinger and his dog, Frisky.
Ernie stops at the grocer's and ties Frisky to the row of gum-ball machines outside the store.
Everything is going well until another dog passes by.
Frisky does what any self-respecting dog would.
He strains at his leash and brings down all four gum-ball machines with a loud crash.


Corrections
An article in the Currents column of The Home Section on Thursday about a fan made in India misidentified the distributor.
It is Fuoriserie Imports of Long Island City, Queens.


Radio to Link New I.B.M. PC
The International Business Machines Corporation said yesterday that it would soon offer a notebook-sized personal computer that can communicate with larger computers by radio or cellular telephone, receive and send faxes, and be used as a telephone.
The new computer line -- called 9075 PCradio -- is intended for people who work away from data bases they need to tap into.
I.B.M. cited as examples service technicians seeking information from their home offices and police officers who want to check license plates or criminal records from their patrol cars.


Treasury Bond Prices Advance
Bond prices advanced again and long-term interest rates fell in active trading yesterday, staging a turnaround from morning trading when prices fell after a Government report suggested that consumer spending in the third quarter might be picking up.
The retail sales report, which showed that sales rose by five-tenths of a percent in July, was slightly better than most analysts had expected.


2 Japanese Arrested In Bank Loan Scam
Prosecutors in Osaka, Japan, accused a restaurateur and a branch manager of a small local bank of conspiring to obtain $2.5 billion worth of loans fraudulently from many of Japan's biggest banks.


The Undrafted Rebel Becomes a Celtic
The Boston Celtics have signed guard ANDERSON HUNT, the only Nevada-Las Vegas starter not selected in the 1991 draft, the National Basketball Association team said yesterday.
Terms of the contract were undisclosed.


Street Cinema


TRANSACTIONS
American League
AL -- Upheld the two-game suspension of Kansas City manager Hal McRae for bumping umpire Dale Scott in a June 6 game.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Waived John Shelby, outfielder.
Activated Alan Trammell, shortstop, from the 15-day disabled list.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Activated Roberto Kelly, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Mike Humphreys, outfielder, to Columbus of the International League.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
ATLANTA HAWKS -- Named Bob Weinhauer assistant coach.
BOSTON CELTICS -- Extended the contract of Kevin McHale, forward, through the 1992-93 season.
Signed Anderson Hunt, guard.
DETROIT PISTONS -- Traded James Edwards, center, to the Los Angeles Clippers for Jeff Martin, guard, and the Clippers second-round draft pick in 1995; and Scott Hastings, center-forward, and their 1992 second-round pick to the Denver Nuggets for Orlando Woolridge.
GOLDEN STATE WARRIORS -- Signed Chris Gatling, forward, to a five-year contract.
SAN ANTONIO SPURS -- Signed Mark Davis and Eric Johnson, guards.
Continental Basketball Association
RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Traded Stevie Thompson, forward, to the Oklahoma City Cavalry for Anthony Frederick and Keith Owens, forwards.
TRI-CITY CHINOOK -- Traded the rights of Michael Ansley, forward, to the Birmingham Bandits for the rights to Pete Collins, forward.
World Basketball League
YOUNGSTOWN PRIDE -- Signed Todd Lark, guard.
Placed Tim Jackson, forward, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.
Placed Anthony Jones, forward, and James Bradley, guard, indefinitely on the club's suspended list, for leaving the team.


Miscellany
*
Four advertising executives have formed Anders, Moser, O'Brien Direct, New York, a direct-marketing agency: Bob Anders, president and creative director; Carol Moser, creative director; John O'Brien, director of client services, and Steven Polansky, chief financial officer.
All had held similar positions at Nash Direct, New York.


New York A-Plant Shut by Staff As Instruments Fail
A power surge at dawn today knocked out instruments that operators used to control the reactor at a nuclear power plant in upstate New York and caused the failure of a succession of systems that monitored the plant's operations.
Workers at the Nine Mile Point Nuclear Station, on Lake Ontario about six miles from Oswego, were never in danger from a release of radiation, said the plant's operator and co-owner, the Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation.


Review/Film; How American Soul Music Conquered Dublin
"When I was studying, I used to sing hymns," the young man whispers in the confessional.
"Now I'm always humming 'When a Man Loves a Woman,' by Marvin Gaye."
"Percy Sledge," the priest corrects him in "The Commitments," Alan Parker's exuberant valentine to American soul music and the impoverished Dublin teen-agers who think of it as magic.
That everyone in this film, from the priest to the street kids to the father who never got over Elvis Presley, is totally obsessed with popular music is simply taken for granted.
As in his earlier "Fame," Mr.
Parker immerses his audience in a world in which popular art amounts to a communal high, a means of achieving identity and a great escape from the abundant problems of everyday life.
As in "Fame," he does this with a mixture of annoying glibness and undeniable high-voltage style.


Food Notes
Dining Italian
It is always edifying to see how others see Americans.
"I Ristoranti di Veronelli USA" (Veronelli Editore, 1991) is an Italian guide to the Italian restaurants in the United States written and published by Luigi Veronelli, a respected critic in Italy.
It covers nearly 1,000 places in 45 states, including Alaska, and took three years to compile.


Flaws May Cost Millions At Harlem Sewage Plant
New York City's newest and most expensive sewage treatment plant may have design flaws that have been causing the severe odors that Harlem residents have complained about since it opened in 1986, state and city officials said yesterday.
If the sprawling $1.1 billion plant along the Hudson River has been designed improperly, it could take many years and millions of dollars to address the problem.


The Swamp President
George Bush coupled his 1988 campaign pledge to be the "environment President" with a promise to resist further erosion of the nation's valuable wetlands.
"My position on wetlands is straightforward," he said.
"All existing wetlands, no matter how small, should be preserved."
Mr.
Bush's latest proposal for managing wetlands, however, will certainly result in wetland loss, at least by present Federal standards.
Shaped more by politics than science, it represents a grievous disappointment to conservationists.
And it plunges wetlands policy into a swamp of controversy that's sure to grow when the proposal is offered for a 60-day public review later this week.


Police Seek 2 Suspects in Series of East Side Rapes
Five women who live alone on the East Side were raped this summer by men who broke into their apartments brandishing knives, the police said yesterday.
Although the descriptions of the assailants in all five attacks are similar, they are not identical, and the police believe that two different men are responsible for the attacks, three of them in the Stuyvesant Park area and two on the Upper East Side.


Dollar Ends the Day Mixed In Continued Light Trading
The dollar was mixed against major currencies yesterday in another day of quiet trading as the market waited to see if German interest rates are headed up or down.
Gold prices were lower.
The Republic National Bank in New York quoted an after-hours bid for gold at $356.50 an ounce, down 95 cents from late Monday.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery fell $1.20 an ounce, to a late bid of $356.30.


Litter-Strewn Nightmares Become East Harlem's Fields of Dreams


Public &amp; Private; Death: The Best Seller
It came as a surprise to me when "Final Exit" shot to the top of the best-seller list.
This is no beach book.
From the detailed instructions on cyanide poisoning ("1. Take a small glass of cold tap water . . .") to the chapter entitled "How Do You Get the Magic Pills?" Derek Humphry's slim little large-type volume is a cookbook for those who want a reliable recipe for suicide.
The key to why thousands of people might buy such a book is in the foreword, written by Betty Rollin, the television journalist who caused a flap in this field several years ago when she admitted assisting in her own mother's suicide.
Ms.
Rollin quotes her mother, riddled with ovarian cancer: "I'm not afraid to die, but I am afraid of this illness, what it's doing to me."


Historic Hudson River Pier to Be Torn Down


No Quick Trial For Man 'Lost' In Jail System
A homeless man arrested in an arson case 13 months ago spent a year in the city's jail without being given a trial, assigned a lawyer or formally charged.
"This is a nightmare," Judge Ellen M. Heller of Baltimore Circuit Court said Monday when the 54-year-old man, Martin Henn, was finally arraigned.
"He was lost in the system."


Profits Mixed at 3 Retailers
The J. C. Penney Company said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings tumbled 62.7 percent as its revenue also fell.
But the May Department Stores Company reported a 4.9 percent earnings gain.
Meanwhile, the specialty apparel retailer the Limited Inc. said its profits were essentially unchanged from a year ago.
J.
C.
Penney said it earned $31 million, or 19 cents a share, in the quarter ended July 27, down from $83 million, or 62 cents a share, in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Revenue fell 2.6 percent, to $3.73 billion from $3.83 billion.
The company's share price rose $2.375 yesterday, to $53.25, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Lost Temper and a Lost Cause for Mets
The Mets lost the game.
Frank Viola lost his temper.
And the Pirates, methodically lengthening their lead over the Mets in the National League East, had to have further lost respect for the team once considered their top rival.
Once again manufacturing inadequate offense, the Mets fell behind early and awakened with their bats only after their latest nightmare was irrevocably under way, losing by 7-4 to the Cardinals.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 9
Aug. 2
Aug. 10
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.1
7.2
7.5
Distillate production, daily
2.9
3.0
3.1
Gasoline stocks
207.4
210.6
212.4
Distillate stocks
123.6
121.8
119.3
Crude imports, daily
6.9
5.6
6.2
Product imports, daily
1.3
2.3
1.9
Crude stocks
348.1
345.7
375.9
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.4
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
88.1
87.6
94.3
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Swede Soars in Javelin Peter Borglund of Sweden, almost disqualified for checking in late, had the year's fifth-longest javelin throw at the Stockholm Games last night.
Borgland tossed the javelin 285 feet 5 inches to defeat his countryman Dag Wennlund by almost 19 feet.
Borglund said he had lost track of time and showed up less than 30 minutes before the javelin event's start. (AP) SWIMMING


Another Rights Group Is Opposing Judge Thomas
The NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund Inc., a group once headed by Thurgood Marshall, today urged the Senate to reject the nomination of his potential successor on the Supreme Court, Judge Clarence Thomas.
The organization, a separate entity from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, is the latest in a growing number of liberal groups to oppose the elevation of the black appellate court judge to the High Court.


Isador Perlman, 76, a Researcher Who Created Artificial Isotopes
Isador Perlman, a nuclear chemist long associated with the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory and the University of California at Berkeley, died Aug. 3 at the John Douglas French Center for Alzheimer's and Related Diseases in Los Alamitos, Calif.
He was 76 years old and lived in Albany, Calif.
Dr.
Perlman was credited with the discovery of several artificial isotopes.
He was prominent in the research of alpha particle decay, one of three forms of radioactive disintegration of atoms, and in advancing the understanding of the energy-level structure of radioactive elements.


Gorbachev Turns Green
Soviet diplomacy is preparing a dramatic leap in the concept of "new world order" that will leave President Bush back in the primeval sludge if he doesn't move.
Mikhail Gorbachev gave Mr.
Bush a hint of his thinking at their Moscow meeting, proposing that next year's U.N. conference in Rio de Janeiro on the environment be held at the summit level.
European leaders at the London Group of Seven also urged the U.S. to be ready with firm commitments.
But Mr.
Bush was evasive; he doesn't realize the pressure building.


Mammography's Value Remains Uncertain
To the Editor:
The "quandary" over the best treatment for early-stage breast cancer, described in your July 21 front-page news article, is played out by the women who use our medical library.
An ever-increasing number come in to read about treatment options after receiving a diagnosis of carcinoma in situ, earliest stage breast cancers, following routine mammography screening.


Studies Challenge Theories on Bypass Deaths
Two studies have challenged the prevailing medical opinion on why death rates for heart bypass patients vary among hospitals and surgeons.
The studies found no evidence to support the idea that the rates are caused in part by variations in the severity of illness and by the number of procedures a hospital or surgeon performs each year.


Early Favorite Is Big Brat
Big Brat, undefeated in seven starts this season, drew the No. 7 position for Friday night's $889,000 Woodrow Wilson Pace, which will highlight the Million Dollar Babies night at the Meadowlands.
Big Brat, a son of Cam Fella, was made the early 2-1 favorite in the field of 10.
He is trained by Bob Bencal and will be driven by Jack Moiseyev, the winning driver in the Hambletonian and the Meadowlands Pace earlier this season.


Market Place; Staples' Big Plans In Office Supplies
STAPLES INC., the six-year-old office-supply chain, is growing rapidly.
From 34 stores at the end of the 1990 fiscal year, it has 105 now, and intends to have 124 by the end of the 1992 fiscal year, which ends Jan. 31.
But analysts say it has the situation well in hand.
"Staples has the greatest growth potential of any retailer that I follow," said Christopher Vroom, an analyst with Alex.
Brown &amp; Sons in Baltimore.
Mr.
Vroom predicted the stock, which lost 25 cents yesterday, closing at $19.25 a share in over-the-counter trading, will be selling at $28 to $30 within a year.


CUNY Rescued As City Covers $19 Million Bill
The city has restored $19 million to the City University of New York to save -- for the school year starting in September anyway -- two-year degree programs that were eliminated after the state refused to pay for them.
The decision, announced on Monday, came a week after university trustees declared a financial emergency and threatened to dismiss more than 870 instructors.
The threat capped several weeks of political brinkmanship and lobbying by university officials, who appeared to be using the plight of the students and teachers to pressure either the city or the state to restore the money.


Welsh National Opera Names New Director
Matthew Epstein, a manager at Columbia Artists and the former artistic director of the Brooklyn Academy of Music Opera, has been appointed general director of the Welsh National Opera, the company announced yesterday.
Mr.
Epstein is to take up the post on Aug. 28.
Mr.
Epstein, who is 43 years old, is also an artistic adviser to the Chicago Lyric Opera and a consultant to the San Francisco and Santa Fe, N.M., opera companies.


8 Teen-Agers Charged In Cemetery Vandalism
Eight Queens teen-agers were arrested and charged yesterday with vandalizing hundreds of tombstones in a Queens cemetery last week, the police said.
The teen-agers entered the cemetery early Friday morning so that one of them, Adam Orna, 18 years old, could steal a tombstone as an ornament for his Jackson Heights home, said Lieut.
James Maguire of the 114th Detective Squad.
"He thought it would look cool in his bedroom," the lieutenant said.


No Headline
A Daughter's Intimations
After a legal battle with the family of Lawrence Durrell, the British literary quarterly Granta is about to publish extracts from the journals of his daughter Sappho, in which she intimates that she had an incestuous relationship with the writer, who died last year.


Corrections
An article on July 25 about the decision to admit women to Skull and Bones at Yale University misidentified the Supreme Court justice who swore in George Bush as President.
It was Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist; Justice Potter Stewart administered the oath when Mr.
Bush was sworn in as Vice President in 1981 and 1985.


Farley Deal With Creditors Averts a Forced Bankruptcy
Farley Inc. announced yesterday that it had agreed in principle with its bondholders to restructure the company's debt while averting an involuntary bankruptcy proceeding.
The agreement, which does not change the ownership of the Chicago-based Farley Inc., calls for the holding company to give its subordinated bondholders 3 million shares, or about 5 percent, of stock in Fruit of the Loom and a 9.2 percent interest in Doehler-Jarvis Limited Partnership in exchange for $172 million in bonds and accrued interest that the creditors hold.


Dow Gains 7.38 Points; Volume Up
Stock prices posted a modest gain yesterday in heavy trading, helped by continued interest in the bank sector, which has been ignited by the planned acquisition of Security Pacific by BankAmerica.
Also aiding the market was a stronger-than-expected retail-sales report for July and a sharply revised June figure, which gave an added lift to some retail issues.


Former Hostage Spends Some Free Time


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about new financings from banking companies referred incorrectly to an offering of convertible preferred shares from the Norwest Corporation.
The offering, which was announced at $175 million and then raised to $200 million, was a public offering, not a private one.


Afrikaner Cohesion: A Myth System Blown Apart
A deadly clash between far-right whites and police officers last week has highlighted the fraying cohesion of South Africa's long dominant Afrikaners.
The violence Friday night in the Transvaal town of Ventersdorp, which erupted outside a hall where President F. W. de Klerk was speaking to supporters of his National Party, left 3 men dead and wounded 57 other people, including seven police officers and 15 black passers-by.


2 Brewers to Change Malt Liquor Marketing
As the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms continues a renewed crackdown on malt liquor advertising, two more companies have agreed to make changes in their marketing efforts, a bureau spokeswoman said yesterday.
The Stroh Brewery Company, Detroit, said it would discontinue references like "the real power" and "more power to you" in advertising for the Schlitz and Red Bull brands.


73-Year-Old Harlem Woman Foils A Man's Rape Attempt
Attacked by a man who pushed his way into her Manhattan apartment, a 73-year-old woman resisted so ferociously that she foiled a rape, the police said yesterday.
The assailant tied her up and stole her jewelry, but the woman later gave the police a description of her attacker that led them to arrest an acquaintance of her grandson.


INSIDE
Sitting This One Out
The politically powerful teachers' union will not endorse candidates in the City Council primaries.
Page B1.
Iran-Contra Defense Fund


Can Skim Milk Taste Like Whole Milk?
All that the scientists at the Electric Power Research Institute were trying to do was find a way to conserve power in the dairy industry.
But, inadvertently, they may have developed a process that makes skim milk taste like whole milk.
Instead of heating milk to drive off water to produce concentrate or powder, as is usually done, institute researchers and representatives of the Dairy Research Foundation chilled it.
Some of the water formed ice crystals, which were filtered out.
The resulting concentrate was reconstituted by adding water.


Man Accused in Slaying of a Girl Says He Killed Dozens of People
A man accused of kidnapping and slaying a homeless 10-year-old girl has told investigators that he killed more than 60 people around the country since 1977, a newspaper reported in its Wednesday issue.
The man, Donald Leroy Evans, is being held without bond here on a Federal kidnapping charge in the Aug. 1 abduction of Beatrice Louise Routh.


Which Shoes Are Best For Children? Maybe None
PARENTS beleaguered by the high cost of children's footwear may be relieved to hear that, in the opinion of many orthopedists, the best thing for growing feet is not that pair of adorable, miniaturized glow-in-the-dark running shoes, or the sensible, if aesthetically objectionable, Oxfords, or even the K Mart flip-flops, but rather no shoes at all.
In a new review that confirms and expands on what many pediatricians have been saying of late, Dr.
Lynn T. Staheli, director of orthopedics at Children's Hospital and Medical Center in Seattle, has concluded that the children with the healthiest and most supple feet are those who habitually go barefoot.


Bridge
When the declarer is establishing a suit in a no-trump contract, it does not occur to the average defender that it might be right to help him do it.
It occurred to West, who is not an average defender, on the diagramed deal from the Goldman Pairs in Manhattan in May.
Sitting West, defending three no-trump, was Karen Allison of Newark, who has represented Canada in the open division of the World Team Olympiad.
She led a spade, and East was allowed to win with the ten.
The next spade was won with the ace in dummy, and a club finesse lost to the queen.


Ring Is Nice, but Pension's Better
Ted (Double Duty) Radcliffe played or managed for 36 seasons, his baseball career highlighted by a .380 batting average in 1943.
The way he sees it, the numbers, the achievements are legendary and should lead, any year, to his being voted into the Baseball Hall of Fame by the veteran's committee.


'I Felt Privileged to Be in the Peace Corps'; Giving, and Getting
To the Editor:
Why did I join the Peace Corps?
My answer to that inevitable question is always an attempt to shatter the idealistic illusion that surrounds the Peace Corps.
It's an illusion that haunts P. F. Kluge ("Wrestling With the Peace Corps," Op-Ed, July 30).


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 14


A Late-Summer Offering of Salads, Served Up Cool or Warm
AUGUST is a time for casual summer dining, a time when my family eats a lot of fish, more vegetables than meat, and, especially, a lot of salad.
Often, when guests come for dinner at this time of year, I prepare a buffet consisting of different types of salads, all of which can be eaten at room temperature.
The two salads and pickled vegetables on my menu today are ideal summer buffet fare.
I usually extend the menu with store-bought foods: cheese, crunchy French bread, olives, nuts, and, if meat is desired, cold chicken or ham.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Barclay Capital Management Inc., New York, a subsidiary of Barclay Investments Inc., named Kenneth D. Brown president and Joseph P. Blanchard senior vice president. *
First Financial Caribbean Corp., San Juan, P.R., named Zoila Levis president.
He succeeds Salomon Levis, who remains chairman and chief executive.


Kansas City Fed Bank Names New President
The Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City yesterday named a career officer, Thomas M. Hoenig, as the bank's new president, succeeding Roger Guffey, who is retiring.
The 44-year-old Mr.
Hoenig, who will take office on Oct. 1, has been with the bank since 1973, always in bank supervision and currently as senior vice president of the Bank Supervision and Structure division.
As president of one of the Federal Reserve's 12 regional banks, he will become one of the Fed's policy makers, a group that has the power to change the nation's short-term interest rates.


Metro Datelines;
A $100 million lawsuit has been filed on behalf of a black Long Island teen-ager who was attacked by a group of white youths after he spoke to a white girl at a party.
Pam Liapakis, the lawyer for Alfred Jermaine Ewell, 17 years old, filed the suit on Monday in State Supreme Court in Mineola against the youths accused of beating Mr.
Ewell.


Ex-C.I.A. Officials Start Legal Fund
In a highly unusual move, a group of former high-ranking intelligence officials is organizing a defense fund to help pay the legal expenses of their colleagues who are under scrutiny in the Iran-contra affair.
The fund will be headed by five trustees, each a former executive at the Central Intelligence Agency.
They will decide how to raise money and disburse it to current and former agency employees who are under investigation in the affair, representatives of the fund said today.


Plymouth Rock Is Vandalized


Memo Suggests Political Slant To Transit Cuts
In an internal memo, the head of the New York City Transit Authority told another agency official to make service cuts only in areas "where we do not have significant community or political opposition."
The memo was released yesterday by an advocacy group for subway and bus riders, which accused the Transit Authority's president, Alan F. Kiepper, of "trying to fool riders, legislators, and taxpayers." The group, the New York City Transit Authority Advisory Council, called for his resignation.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.56
5.66
8.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.30
5.31
7.45
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.40
5.39
7.34
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.73
7.77
8.51
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.16
8.21
8.78
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.12
9.15
9.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.04
7.05
7.45
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Pirates Strike Once Again As the Phils and Streak Fall
The Pittsburgh Pirates stopped Philadelphia's 13-game winning streak, the longest in the National League this season, and extended their own winning streak over the Phillies to 13 games with a 4-3 victory tonight.
Halting the Phillies one victory short of what would have been their longest winning streak since the 1890's, the Pirates beat Philadelphia for the 15th time in their last 16 meetings.
The Pirates are 7-0 against Philadelphia this season and haven't lost to the Phillies since Aug. 5, 1990.


Ralph Kennickell Jr., Chief of Printing Office
Ralph E. Kennickell Jr., chief of the Government Printing Office in the second term of the Reagan Administration, was killed in an auto accident in Bland County in southwestern Virginia on Sunday.
He was 45 years old and lived in Wexford, Pa.
A car driven by Mr.
Kennickell, who was on vacation, left the road at a curve on U.S. 52 and struck an embankment, the Virginia state police said.


Greenville Journal; Side Effects of a Bid on Medical Files
Claude (Bob) Rogers has bought just about anything you could name at auction.
He has made winning bids on several "financially distressed" shopping centers, on 1 of the 10 original gold-record replicas of Elvis Presley's "Blue Suede Shoes" and, last year, on a big green parrot named Bubba.
Always, the idea is to buy low and sell high, said Mr.
Rogers, a 52-year-old Greenville businessman who runs an auto body and salvage business, an auto leasing concern and assorted real estate ventures here.
There was an exception, however: he grew attached to the parrot and kept him.


Red Wine May Have Potential As Potion for the Blood's Ills
AT last science has come up with a possible way to help lower cholesterol that is more an indulgence than a dietary hardship: modest consumption of red wine.
Inspired by a French research report last year that drinking red wine seemed to lower cholesterol levels in people, plant scientists at Cornell University have isolated a natural chemical in grapes that they believe is the actual cholesterol-lowering substance in red wine.


U.S. NOW PREFERS LIMITED INSPECTION OF CHEMICAL ARMS
The United States has reversed its earlier insistence that a United Nations treaty to ban chemical weapons require fully open and immediate inspections, and has instead submitted a plan for more restrictive access.
The new proposals presented to the 39-nation conference drafting the agreement represent a retreat from the approach to inspection that President Bush himself once characterized as "anywhere, anytime, and no right of refusal." The proposals were disclosed by participants in the conference who say that to obtain an agreement it is necessary to take care of American concerns on the issue.


Black Councilman Is Target of Remark By White Colleague
A white City Councilman called a black colleague "curly" during a heated exchange on Monday, and later publicly apologized.
The white Councilman, Ernani Bernardi, made the remark to Councilman Mark Ridley-Thomas at a committee meeting on proposed changes in police policy.


Maven on Marketing To Empire Builder
When Richard M. Rosenberg took over as chief executive of the BankAmerica Corporation a little more than a year ago, he gave little hint of what was to come.
Known in banking circles as the marketing maven responsible for innovations like putting scenery on checks, he was expected to concentrate on building the Bank of America's California retail franchise.
But Mr.
Rosenberg is turning into an empire builder.
With the announcement this week that it will buy the Security Pacific Corporation, BankAmerica took a big step toward becoming one of the first nationwide banks, fulfilling the vision of the Bank of America's founder, A. P. Giannini.
Hard-Driving Ball of Energy
And Mr.
Rosenberg, a short, hard-driving ball of energy, is on his way to becoming, quite possibly, the most powerful banker in the nation.


Falling Ice Kills Twins, 17
A large ice ledge fell on 17-year-old twins searching for fossilized ivory along an Arctic Ocean beach on Saturday, killing both girls.
The twins, Minnie and Josephine Lane, were pronounced dead at the scene.


New Jersey Youngsters Learn the Art of Angling for a Day


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Adage Inc., West Chester, Pa., a maker of computer terminals, said it had committed to discontinuing and was negotiating a sale for its Pulsar Security unit. *
Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C., London, said that it had formed a venture with Apollinaris Brunnen A.G., the mineral water unit of Brau und Brunnen Aktienges vorm Dortmunder Union, Berlin.


The Pop Life
Paul Simon
Paul Simon will have the luxury of being able to walk to work tomorrow.
The singer, who lives on Manhattan's Upper West Side, will be performing on the Great Lawn in Central Park.
Here's what he'll see when he gets there: some 300,000 to 500,000 people (depending on who is predicting and on the weather); the most expensive stage ever put up in Central Park; 500 policemen; 160 portable toilets; 14 television cameras for HBO's live broadcast of the concert; Dennis Miller, the comedian, wrapping up his preshow announcements; a blimp; a helicopter or two and, at the far end of the lawn, a fire truck with a cherry picker to give photographers a good view of the crowd.
Trash bags will be donated by Glad.


She Never Broke a Sweat as They Danced the Day Away


Serbia vs. the New World Order
Aggressors must not be allowed to profit from their conquests.
That's the principle President Bush soundly invoked to mobilize the world against Saddam Hussein's seizure of Kuwait.
The lesson seems to have been entirely lost on Slobodan Milosevic, the Communist leader of Serbia.
He's out to expand Serbian frontiers, using a mix of political intimidation and crude military force.
Mr.
Milosevic's designs are now frighteningly close to realization.
European governments have tried and failed to broker a negotiated peace.
Washington, which has not yet addressed the harsh new reality, needs to take a stand.


Cuomo Plans to Scale Back Proposal for Adirondacks
In a scaled-down version of the broad recommendations made last year by his Commission on the Adirondacks, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is to propose measures to restrict development along many Adirondack lakes and preserve large tracts of back-country forest.
While less encompassing than called for by the commission that he had appointed, the Governor's package is still the most significant package of legislation affecting the Adirondacks in two decades, and it foreshadows what will likely be an intense legislative struggle next year during the centennial of Adirondack Park.


People
*
Keith Gould has been named director of New York creative services at Ayer Inc., from co-director.
The other co-director, Sue Read, has become a trouble-shooter reporting to Patrick Cunningham, Ayer's chief creative officer.
Promoted to associate directors were Jeanne Chinard, an executive vice president, and Robert Chimbel, a senior vice president who was general manager and creative director at Zwiren Ayer, Chicago. *
Louis M. Schultz, executive vice president and director of media services at Lintas U.S.A., has been named chairman of a new Lintas Worldwide media council and was also appointed to the Lintas Worldwide board of directors.


BRITISH FOCUSING ON 2 OTHERS HELD
Against the growing campaign to win freedom for Western hostages inside Lebanon, Government efforts on behalf of two other British businessmen who have been held elsewhere in the Middle East took center stage here this week.
In one case, officials reported that a British contractor prevented from leaving Saudi Arabia since 1975 was allowed to return to England on Monday after a long Government campaign to win his freedom.


Books of The Times; The Pioneers of Israel Long Before the State
The Blue Mountain By Meir Shalev Translated by Hillel Halkin. 375 pages.
Aaron Asher Books/HarperCollins. $22.95.
In "The Blue Mountain," Meir Shalev uses fictional characters and folkloric wisdom to depict the pioneering life of Jewish families thrown together in a small cooperative village decades before the birth of the State of Israel.
The villagers have gladly traded one hardship for another: the fear of living almost as aliens in their native Russia for an alien wilderness in Palestine.
The untamed land these settlers inhabit before and after World War I stands in marked contrast to the developed country encountered by the recent arrivals from the Soviet Union.
The stubborn characters in Mr.
Shalev's novel may well remind readers of some of the tough-minded old-timers with similar backgrounds in modern Israel.


Boy Scouts to Allow Homosexuals in New Program
Challenged by a gay rights group and the United Way in the San Francisco Bay Area to end its practice of banning homosexuals, the Boy Scouts of America has instead agreed to develop a youth program that will allow gay members, atheists and girls.
The program, "Learning for Life," will be separate from the traditional Scout program but will be administered by local Scout councils that choose to offer it.
The program, announced by the United Way on Monday, will be the first Scout-related curriculum to include openly gay youths.


Newborn Is Thrown in Trash and Dies
A young Brooklyn woman gave birth on Monday afternoon in a stairwell in a Coney Island housing project and then dropped the infant down a trash chute into a compactor 10 stories below, the police said yesterday.
The Medical Examiner's office said the baby was alive when it was dropped but died from the fall.
The mother, Melondie Cummings, 19 years old, was arrested yesterday on a charge of second-degree murder.
The police believe she had been visiting her sister in the project.


Why Wait to Conserve New York's Water?
To the Editor:
I am disappointed to find that you've adopted an anticonservation position on New York's water ("Crying Wolf About Water," Topics of The Times, July 28).


Agent Makes Capital For an Elite Clientele
Pro basketball's most voracious predator considers himself first and foremost a family man.
David Falk has a wife, two daughters and an extended clan, which, in his opinion, includes Michael Jordan and Patrick Ewing.
Adrian Dantley, agent/attorney Falk's first basketball client, is godfather to his oldest daughter, 8-year-old Daina.
Boomer Esiason, Cincinnati's fair-haired quarterback and another client of Falk's agency, ProServ, is godfather to his youngest, 3-year-old Jocelyn.


CHRONICLE
In London, another Assemblies of God evangelist ran into trouble when British television regulators told the Rev.
MORRIS CERULLO, who picked up the pieces of JIM and TAMMY BAKKER'S empire, that he could not work miracles on British television.
The weekly "miracle healing" episode of "Victory With Morris Cerullo" was pulled last week from the Super Channel after the Independent Television Commission expressed concern, The Associated Press reported.
The channel has 23 million viewers across Europe.


Hope for Change Fades in Zaire as Feuds Flare
Zaire's opposition groups announced today that they would boycott a national political conference because of what they called Government vote-rigging and intimidation in the selection of delegates.
The decision is likely to deepen political divisions between opposition leaders and the Government of this sprawling central African nation and create difficulties for President Mobutu Sese Seko in an already frenetic and complicated negotiating process.


Charles Willard, 48, A Producer of Works Staged on Broadway
Charles A. Willard, a Broadway theatrical producer and manager, died on Sunday in Lake Placid, N.Y., where he had a summer home.
He was 48 years old.
He died in a boating accident, said George Pappastavrou, a friend and coexecutor of the estate.


Metro Datelines; Conviction Upheld Against Ex-Senator
A Federal appeals court yesterday upheld the felony conviction of former State Senator Andrew Jenkins.
Mr.
Jenkins, a 49-year-old Queens Democrat, was convicted in May 1990 on charges stemming from an F.B.I.
"sting" in which he agreed to launder $150,000 in cash through a bank in Zaire.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Clark M. Clifford resigned as First American Bankshares' chairman.
Federal investigators have said Washington's largest bank holding company was secretly controlled by B.C.C.I.
Mr.
Clifford apparently resigned under pressure from Federal regulators and the board of the bank he led for nine years.
Mr.
Clifford's law partner and protege, Robert A. Altman, president of a holding company tied to First American, resigned as well.  [ A1. ]


Computers That Hear and Respond
The airport in El Borma, Tunisia, is fogbound.
A dispatcher must reroute military traffic for the United States Transportation Command.
He looks down at his computer screen, but instead of typing at the keyboard he speaks into a microphone.
"Give me a list of all airports in Tunisia," he says.
His words appear instantaneously on the computer screen.
Within seconds, his answer, a long list of airport locations, also appears.
"Which airport is closest to El Borma?" he asks.
Again, the system responds within seconds.
The dispatcher takes the data, plots alternate routes and then sends out alerts that Transportation Command outposts around the world could receive.


Like the Lusitania That Left It, A Pier Is Heading for Oblivion
The great green hulk of Pier 54 reaches forlornly into the Hudson River, a decrepit remnant that seems to be waiting, like a sea captain's aging wife, for impending disaster.
In 1912 the liner Carpathia docked there, carrying the 705 survivors from the Titanic.
Three years later, the Lusitania embarked from Pier 54 on its last voyage, one that would finally help drag the United States into war.
In World War II, it saw men off to war.


Alexander Takes Plan On Education to Nation
When President Bush called Lamar Alexander last December to offer him the job of Education Secretary, Mr.
Alexander asked the President for two things: the time to form an education policy and the freedom to put together a team of people to carry it out.
Whether the Bush policy will win over Congress is debatable.
But Mr.
Alexander has certainly gotten the team he wants.


Review/Music; New Leads In City Opera 'Turandot'
New singers have taken over the principal roles in Puccini's "Turandot" since the New York City Opera's production was last reviewed.
Like many of the company's second casts these days, the new cast, heard on Saturday afternoon, was an evenly balanced group that gave a solid but rarely sparkling performance.
There were some moving moments, which is more than can be said for many a "Turandot." And the revamped production, with impressionistic sets by Beni Montresor, new staging by Jonathan Eaton, gorgeously stylized choreography by Shi Zheng Chen and soft, effective lighting by Jeff Davis, has many attractions of its own.
And Guido Ajmone-Marsan had the orchestra, particularly the brass, playing brilliantly.


Lawyer Guilty In Work Given By Ex-Surrogate
A lawyer with close ties to a retired judge of the Surrogate's Court in Manhattan pleaded guilty yesterday to Federal tax evasion, mail fraud and money-laundering charges stemming from work assigned to him by the judge, Marie M. Lambert.
Investigators said the lawyer, Vincent J. Catalfo, derived most of his income, including $770,000 on which he failed to pay taxes, from fees and guardianships awarded to him by Surrogate Lambert over a six-year period.
Law-enforcement officials have said the judge, who retired last year at age 70, has been the subject of a Federal investigation into whether she awarded excessive fees to lawyers who were her friends.


Accounts
*
The Rihga Royal Hotel, New York, to Weiss, Whitten, Carroll, Stagliano, New York, after a review involving more than 10 agencies.
Billings were not disclosed.
The agency said the account had previously been handled by the MacDougall Company, New York.


From Cartoons to a Play About Racism in the 60's
Sometimes you ask a question and it changes your life.
That's what happened to Lynda Barry, the author of "The Good Times Are Killing Me," an investigation, both joyous and sad, into the mysteries of childhood and race relations in urban America.
Ms.
Barry's play opened Off Broadway last week at the Minetta Lane Theater after a successful run at the nonprofit Second Stage.


Bell Atlantic To Use Retail Sales Outlets
Looking for a more alluring way to sell telephone services like caller I.D. and call forwarding, the Bell Atlantic Corporation is about to try marketing them through department stores, to be sold in the same manner as cosmetics, clothing or cookware.
The market trial, the first effort by a phone company to sell such services through a department store, will begin on Friday through Hecht's, a 27-store chain around Baltimore, Washington and Richmond.


60-Minute Gourmet
AMERICANS have acquired a taste for hot foods in the past decade, everything from blackened fish to Southwestern salsas, Tex-Mex sizzlers and Sichuan fare.
One of the most popular dishes in the French and American repertoire is the classic steak au poivre.
The basic recipe calls for coarsely ground black pepper -- and lots of it -- that is pressed into the surface of the steak.
The meat is then seasoned with salt and cooked in a cast iron skillet over high flame to the desired degree of doneness.
It is often served with a red wine sauce.


Church Cancels a Rally Planned For Professor Accused of Racism
A rally scheduled for tomorrow in support of the City College of New York professor accused of making racist and anti-Semitic slurs was canceled yesterday afternoon when the church that was to be host for the event withdrew its backing.
The Rev.
Daniel Dupree of the Convent Avenue Baptist Church in Harlem said the rally for Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., chairman of the African-American studies department at City College, had been canceled mostly because the church's pastor, the Rev.
Clarence P. Grant, was away on vacation.


Foreign Affairs; Mr. Bush's Three Trios
Never since World War II have so few had so much control over the making of American foreign and defense policy.
And though the professionals in the State and Defense Departments grumble about being excluded, never in the last 40 years has the national security bureaucracy known such harmony.
The obvious part of this story is the passing of most throat-cutting cold war issues and Mr.
Bush's skill in getting his trio of senior aides -- Secretary of State James Baker, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser -- to work together without the legendary bloodletting that devastated their predecessors.


French Report Xytronyx Stake
Groupe des Assurances Nationales of Paris, an insurance underwriting concern, has taken a 12.78 percent stake in Xytronyx Inc., a health products company in San Diego.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the French company said it held the 422,990 common shares and 18,570 warrants to purchase Xytronyx common shares for investment only.


Quotations of the Day
"Our system of civil justice is, at times, a self-inflicted competitive disadvantage." -- Vice President Quayle.
"Anyone who believes a better day dawns when lawyers are eliminated bears the burden of explaining who will take their place." -- John J. Curtin Jr., president of the American Bar Association.  [ A14:3. ]


Canada Indians Sue on Mill
Two groups of Canadian Indians have filed a lawsuit in Toronto seeking $1.3 billion (Canadian) in damages from the Kimberly-Clark Corporation and The New York Times Company for the pollution of rivers in their native territory in northern Ontario around James Bay.
The suit, which was filed on Monday by the Moose Factory First Nation and the New Post First Nation, charged that a 60 year-old paper mill in Kapuskasing owned by the Spruce Falls Power and Paper Company, a joint venture of the two American companies, had released dioxins and other dangerous substances into three rivers.


Wang Computer
Wang Laboratories Inc. introduced a low-cost version of its VS 6000 minicomputer line.
The new model, the VS 6000/Server, can be used either as a conventional stand-alone computer or as a unit to store data in a network of personal computers.
Wang said the new machine should end speculation that the company was dropping its proprietary line of minicomputers.
After the company signed an agreement to resell I.B.M. computers in June, many industry analysts speculated the Wang would stop manufacturing its own systems.
The VS 6000/ server is priced $11,500 to $125,000.


About New York; Just Simon in the Park, to Garfunkel's Disappointment
The evening of Saturday, Sept. 19, 1981, was one of those precious, glorious occasions when magic percolates in a metropolis often too frazzled to feel.
Art Garfunkel remembers that it had been raining, until the sun popped out just in time to set.
"You know how the rain cleans the air and makes everything so lovely?" he asked.


Taking Lessons From Restaurants That Still Fill Their Seats
NEW YORK snaps to attention in autumn, not just with school and Broadway openings, but with new restaurants.
This fall, the list of restaurants to open is almost as brief as that of Democratic Presidential candidates.
But where kitchens are being built, and menus conceived, there is optimism.
"I think I know what it takes," said Arnold Israel, a former advertising and promotional executive who is opening his first restaurant, a refurbished edition of the Art Deco One Fifth at Fifth Avenue and Washington Square in about a month.
Paradoxically, the recession made it easier for him to open the restaurant now than during the boom years of the past decade because his initial investment was considerably less than it would have been then and it was easier to negotiate favorable terms for the space.
"The economics are good now but you still have to be prepared to work 16 hours a day to cater to your customers," he said last week.
"By giving people excellent food, service and value you can sustain it beyond the initial flush of curiosity."
A sound philosophy does not guarantee success, of course, but now that much of the glamour in the New York restaurant business is gone, this year's crop of intrepid restaurateurs will try to follow the lead of establishments that are weathering the recession and transition from the free-spending 80's to the cautious 90's.
In New York and around the country, these perennial magnets continue to fill their tables night after night.
In contrast to the hot spots that briefly attracted a feeding frenzy of fashionable crowds before closing down, these durable restaurants have in common a businesslike attitude of dedicated professionalism.
"Successful restaurants like the Gotham Bar and Grill are about fabulous consistency and constantly paying attention to detail," said Richard Lavin, who is working with Mr.
Israel as a consultant.
"We think we're all headed for Broadway, but we must be willing to edit all the time."
Like the Gotham Bar and Grill, there are other places known for top-notch food in relaxed but stylish settings that were established in the early 1980's and are still going strong.
Union Square Cafe, Elio's and Provence are some notable examples.
Some restaurants, ranging from formally elegant to brassy, like Le Cirque and Jim McMullen's on the Upper East Side, Cafe des Artistes on the West Side and Smith &amp; Wollensky and the venerable Palm in midtown, have been enjoying even longer successful runs.
Commander's Palace in New Orleans, Legal Seafood in Boston and Joe's Stone Crab in Miami are all examples of restaurants in other cities around the country that continue to succeed regardless of the economy.
A casual neighborhood spot like Isabella's, with its sidewalk cafe on the Upper West Side, which opened in late 1987, never enjoyed the high profile of some others but has become solidly established.
Stephen Hanson, one of the owners, said that to date, business in 1991 is outpacing that in 1990 by about 6 percent.
A few newer places at various price levels, including Aureole, Trattoria dell'Arte and Zarela, have been around long enough for the novelty to have worn off, but are still packed with diners night after night.
"Business is up by 20 percent," said Sheldon Fireman, the owner of Trattoria dell'Arte.
"There's no magic, it's all hard work and having a flexible attitude that doesn't dictate to the customers but keeps them happy and coming back."
And judging from the many customers who dine there week after week, Coco Pazzo, the busy Italian spot on the Upper East Side that is scarcely a year old, appears to fit the profile of a place settling in for a long run rather than one doomed to become a fashion victim.
"People come in here, look around and asked, 'What recession?' " said John Fanning, the maitre d'hotel.
The key, of course, is nurturing repeat business.
Successful restaurateurs say their regular customers make up anywhere from 40 to 90 percent of their business, which may explain why neighborhood restaurants that depend on a local clientele seem to be thriving.
Eddie Schoenfeld, an owner of Vince and Eddie's near Lincoln Center, is opening another restaurant on the West Side in September, Fishin Eddie on West 71st Street.
"We hope we can continue to satisfy the needs of this neighborhood," he said.
"It's very important to understand your marketplace."
It's not only the neighborhood places that hope to cultivate a local clientele.
"We do not want to be that once-a-year special occasion sort of place," Peter W. Tischmann, vice president and general manager of the newly restored St.
Regis, said of the hotel's luxuriously appointed restaurant, Lespinasse.
"We want to be the kind of place people will come back to because they like the food and the service and because they can afford it."
"Having repeat customers makes a place recession proof," Mr.
Tischmann said, "but to do that we must first establish ourselves." Lespinasse will open Sept. 10 with Gray Kunz, formerly of Adrienne in the Peninsula across the street, as chef.
Mr.
Tischmann said a three-course lunch would cost $35, comparable to many of the top midtown restaurants.
But the price of a three-course dinner, including extras like chocolates and petits fours, will be $50, $5 to $20 less than most of the competition.
But delivering value is not just about low prices.
In the past few years a number of Manhattan restaurants like Hubert's and Rakel restructured their menus and cut prices but still went out of business.
"New Yorkers are sophisticated and they understand about prices," said Sirio Maccioni, the owner of Le Cirque.
"It goes back to perceived value and that can happen at any price level," said Drew Nieporent, owner of Montrachet and an owner of TriBeCa Grill.
Mr.
Nieporent says that TriBeCa is extremely busy, and that Montrachet has "hung in there."
"Your customers have to buy what you're delivering," he said.
"And it's not just the food. For some it's the room or the service or the greeting at the door. Maybe they really like just one dish."
Indeed, there is a host of elements that contribute to a restaurant's success.
And unlike in the flush economic climate a few years ago when droves of people would show up at the latest multimillion-dollar cattle barn with sponged walls, halogen sconces and $25 grilled chicken, close attention must be paid to every one of them.
Mr.
Hanson said that when he opened Coconut Grove, his first restaurant, in early 1987, it was meant to be trendy.
"It was less well-conceived and that wasn't wise because trends pass," he said.
"By the time I opened Isabella's I had a better understanding of how important it was to attract people from the community. You have to work much harder at service." Unlike Isabella's, Mr.
Hanson said, business at Coconut Grove is off about 8 percent.
"Customers are much more demanding these days; they are very aware of prices and are very sensitive to the details on how they are treated -- on the phone, when they come in, by the waiter, everything," said Elio Guaitolini, co-owner of Elio's, which opened at Second Avenue and 84th Street in 1981 and where some customers dine as often as two or three times a week.
"We have to be much more careful than we were three years ago when the mood was lighter," he said.
Marc Sarrazin, who runs an informal personnel agency for chefs in addition to being an owner of DeBragga &amp; Spitler, wholesale meat purveyors to the restaurant industry, believes it is important for restaurants to deliver according to expectations.
"There is room for great restaurants at every level, but there has to be harmony," he said.
"Customers can sense when there is tension, when the kitchen and dining room are at odds. We should give them more credit."
Pretension is out and personalization is in.
Even at Le Cirque, where the social and power scene makes it seem as if the 80's never went away, Mr.
Maccioni can be seen patrolling the dining room with an eagle eye; he's not above aligning the salt and pepper shakers or instructing a waiter to remove plates.
Mr.
Maccioni and others also pointed out how important it was to refresh a restaurant.
At the Gotham Bar and Grill, for example, Jerome Kretchmer, an owner, and his chef, Alfred Portale, are developing a complete four- or five-course dinner for the first time.
"It's just to give our steady customers the possibility of a new experience," Mr.
Kretchmer said.
Charles Palmer, chef and co-owner of Aureole, said nothing can be taken for granted.
"Business has been great, but if there is any lapse it could go the other way. This place is not cheap but I guess people perceive it as value." The complete dinner at Aureole is $55.
And just as chefs and owners are paying careful attention to the details of greeting and service as well as to the quality of food, they are forever fine-tuning costs so they do not have to increase prices in the face of higher expenses.
"We no longer have the guys from Wall Street coming in and showing off with $400 bottles of port," Mr.
Palmer said.
These former big spenders, it seems, are also going to bed earlier these days.
Fashionably late no longer seems fashionable and many restaurants, even the highly successful ones, are trying to devise ways, like not closing for vacation, to compensate for the decline in business after 9:30 or 10 P.M.
It's a situation the newcomers will have to face.
These hours around the edges of the prime dining times can often make the difference between profit and loss.
Along with the high-rolling party atmosphere, out went the dilettantes who regarded having a stake in a restaurant as a way of nourishing their egos but who never wanted to do the hard work.
"When you think of the great restaurants of Europe, they're about the people who run them, not two-or-three-million-dollar installations," Mr.
Sarrazin said.
"In the past few years the restaurant business became distorted, a monster. Maybe now it's getting back on a better track."


When a Fellow Needs A Friend, Not Just a Buddy
"THERE is much about our experience as men that can only be shared with, and understood by, other men," Sam Keen, a writer and philosopher, says in his best-selling book on men, "Fire in the Belly." And he says, "Only men understand the secret fears that go with the territory of masculinity."
What's going on here?
After listening for a generation to women's complaints that men should open themselves emotionally and be more vulnerable in their relationships, some men are heeding the advice, Mr.
Keen says.
But with a twist: They are increasingly confiding in other men about the nature of manhood and friendship itself.


Short-Term Rates Off Again; Further Drop Is Expected
The recent decline in yields on short-term securities, both money market funds and certificates of deposit, gained momentum in the last week, and rates will likely drop even lower, said Robert K. Heady, publisher of The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest rate publication based in North Palm Beach, Fla.
Commenting on what he called the very strong decline in the seven days that ended yesterday, Mr.
Heady said: "The bottom of the down cycle is not yet in sight. The latest decline in savings yields follows last week's easing of the Federal funds rate and Monday's drops in Treasury bill rates."


Breaking the Beirut Hostage Impasse: New Mideast Alignments Clear Way
A powerful confluence of national interests has contributed to the surprisingly abrupt progress toward freeing the Western hostages held in Lebanon, according to specialists inside and outside the Bush Administration.
In the long regional struggle that has brought hostage-taking to the fore as a widely condemned tactic, each of the major parties has either taken part in or witnessed military, political or economic turmoil that has changed national equations.


Pope Urges East Europe's Youth to Carry the Flame
Pope John Paul II arrived in his homeland today for the second time this year with a call for Europe's youth to carry on the triumph of freedom over Communism in Eastern Europe.
The Pope is on a pilgrimage to Poland and Hungary -- two countries struggling in their transition from Communism to capitalism -- to inspire Roman Catholics to maintain their faith in the face of growing materialism.


Clifford Resigning as Chairman Of Bank That Had Secret Links
Clark M. Clifford, a towering figure at the intersection of law and politics in the capital for nearly half a century, resigned today as the chairman of Washington's largest bank holding company, apparently under pressure from Federal regulators and the board of the bank he led for nine years.
Federal regulators and investigators have said that First American Bankshares Inc. was secretly controlled by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, a loosely regulated international banking concern that was seized last month after auditors reported that the bank had a complex past that included bribery, money laundering and bank fraud.


Future Looks Grim For Theater Center In Los Angeles
When it opened in a converted Greek Revival bank building six years ago, hopes were high that the Los Angeles Theater Center would form the nucleus of a SoHo-like arts district to revive the seedy Spring Street area downtown.
The city pumped more than $27 million into the experimental multi-cultural theater company.
But today the nearby storefronts are mostly vacant, petty drug dealers and homeless men gather in littered doorways and the daring young company teeters on the brink of financial collapse, a stark example of the risks in using the arts as a tool of urban redevelopment.
The city has said no more money, and The Los Angeles Times has refused to run the company's advertisements for failure to pay.


California Bonds Yield 4.5% to 6.6%
A $1.2 billion issue of California general obligation bonds was priced through competitive bidding yesterday and was won by the Bank of America.
The bonds, which are noncallable, were priced to yield from 4.5 percent for the 1992 maturity to 6.6 percent for an issue that matures in 2011.


Referee Sues N.F.L.
BEN DREITH, a longtime National Football League referee, filed an age discrimination suit against the league in the United States District Court in New York yesterday.
The suit was filed on his behalf by MICHAEL J. O'BRIEN, an attorney with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, who accused the N.F.L. of "heightened scrutiny" of referees over the age of 60.


Detroit's Boys-Only Schools Facing Bias Lawsuit
Desperate over the wasted lives of its young black men, Detroit is about to open the nation's first public schools for inner-city boys, unless a court challenge blocks them.
Other large cities have contemplated similar schools but have backed away in the face of political pressure or the fear of lawsuits.
That has left Detroit with the nation's most radical attempt to rescue the next generation of black boys, many of whose troubled older brothers have already been lost to drugs, prison or homicide, by isolating them in classrooms with specially trained teachers and curriculums emphasizing black achievements.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Erie County, Pa., is offering $129.8 million in revenue bonds, priced to yield 6.95 percent for an issue due in 2014, through PNC Capital Markets. *
Maine is offering $150 million of tax anticipation notes, priced to yield 4.75 percent, through Prudential Securities.


Insurance for Athletes
The National Collegiate Athletic Association's Executive Committee put the final touches on a catastrophic injury insurance program for all N.C.A.A. athletes yesterday and approved a one-year extension of DICK SCHULTZ'S contract as executive director.
With a premium projected at about $3.5 million annually, the catastrophic injury program will cover all athletes in all three divisions, approximately 266,000 young men and women. (AP)


A Shove Brings A Ban
Anastasio Velasquez, the Nicaraguan pitching coach who shoved an umpire Monday night in a game between the United States and Nicaragua, has been suspended from international competition for a period of one to five years.
Manuel Suere, the chairman of the appeals committee for the Confederation of Pan American Baseball, said this afternoon that Velasquez's suspension was effective immediately and that the committee would determine its length in a future meeting.


Ryder Captain Picks Floyd and Beck
The United States Ryder Cup team was completed yesterday when the team's captain, Dave Stockton, chose Chip Beck and Raymond Floyd for the final two spots on the 12-man squad.
The Americans will play a European team Sept. 27-29 at the Ocean Course in Kiawah Island, S.C.
The two wild-card picks joined the 10 golfers who qualified through a two-year point system instituted by the PGA of America.
They are: Fred Couples, Payne Stewart, Lanny Wadkins, Hale Irwin, Paul Azinger, Corey Pavin, Mark O'Meara, Mark Calcavecchia, Wayne Levi and Steve Pate.


Yankees Go Backward Again, On the Double
The Yankees finished off their doubleheader dance last night at Yankee Stadium and it was not a pretty sight.
The dance proved to be boring the past four days because they took two steps backward, two steps forward and then two more steps backward.
When the dancing was finally completed last night, they had lost their second doubleheader since Saturday and were shuffling closer to the sorry depths of last season.
Kansas City limited the Yankees to 14 hits in two games and swept them by scores of 5-0 and 8-1.
It marked the first time the Royals had ever swept a doubleheader from New York.


Mammography's Value Remains Uncertain; A Supportive System
To the Editor:
I am writing in response to a Personal Health column by Jane E. Brody on the hurdles in jobs and relationships faced by those who have survived cancer (July 17).


For Coke (Without Asking), Free Advice on Marketing
THIS summer, advertising executives have been talking about Coca-Cola almost as much as they have been drinking it.
Much of their chatter is about a flurry of ad and marketing changes at the Coca-Cola Company, involving top executives and possibly the creative content of its campaigns.
The prevailing sentiment among cola cognoscenti seems to be that changes in the marketplace have caught up with the nation's soft drink sales leader.
Moreover, while Coke still outsells Pepsi, some advertising experts are saying that the Pepsi-Cola Company now looks to be out-marketing its archrival.


Review/Film; The Unsung of the Opera, Or, Voices of the Chorus
How many sopranos does it take to sing a high C?
This is just one of the questions, large and small, considered with enormous wit, intelligence and compassion (and occasional rue) in the very fine new documentary, "In the Shadow of the Stars," opening today at the Film Forum.


Japan Hit By Another Scandal
Japan's mounting financial scandals were topped today with allegations that an Osaka restaurant owner had conspired with a branch manager of a small local bank to obtain $2.5 billion worth of loans fraudulently from many of Japan's biggest banks.
Among the big banks was the Industrial Bank of Japan, which is close to the Ministry of Finance and one of the world's most prestigious financial institutions.
It reportedly lent about $75 million, accepting forged deposit receipts from Nui Onoue, 61 years old, the restaurant operator, as collateral.


Alexander's Offers Fun With Circulars
A new television advertising campaign for Alexander's offers an all-too-rare acknowledgment that in real life, consumers often do not eagerly await the arrival of sales circulars from retailers.
The spots, which began running this week, depict the uses to which consumers often put such circulars: to line bird cages, start barbecue fires, swat flies -- even train puppies.
The spots, created by Della Femina, McNamee, New York, feature an announcer who urges viewers, "So please take a look at our sales circular before you use it."


For Mexico's Green Party, It's a Very Gray World
Maria Antonieta Tejeda Munoz joined student protests against the Mexican Government in 1968 and they were crushed.
She ran for Congress against the Government party in 1988 and was trounced.
She understands the country's cynicism about politics fluently.
But the 44-year-old sociologist did not quite bargain for the reception she would get as a candidate of the Partido Ecologista, Mexico's fledgling Green Party, to represent the most polluted city in the world.


Grace &amp; Rothschild To End Sterling Work
For the second time in a week, a United States advertising agency is losing a large account because a foreign auto maker no longer will be selling its cars in this country.
Grace &amp; Rothschild Advertising, New York, said it would end work later this month on its $20 million Sterling auto account, following a surprise announcement on Friday by British Aerospace P.L.C. that Sterling sales will end here.
Only days earlier, Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, New York, lost its Peugeot account, billing $10 million to $12 million, because the French car maker had made a similar decision.


Albus Eyes the Trophy, Not the Money
Jim Albus of the Piping Rock Club on Long Island is $181,000 richer and more famous after his success on the Senior PGA Tour this season, but the championship of the Metropolitan Golf Association always holds a special place in his heart.
"This tournament means a lot to me because it is the first big tournament that I ever won," Albus said here today after shooting a five-under-par 66 at the Hollywood Golf Club to share the first-round lead of the Met Open.


Dispute Over Air-Conditioner Leads to Slaying in Bushwick
The co-owner of a small appliance repair shop in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn was shot and killed yesterday afternoon by a man who had complained about the amount of money that the shop had charged his brother to fix his air-conditioner, the police said.
The suspect, Luis Silvero, 24 years old, entered the shop at 254 A Stockholm Street just after 4:30 P.M. yesterday and began "complaining and yelling" to one of the owners, Carmello Padilla, 36, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.
When Mr.
Padilla turned away, Mr.
Silvero pulled a 9-mm. pistol and shot him twice in the back, Officer McInnis said.


DISCONTENT GROWS IN IRANIAN CITIES
Several Iranian cities in recent weeks have experienced rare outbreaks of unrest, including demonstrations, bombings and arson attacks, suggesting that discontent is growing in Iran as economic conditions deteriorate.
The incidents and the challenge they pose to the Government of President Hashemi Rafsanjani help to shed light on Teheran's expressed desire to reopen economic and political ties to the West after years of self-imposed isolation.


Wine Talk
WHEN it comes to wine, the word "tasting" takes on a new life.
As in: "I'm not very good at tasting wine."


Brown's Gospel: Community Policing
At 6-foot-3, in a dark suit and tie, Lee P. Brown was an imposing figure as he stood between murals of Jesus in the garden and Jesus weeping over Jerusalem.
In the humid Harlem church, his sweating listeners hung on his words.
He told them that their ministry was to be good parents.
Teach moral discipline and spiritual idealism to their children, he said, and then go out and improve the community and city.
The message, sprinkled with biblical allusions and lines from spirituals, could have been delivered by a minister.
Indeed, Mr.
Brown confided, he once had given serious thought to becoming one.
"But," he said with a wry smile, "you can see from my current position the Lord had other plans for me."


Cotton Prices Fall Sharply After Report of Output Rise
Cotton futures prices crumbled yesterday after the Government forecast a 14 percent jump in cotton production this year, double the increase the market was expecting.
Cotton futures fell the permitted daily limit of 2 cents a pound across the board on the New York Cotton Exchange, with the contract for delivery in October at 63.80 cents a pound.


Robert E. Dallos, Reporter, 59
Robert E. Dallos, a New York-based business reporter for The Los Angeles Times, died on Sunday while on vacation in Budapest.
He was 59 years old and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.
He died of a heart attack, said his mother-in-law, Herta Griffenhagen.


Using Cost-Cutting To Limit Public Data
To the Editor:
Ten years ago the Office of Management and Budget began a program to eliminate unnecessary publications and information the Government had been producing for distribution or sale to the public.
Much has by now been eliminated, some of it indeed unnecessary, but it appears this program has also been used deliberately to restrict the flow of important information from the Government to the people.


Metro Datelines; Death Penalty Voted In a Rape-Murder
A 29-year-old deliveryman was condemned to death yesterday in the 1989 kidnapping, rape and murder of a woman he had tricked into giving him a ride when she was Christmas shopping.
A three-judge panel deliberated just over eight hours over two days before returning its verdict against Sedrick Cobb.
The same panel convicted Mr.
Cobb last month in the death of 22-year-old Julia Ashe.


What's That Duck Doing in My Drink?
A FUNNY thing happened to the swizzle stick. It became a dolphin -- among other things.
Forget fans and umbrellas.
These days, a tall summer drink just seems anemic without a dinosaur, chenille duck, orange giraffe, blue marlin, green camel or rubber shark swimming around in the center.


Crop Circles Riddle Deserves More Study
To the Editor:
It is rare for people to encounter a mystery of the sort described in your news article on the crop-circle formations of southern England (Beckhampton Journal, July 27).
The phenomena in question are particularly newsworthy because they regrettably remain at the periphery of scientific investigation and for various reasons receive little or no attention from scientists.


James Roosevelt, Ex-Congressman And a President's Son, Dies at 83
James Roosevelt, a six-term Congressman, former delegate to the United Nations and eldest son of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, died yesterday at his home in Newport Beach, Calif.
He was 83 years old.
Complications from a stroke and Parkinson's disease were the causes of death, said his son H. Delano Roosevelt.


Rare Dismissal on California Faculty
For what is believed to be the first time in the 123-year history of the nine-campus University of California, a faculty member with tenure has been dismissed.
The faculty member, Michel Strickmann, an associate professor in the Oriental languages department at the University of California at Berkeley and a widely recognized expert in Oriental religions, was dismissed at the end of the spring semester.


Editorial Notebook; Woodrow Wilson's Dynamite
If one were to choose the man of the hour in post-Communist Europe, his name might well be Woodrow Wilson, long deceased and seldom celebrated.
For he was the President who memorably informed Congress in 1918 that "self-determination is not a mere phrase. It is an imperative principle of action which statesmen will henceforth ignore at their peril."
From the Baltics to the Adriatic, from the Ukraine to the Balkans, oppressed millions have given new life to his imperative -- and often troublesome -- principle.
Indeed, if results are the measure, Wilson has proved a more successful revolutionary than Lenin.


Sports of The Times; Fistiana Has Gone Software
A.
J.
LIEBLING, who coined the phrase "the sweet science," might sputter into his bouillabaisse at the thought, but the grubby world of boxing has taken a turn toward the scientific.
Boxing's own little revolution is taking place in the amateur ranks, where fights last only three rounds and boxers wear headgear and referees intervene when one boxer shows any sign of the staggers.
Even a critic of bloodthirsty professional boxing can live with a version that tries to minimize vulnerability.


Edna Bennett, Photographer, 81
Edna Bennett, a photographer, writer and naturalist, died on Saturday at Eastern Long Island Hospital in Greenport, L.I.
She was 81 years old and lived in Southold, L.I.
She died of cancer, said a friend, Marie Wheeler.


CHRONICLE
The testimony of the Rev.
MARVIN GORMAN in his $90 million slander suit against a former rival television evangelist, JIMMY SWAGGART, shifted from sex to money as Mr.
Gorman testified in New Orleans yesterday that the loss of his religious empire cost him tens of thousands of dollars a year.
Mr.
Gorman's suit accused Mr.
Swaggart of ruining Mr.
Gorman's reputation and destroying his career in 1986 by spreading rumors that he had had more than 100 affairs, fathered illegitimate children and was possessed by the devil.


City Teachers Won't Support Council Races
The New York City teachers' union, a powerful force in municipal politics, has decided to withhold candidate endorsements in next month's City Council primaries to protest cuts in this year's education budget.
The surprising step, taken last week in a unanimous voice vote by the 89-member executive board of the United Federation of Teachers, represents the first time in 20 years that the teachers have declined to endorse candidates in a city election, union officials said.
The teachers announced their decision yesterday.


U.S. Soccer Team Takes the Gold
Joe-Max Moore, who entered the game only as a substitute for an injured teammate, scored the winning goal on a free kick in overtime tonight as the United States defeated Mexico, 2-1, to win the gold medal in soccer in the Pan American Games.
The young American team won all five games here, giving a bit of hope for development for the 1992 Summer Olympics and for 1994, when the United States will be the host of the World Cup.
The Americans were helped when Brazil and Argentina, traditional powers, did not send teams because of other priorities.


2 Big Trades for Pistons
The Detroit Pistons traded center JAMES EDWARDS and acquired forward ORLANDO WOOLRIDGE in separate deals with the Los Angeles Clippers and the Denver Nuggets yesterday.
The 7-foot-1 Edwards goes to the Clippers in return for 6-6 guard JEFF MARTIN and the Clippers' second-round draft pick in 1995.
The Pistons also traded SCOTT HASTINGS, a 6-11 reserve center-forward, and their 1992 second-round pick to the Nuggets for the 6-9 Woolridge. . . .
CHRIS GATLING, one of the Golden State Warriors' three first-round draft picks, signed a five-year contract.
Salary terms were not announced although the deal for the former Old Dominion star is reported to be worth about $5.6 million, including $4.75 million guaranteed. (AP)


Address by Quayle On Justice Proposals Irks Bar Association
Vice President Dan Quayle went before the American Bar Association today to say that the United States has too many lawyers, too many lawsuits and too many excessive damage awards.
The result, he charged, is that compared with less litigious countries, the United States is handicapped in world markets.
His remarks, which were coolly received, brought a rare and pointed rebuke from the association's chairman even as the Vice President stood nearby.
Mr.
Quayle then returned to the microphone to defend himself.


Economic Scene; Coca Dreams, Cocaine Reality
IT is no surprise that Washington is sending the Green Berets to Peru: As Willie Sutton might have said, that is where the coca is.
What ought to surprise, say economists who study illegal markets, is the drug busters' faith that harassment of Peruvian coca farmers will affect the supply of cocaine in Miami or Modesto.
At best, argues Peter Reuter of the Rand Corporation, intervention will push coca cultivation into other parts of the Andes.
At worst, it will further enrich the Shining Path guerillas, who sell protection services to the coca farmers.


Personal Health
ABOUT 24 million Americans wear contact lenses, and unless they and the eye-care specialists who fit them pay more attention to known hazards, tens of thousands of people will suffer serious and possibly vision-threatening problems, largely a result of improper use of the lenses.
The risks associated with wearing contacts have increased significantly since the development of extended-wear lenses, which can be left in the eyes overnight and which are often worn for a week or more.
Consumers add to the risk by shopping at vision centers that offer quickly fitted lenses at low cost, usually without careful attention to whether they are suitable or adequate instruction in proper use and cleaning.


B.C.C.I. Accusations in India
An Indian opposition leader has accusedofficials in the Governments of Prime Ministers Indira Gandhi and her son, Rajiv, of protecting the operations of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
The lawmaker, George Fernandes of the Janata Dal Party, also said that B.C.C.I. had run a money-laundering operation in collaboration with Reliance Industries Ltd., a leading Indian industrial house, and provided jobs for the relatives of officials in Rajiv Gandhi's office.


Earnings Rise At Polygram
Polygram International Ltd. yesterday reported record earnings of $72 million, or 42 cents a share, for the first six months of 1991, up from $58 million, or 34 cents a share, a year earlier.
The company said that sales rose 24.5 percent, to $1.3 billion, from $1.065 billion in the similar period a year earlier.


ISRAELIS AND U.N. HOPE FOR ACCORD ON HOSTAGES SOON
Optimism grew today among United Nations and Israeli officials that a deal could be struck soon for a sweeping exchange of Middle East prisoners that would include freedom for the 10 remaining Western hostages in Lebanon.
There were fresh reports from several capitals in the region giving the outlines of possible settlements.
One carried by Iran's official press agency said that later this week, Israel might free a Shiite Muslim cleric who has been a pivotal captive for the last two years.


Magazine for the Black Intelligentsia
In its most recent issue, the third, the magazine Reconstruction presented to readers what is becoming a predictable mix of the unpredictable.
There was, for example, a long polemic blasting Harvard Law School for what its author saw as a stress on "white cultural norms" at the expense of "subordinate communities." It seemed a statement of the sort of ethnic militancy that has led black students to occupy offices demanding the hiring of more minority faculty members.
But there was also a measured, even generally admiring article on Stanley Crouch, the black writer whose unorthodox views and attacks on liberals, feminists and Black Power leaders often send ethnic militants into paroxysms of anger.


2 Groups Make Offers For Control of Emerson
The troubled Emerson Radio Corporation said yesterday that two investment groups had made competing offers for control of the company and that Jerry Zarin, a turnaround expert with consumer electronics management experience, had been named president and chief executive.
The 50-year-old Mr.
Zarin has been consulting with Emerson for the last month and will take the reins from William L. Lane, who will remain as chairman.


Suspects in Iranian's Killing Were Detained Briefly
Two Iranians now suspected of killing former Prime Minister Shahpur Bakhtiar of Iran were briefly detained by the Swiss and French border police last week after trying illegally to cross into Switzerland, French officials said today.
The two were freed after questioning by the French police, who had not yet been alerted to the killing of Mr.
Bakhtiar and an aide, and were last seen heading south, possibly toward the French borders with Italy and Spain.


Ann Taylor Deficit
The Ann Taylor Stores Corporation. reported a net loss of $16.01 million for the fiscal second quarter ended Aug. 3, compared with a deficit of $2.44 million in the quarter a year earlier.
Sales rose to $101.28 million from $92.76 million.
Latest-quarter results included a charge of $16.84 million, or 84 cents a share, for debt financing costs.


British Air Cuts U.S. Fares To London and Rivals Join In
British Airways has introduced discounts of up to 15 percent on its flights between the United States and London this fall, and three carriers -- American, Continental and United -- have quickly matched them.
Other carriers competing on the trans-Atlantic routes are expected to follow.
Delta Air Lines and Northwest Airlines said yesterday that they were studying the British Airways specials.
"Everybody will match," said Edmund Greenslet, publisher of The Airline Monitor, a trade journal.


Ivanisevic Feels the Tug Of Homeland in Turmoil
The phone calls are much the same as they have always been.
Srdan and Gorana Ivanisevic wait for their 19-year-old son, Goran, to report from his latest stop on the men's professional tennis tour.
The parents want to know about his distant, glamourous life.
"Same thing," Goran tells them.
He is either playing pretty good or very bad.
There isn't much time for anything else.


Dramatic Revival for U.S. Cyclist
Last year at this time, Jeanne Golay's dreams were shattered and her spirits plummeted to the lowest point in her cycling career.
After competing in the United States national championship, Golay tested positive for drugs and was given a six-month suspension.
She came back in February, and this afternoon, competing in the Pan American Games, Golay reached the highest ground yet in her comeback by winning a gold medal in the individual road race.
The 29-year-old Floridian completed the 63-kilometer course (39 miles) in 1 hour 31 minutes 21 seconds.


Corrections
A brief article in the Company News columns of Business Day yesterday by Bloomberg Business News, about the Amoco Corporation, referred incorrectly to a recent transaction involving Amoco and a unit of the General Electric Company.
The Amoco Olefins Corporation, a unit of Amoco, exercised an option to purchase an olefins production plant it has been leasing from GE Capital Transportation and Industrial Funding.
Because the purchase price exceeded $15 million, the deal required Federal Trade Commission approval, which was granted on Thursday.


EXPERTS WORRIED BY KUWAIT FIRES
Nearly six months after the Iraqis blew up hundreds of Kuwaiti oil wells, about 40 percent of the wells have been capped but the short- and long-term health effects still look grim.
At an international conference here on the Kuwaiti oil fires arranged by Harvard's School of Public Health and Center for Middle Eastern Studies, Prof.
Richard Wilson, a Harvard physicist and specialist in risk analysis, estimated that 50,000 people in the Kuwait region "will have their lives shortened in some way" in the next several years because of the smoke.


Civil Lawsuit Settled By American Medical
American Medical Holdings Inc., which owns American Medical International, one of the largest American hospital chains, said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $16 million to settle a civil fraud lawsuit filed by a Miami physician and lawyer.
Analysts said the settlement removed a cloud over American Medical Holdings, which hopes to sell $254 million in common stock and $201 million in new high-yield bonds this week.
The money will be used toward paying off $470 million in junk bonds, which pay 16.75 percent interest.


Catledge: 3 Days in Jail
Orlando Magic forward TERRY CATLEDGE was sentenced to three days in jail yesterday for driving to a basketball practice last February with a suspended driver's license.
The 6-foot-8-inch forward, who led the Magic in scoring during their first season, in 1989-90, also will have to contribute 125 hours of community service and pay a fine, according to Orange County Circuit Court records.
The amount of the fine was not disclosed.


Prince Of Wales Quits Panel Of Museum
The Prince of Wales has lobbed another round in his war against architectural modernism, abruptly resigning as president of the patrons of the Museums of Scotland in a row over choosing the design for the museum's new building.
Officials of the Edinburgh museum disclosed the Prince's resignation on Tuesday, the same day they unveiled the winner of their eight-month design competition: a modern structure with fortresslike walls, a tower and a boat-shaped roof garden, designed by the London architectural partnership of Benson &amp; Forsyth.


Home Video
'Three Tenors' a Hit
They make an odd trio up there among "Terminator" and "Richard Simmons's Sweatin' to the Oldies," but for almost a year Luciano Pavarotti, Jose Carreras and Placido Domingo have climbed steadily to near the top of most best-seller lists with their classical music video "Three Tenors in Concert."


Talking Deals; Awaiting the Next Big Bank Merger
WITH the BankAmerica Corporation having agreed to buy the Security Pacific Corporation, attention in California banking circles is shifting to a deal that has not yet happened: an acquisition of First Interstate Bancorp by Wells Fargo &amp; Company.
Wells Fargo and First Interstate have not given any firm indication that they are interested in a merger, and it is unclear whether the two companies have even held any discussions.
But many analysts, investors and industry executives say a deal is almost a sure thing, if not immediately then in the long run, in response to BankAmerica's agreement, announced Monday, to buy Security Pacific for $4.4 billion in stock.


Polish Film to Open Festival
"The Double Life of Veronique," a film by the Polish director Krzysztof Kieslowski, will open the 29th New York Film Festival on Sept. 20 at Lincoln Center.
The film, which is in Polish and French, stars Irene Jacob in a dual role that won the French actress the best actress award at the Cannes International Film Festival in May.
The last night of the festival, on Oct. 6, will feature David Mamet's "Homicide," starring Joe Mantegna.
Other films in the festival are to be announced this week.


Why Privatization Is Destined to Fail
To the Editor:
The big cost savings and better service claimed for turning public services over to private companies in your July 7 front-page article come as a result of reduced wages and benefits for the workers who deliver the service and not from any superiority in efficiency.


Communism didn't Cause Polish Intolerance; Tactics at Auschwitz
To the Editor:
Henry Siegman accuses me and my colleagues of contributing to anti-Semitism in Poland (letter, Aug. 3).
He says the Jewish community there, already exposed to anti-Semitism, was left to "deal with the consequences" of our demonstration against the convent at Auschwitz.


BANKS IN U.S. SHUN A LOAN TO MOSCOW
American banks have not put up any money to finance Soviet purchases of American grain, despite the Bush Administration's efforts to facilitate such loans.
No American banks participated last month in a $600 million loan to the Soviet Union for grain purchases, even though the United States guaranteed repayment of almost all of the principal and half of the interest, banking and grain industry executives said.


Buster Smith, 86, Alto Saxophonist And Band Leader
Henry (Buster) Smith, an alto saxophonist and band leader who played an important part in the musical upbringing of Charlie Parker, died on Saturday in Dallas.
He was 86 years old.
He died of a heart attack, The Associated Press reported.


Bridge
Most tournament players are happy to employ the weak two-bid, which has been around for 60 years. monds, showing four spades and five hearts, has a considerable following, and there are splinter groups of experts around the world using a variety of hypermodern ideas at the two-level, nearly all showing unbalanced hands with less than opening-bid strength.
One of these bids, frowned on by American authorities, is a two-spade opening to show a pre-emptive hand in an undefined suit.
Another is a two-diamond bid to show a weak two-bid in one of the major suits.
And a third is a two-heart bid showing length in both major suits.
This last was used by North on the diagramed deal, played in the Prague Cup contest in Czechoslovakia in April.


Pentagon Rethinking Techniques To Prevent Attacks on Own Tanks
New Pentagon figues showing that most of the American tanks and other armored vehicles destroyed during the Persian Gulf war fell victim to allied fire have alarmed military experts, who say that the Army has neglected some aspects of protecting these forces in an era of high-technology warfare.
In its accounting this week of casualties among United States forces from allied fire, the Pentagon said 27 of the 35 tanks and armored vehicles damaged or destroyed were the victims of American fire -- so-called "friendly fire."


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13
The diplomacy over the hostages in the Middle East will go into a quiet period, according to the U.N.
Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, while, presumably, his Iranian contacts seek to provide him with proof of what has happened to seven Israeli servicemen.
Page A1


Candidates Are Picked To Fill Udall's Seat
A former Maricopa County supervisor won the Democratic primary on Tuesday for the Congressional seat vacated three months ago by Representative Morris K. Udall and is considered certain to win the seat in a special election next month.
The Democratic nominee, Ed Pastor, will face a former Yuma County Supervisor, Pat Connor, who won Tuesday's Republican primary.


Sears to Take Longer To Pay Its Suppliers
Over the last two months, Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company has been contacting its suppliers and vendors to tell them that it will start revising its payment terms in September, a company spokesman said yesterday.
Instead of paying for shipments within 30 days, Sears will take 60 days to pay, said Gerald E. Buldak, a spokesman for Sears.


People
*
Richard Amoils, 39, has joined Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York, as senior vice president and management supervisor, from Scali, McCabe, Sloves, New York, where he was vice president and management supervisor.


Newsprint Mill Given To Workers
The Kimberly-Clark Corporation and The New York Times Company will give their Spruce Falls newsprint mill in northern Ontario to an employee-led group of investors as part of an agreement announced today by the Ontario government.
The agreement also requires Ontario Hydro, the state-owned power company, to buy the mill's hydroelectric power plant for $140 million (Canadian).


Small Reaches New Heights: One Atom as On-Off Switch
A team of physicists has created an electrical switch that represents the ultimate in miniaturization: it consists of just one atom.
Physicists at the International Business Machines Corporation's Almaden Research Center in San Jose, Calif., are reporting in today's issue of the British journal Nature that they have found a way to control electrical current by moving a single atom of the element xenon back and forth.
The atom acts something like a wall switch used to turn lights on and off.


George Elrick Cummings, Squash Player, 92
George Elrick Cummings, a professional squash player and later a coach, died on Friday in Bennington, Vt.
He was 92 years old.
Mr. Cummings's daughter, Judy Cotter, said he had died after a short illness.


At Last, 'Maybe He Will Come Back'
Now and again, Tami Arad said today, she catches herself just as she is about to slip into the past tense when talking about her husband, Ron.
While lapses like that are unsettling, she said, they matter little compared with the hopes and fears that collide each day over the larger question of whether there is also a future tense for Capt.
Ron Arad, an Israeli Air Force pilot missing in Lebanon since October 1986.


Helmut Walcha, A Harpsichordist And Organist, 83
Helmut Walcha, an organist and harpsichordist known for his interpretations of the works of Bach, died on Sunday in Frankfurt, Germany.
He was 83 years old.
He died of cardiopulmonary failure, said Paul Jordan, a professor at the State University of New York in Binghamton and one of Mr.
Walcha's former students.


Abrams Fits the Mold Of Giants Linebacker
In his first Giants training camp last year, Bobby Abrams would adeptly lock his arms around veteran running backs and drive them hard to the ground.
And when the veteran Giants sauntered back to the huddle, some offered him a puzzling look.
"Don't remember you," they would snap. "When were you drafted?"


Bush, in Pittsburgh, Shows Signs of Running in '92
It was supposed to be the kickoff for Attorney General Dick Thornburgh's campaign for the Senate.
But it sounded more like the kickoff for George Bush's re-election campaign.
The President took a brief political detour from his four-week vacation in Kennebunkport, Me., this morning to fly to Pittsburgh, with Mr.
Thornburgh in tow, to speak to the National Fraternal Order of Police convention.
As Mr.
Bush liked to say in the 1988 Presidential campaign, quoting the New York Yankees catcher Yogi Berra, it was "deja vu all over again."


Communism Didn't Cause Polish Intolerance
To the Editor:
The reasoning in your editorial discussing the violence toward the gypsies in Mlawa, Poland ("Hooligans and the Neighbors' Cow," July 29), is preposterous.
Neither Poland nor Hungary has a history of "free societies"; Czechoslovakia was free briefly between the two world wars.


Richard A. Snelling, 64, Is Dead; Governor of Vermont for 9 Years
Gov.
Richard A. Snelling of Vermont, a Republican who blended fiscal conservatism and concern for the environment during nearly nine years in office, died Tuesday night at his home in Shelburne, Vt., just south of Burlington.
He was 64 years old.
Mr.
Snelling's body was found by his state police driver near his pool about 8 A.M. yesterday.


Douglas Kiker, TV Journalist, 61; Was Correspondent for NBC News
Douglas Kiker, an NBC News correspondent for 25 years, died yesterday at his summer home in Chatham, Mass.
He was 61 years old and lived in Washington.
He apparently died of a heart attack, the network said.


Corrections
A brief report in the Addenda listing on the Media Business pages on Monday referred incorrectly to an advertising account on which Dennis Ferrone worked at Wells Rich Greene BDDP before he joined FCB/ Leber Katz Partners.
It was the Oil of Olay account, not Benson &amp; Hedges.
In the same listing, a People entry misidentified the new senior vice president and director of cross-media sales at Hachette Magazines.
He is Gerald S. Wroe; a misspelling was based on information from a Hachette spokesman.


Daly to Set Up Fund
JOHN DALY, winner of the P.G.A.
Championship last Sunday, said yesterday he would set up a college scholarship fund for the children of a man killed by lightning during the tournament in Carmel, Ind.
Thomas Weaver of Fishers, Ind., was struck by lightning during a first- round storm delay last Thursday.
He was 39 years old.


Ford Registers To Offer Notes
The Ford Motor Company has filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $2 billion in notes.
The proceeds will be used to retire some debt and purchase receivables.


CHRONICLE
ANGEL WALLENDA, the 23-year-old member of the Flying Wallendas who continued to perform in the high-wire act after losing her lower right leg and parts of her lungs in cancer operations, has been admitted to Robert Packer Hospital in Sayre, Pa.
"She hasn't taken a turn for the worse, but she's certainly not out of the woods yet," said Diane Giancisco, nursing division manager.
Mrs.
Wallenda, who last performed in the act on Sept. 22 using an artificial leg, was flown to the hospital Sunday from her home in Tioga, Pa., near the New York-Pennsylvania border.


In the Nation; Justice or Hypocrisy?
"After centuries of the most blatant preferences in every aspect of American life -- preferences for whites, males, usually for those of Western European stock, almost always for English-speakers, and all too often for Protestants. . . . In the face of  [ this ]  history of discrimination, is rigid evenhandedness now to be the test of a candidate's or a party's devotion to American values?"
That question was raised in this space on July 4 -- which seemed an appropriate date.
The question seemed timely too, because now "some preferences are called quotas . . . and are extended to blacks, Hispanics, Asians and women." Thus, because they sometimes "inconvenience or disadvantage a white, Protestant male," such "quotas" are under political fire -- from President Bush among other, mostly white critics.


Mets Throw In Towel, and a Victory Goes, Too
The second season, sad and strange, began unofficially for the Mets tonight.
And it began with a grim appropriateness.
Even with all probable meaning stolen from the game, the Mets still couldn't win, blowing a 4-1 lead in what became a 5-4 loss to the Cardinals at Busch Stadium.
The defeat, of course, felt suitably miserable, and only in the realization that it did no great additional harm to their already damaged position was there as solace.


Summer School for the Very Ambitious
In the afternoon there is sailing on Lake Wononskopomuc, tennis and, of course, golf.
After dinner, there is a moment to relax.
Then the summer crowd here breaks up and people head back to their rooms.
They have homework.
This is summer school, but not the kind of summer school where the motivation is last semester's D. This is the Hotchkiss School, the elite boarding school just below the Berkshires.
A D in a subject gets you barred from that class here.
But if your other grades are good, you might spend your summer vacation studying theater, or whales, or Russian, or television journalism.


Bobby McFerrin: Unworried And Happy and a Conductor
As the popular and classical musical cultures pull farther apart, crossing back and forth has become, for some reason, that much more intense.
Bobby McFerrin -- the vocal explorer whose "Don't Worry, Be Happy" swept the nation in 1988 and buoyed (to Mr. McFerrin's displeasure) George Bush's Presidential campaign -- will set aside his four-octave singing range and arsenal of naturally produced sound effects for a while on Thursday to conduct the Beethoven Seventh Symphony and five other pieces.
Mr.
McFerrin's foray into the jaws of the New Jersey Symphony at the Garden State Arts Center in Holmdel will include some familiar items by Bizet, Faure, Vivaldi and Bach.
He will also do some of the improvisational singing for which he is best known.


Power Failure Left A-Plant In Confusion
After a power failure disrupted the control room of a nuclear plant here on Tuesday, the operators had difficulty determining which instruments were still working and which were not, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission said today.
And in at least one case, the commission said, the operators reached the wrong conclusion.
But officials said today that beyond the damage to electrical systems that occurred when problems began at the Nine Mile Point Nuclear Station, there was no damage to the nuclear fuel or other parts of the reactor and no radiation escaped from the plant.


Officials Plan Close Scrutiny Of Blue Cross Rate Proposal
The State Superintendent of Insurance, Salvatore R. Curiale, said yesterday that he was "skeptical" about a proposal by the New York's largest health insurer to change its longstanding policy of charging uniform rates to all small businesses.
Mr.
Curiale said that a formal public hearing would be held on Sept. 6 on the proposal by Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, which is requesting steep rate increases for 120,000 employees of small businesses, who are regarded as bad health risks, and for 380,000 individuals who buy their own policies.


The Stick Congress Gave Castro
Once again Fidel Castro has caught Washington off guard, lowering the minimum age for foreign travel from 60 to 20 years.
This has opened floodgates for an illegal exodus of Cubans -- and created a painful dilemma for Americans:
Having regularly censured him for reining Cubans in, how can critics now condemn him for letting them out?


RESULTS PLUS
YACHTING France Triumphs French yachts won the 50-foot and One-Ton classes yesterday in the Fastnet Race off the coast of Plymouth, England, giving France its first overall victory in the Admirals Cup series.
The French, who were fourth in the Admirals Cup standing when the 605-nautical mile race began Saturday, won the prestigious series by less than a point over Italy.
The United States, which was seeking its first Admirals Cup victory since 1969, finished third and the defending champion, Britain, was fourth.
The Fastnet Race was the final leg of the two-week Admirals Cup, an event held every two years off the southwestern coast of England.
The French 50-footer Corum Saphir was the first yacht to finish the race that went around the Fastnet Rock off the coast of Ireland, placing 20 minutes ahead of the Japanese yacht Will.
France also was victorious in the One-Ton class, with Corum Diamant defeating Brava of Italy by 1 hour 21 minutes. (AP)


The Times Sues To Force Union Into Arbitration
The New York Times filed suit yesterday to force one of its unions into arbitration to resolve a dispute over staffing at a new printing plant in Edison, N.J.
The lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, charges that the union, the New York Mailers Union Local 6, has violated an agreement that called for arbitration of such disputes.
The suit was filed to force the union to attend an arbitration session scheduled for next Tuesday.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher Amid Speculation on Rates
The dollar finished higher yesterday against most major currencies, as investors weighed the Federal Government's report of a small rise in consumer prices against an expected rise in German interest rates.
Gold prices also moved higher.
The Republic National Bank in New York quoted an after-hours bid of $357.60 a troy ounce, up $1.10 from late Tuesday.


Sports of The Times; The Perils With a New Folk Hero
JOHN DALY, the new glittering golfer, may be hazardous to your health, and to his own, and with dangerous ramifications that could reach even into our gross national product.
John Daly is now hailed as a folk hero because he performed a kind of miracle by winning the Professional Golfers Association Championship on Sunday.


Tarkanian Pushes N.C.A.A. Curbs
Jerry Tarkanian today applauded efforts by state legislatures to require the National Collegiate Athletic Assocation to adhere to due process rules in its investigations of college sports programs.
Tarkanian, who as basketball coach at Nevada-Las Vegas has battled the N.C.A.A. for years over its enforcement procedures, told a panel at the National Conference of State Legislatures' annual meeting that the N.C.A.A. was unlikely to change on its own.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
The Justice Department has charged General Electric with defrauding the Pentagon of more than $30 million on the sale of jet engines and support services to the Israeli Air Force.
The civil fraud charges are the first against an American military contractor in a case that has already led to a guilty plea in Israel.  [ Page A1. ]
Salomon Brothers said it had given the Government evidence that it had violated Treasury bond auction rules.  [ D1. ]


SURGERY AFFIRMED AS STROKE FIGHTER
A surgical technique designed to clear clogged neck arteries leading to the brain has been found to be an effective way to prevent strokes in patients who suffer from a severe case of the condition, according to a new study.
Preliminary results of the study were released in February, when researchers financed by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke decided that the patients receiving the surgery were doing so well that it would be unethical to continue to endorse conventional medical therapy.


Other Inmates 'Lost' In the Baltimore Jail
The 54-year-old homeless man who spent 13 months in the Baltimore jail without being formally accused was freed today when the arson charges against him were dropped by the State's Attorney.
But officials now say that the defendant, Martin R. Henn, is only one of seven inmates found waiting at the jail without court dates since the building was taken over by the state last month because the financially squeezed city could not afford to run it.
In the six other cases, the prisoners had been waiting three to four months for arraignment, said the state's acting jail commissioner, Lamont Flanagan.


A PAUSE IS LIKELY IN HOSTAGE TALKS, U.N. CHIEF ASSERTS
The United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, said today that he expected the active diplomacy over the release of hostages in the Middle East to go into a quiet period while, presumably, his Iranian contacts sought to provide him with proof of what has happened to seven Israeli servicemen seized in Lebanon.
The Israelis have insisted on such an accounting as the first step in a projected deal that envisions the freeing of the 10 remaining Western hostages in Lebanon as well as hundreds of prisoners held by Israeli-backed forces in southern Lebanon.
In Israel, officials said today that they wanted solid evidence such as a videotape of those still alive.


Quotation of the Day
"I think he might very well have enjoyed all this." -- Richard Helms, on Washington's continuing fascination with the late William J. Casey.  [ A1:2. ]


Prices on Bonds Rise Sharply
Bond prices soared and long-term interest rates fell yesterday to levels not seen since early February, driven by good news on inflation and another sign that the economic recovery may be stalling out.
The two-tenths of a percent increase in the July Consumer Price Index was in line with market expectations, as was the four-tenths of a percent rise in prices excluding food and energy.


Peace-Weary Iraqis Flee for Jordan, to Rest or to Head West
The 34-year-old Iraqi Christian had a close family, good friends, a Ph.D. and a well-paying engineering job in Iraq.
But when Baghdad lifted travel restrictions on Iraqis in May, for the first time in nearly a decade, he decided like thousands of others to risk it all: he headed to Jordan in search of a scarce visa to the West and a new start in life, far from the hardship of postwar Iraq.


Further Decline Is Expected For Money Market Yields
A further decline in short-term money rates is expected by Walter S. Frank, chief economist for the IBC/ Donoghue's Money Fund Report.
"One should expect that because of the Federal Reserve's actions in encouraging lower rates recently, money market yields will decline somewhat further," he said.
"The whole bond market is strong, with higher prices and resultant declining yields."


Banking's Ultimate Goal; Mergers Set Stage for National Operations And Perhaps a Healthier Financial System
The recent spate of bank mergers, involving 5 of the country's 10 largest banks, has done little to correct one of the American banking system's greatest weaknesses -- the lack of geographic diversification that leaves banking companies vulnerable to regional economic downturns.
The weakness of New England's banking system and the problems before that in Texas have been widely attributed to a patchwork of state and Federal laws that limited banks in those areas to their local markets.
If those banks had been part of a larger company, the losses from a local economic downturn could have been absorbed by other parts of the company, and the damage to the banking system would have been much less.
The problems of New England and Texas are among the reasons the Treasury Department's banking-overhaul proposals would allow nationwide branching.


Communism Didn't Cause Polish Intolerance; Misplaced Blame
To the Editor:
Henry Siegman's letter (Aug. 3) makes it sound as if I participated in Rabbi Avi Weiss's demonstration on the grounds of the Auschwitz convent.
I brought a lawsuit against Josef Cardinal Glemp for falsifying history by claiming Rabbi Weiss came to the convent to kill the nuns (Cardinal Glemp also blamed the Jews for alcoholism and Communism).


Simon Concert to Test Time Warner Synergy
Time Warner Inc., which is financing Paul Simon's concert in Central Park tonight, is betting that the event will pay off in numerous ways.
In return for underwriting the concert the company, of course, will benefit from the publicity and public good will generated.
But the concert is also an effort to use the widely touted "synergies" that the giant entertainment conglomerate described when Warner, the parent of Warner Records and Warner Brothers and cable television systems, merged in 1990 with Time Inc., which owned Home Box Office and cable systems in addition to its publishing empire.


Bonds and Bonilla Help Pirates Continue Dominance of Phillies
The Pittsburgh Piratesbeat Philadelphia for the 14th straight time tonight, getting run-scoring doubles by Bobby Bonilla and Barry Bonds and a homer-saving catch from Bonds to defeat the Phillies, 5-3.
Pittsburgh came from behind to win for the fifth consecutive game, including a 4-3 victory on Tuesday that stopped Philadelphia's 13-game winning streak, the longest in the National League this season.
The Phillies have not beaten Pittsburgh since Aug. 5, 1990, and have lost 16 of their last 17 to the Pirates, including all 8 games this season.


For Croatia Now, Economic Warfare
Though a jittery cease-fire appears to have stopped most of the violence in the strife-ridden republic of Croatia, the law of the jungle now governs business dealings countrywide.
Passenger rail traffic between Belgrade and all points in Croatia and Slovenia screeched to a standstill during recent fighting, forcing rerouting of international trains bound for Western Europe through Hungary.





Reform New York City Council's Outdated Voting Procedures
To the Editor:
In "One Big Problem Is Politics" (editorial, July 31), you note that Congress makes it difficult for constituents to discover a representative's position, thus contributing to voter apathy.
A similar criticism can be made of our New York City Council.


100 Films In Festival Latino
A guest better known for his novels than his cinema connections -- the Colombian Nobel laureate Gabriel Garcia Marquez -- is to preside at the opening of Joseph Papp's annual Festival Latino Film series tomorrow.
The three-week festival will offer more than 100 films from Latin America, the Caribbean, Spain, Portugal and Italy, almost all with English subtitles.
They will include 22 features and 65 documentary, short fiction and animation works competing for awards along with "New Trends in Mexican Cinema (1989-91)" and "A Panorama of Films from the Caribbean and the Antilles."


Communism Didn't Cause Polish Intolerance; A Tour of Prejudice
To the Editor:
We just returned from our own self-conducted, eight-day "heritage" trip to Poland ("In Poland, Tourism With Apologies," Business Day, July 30).
While we did not expect accommodations or restaurants equal to those in France or Italy, what we found was adequate.


In Tennis Life of Chang Family, Father Thinks He Knows Best
It was late.
Michael Chang had already lost and met with reporters, then had departed for the dressing room.
But Team Chang -- his father, mother and brother -- was still huddled closely beneath the grandstands, as much to commiserate as to analyze.
They are doing a lot of both these days.
Chang, once the brightest star in a sky of rising young Americans, is enduring a season of more trouble than toasting at the age of 19.
When the United States Open begins its two-week run later this month, he won't be among the top 16 players.
Chang, who won his first-round match over Amos Mansdorf of Irael, 7-5. 6-2, in the Association of Tennis Professionals tournament in New Haven yesterday, was beaten twice recently in the second round of successive tournaments by Stefano Pescosolido, ranked No. 80 in the world at the time.
Last week, he lasted until the third round at the A.T.P. stop in Mason, Ohio, before he was knocked out by Jim Courier, the French Open champion.


McDonald's Tests 3 Pasta Entrees
The McDonald's Corporation is testing fettucine Alfredo and two other pasta dishes in a restaurant in Rochester, and plans to extend the trial to a few other restaurants in that vicinity over the next few months, a spokeswoman for McDonald's said yesterday.
"It's very preliminary but we're in one restaurant in that area with three pasta entrees," said Ann Connolly, the spokeswoman.
"It's a very small test," she added.


Smith to Face Chavez As Haugen Drops Out
LONNIE SMITH, a former world champion junior welterweight, will replace GREG HAUGEN as the opponent for JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ, the World Boxing Council junior-welterweight champion, on Sept. 14 at the Mirage in Las Vegas, Nev.
Haugen, the original opponent, had expressed discontent over his negotiations with Chavez's promoter, DON KING.
AL BRAVERMAN, King's director of boxing, said that attempts to locate Haugen and remedy the problem were unavailing.
Braverman said that the co-feature on the Chavez-Smith card -- SIMON BROWN, the W.B.C. welterweight champion, against BUDDY McGIRT -- has been canceled because of a broken hand suffered by Brown.
Instead, JULIAN JACKSON, the W.B.C. middleweight champion, will defend against DENNIS MILTON.


Last 4 Children Are Taken From a Father Accused of Abuse
The last four children were removed yesterday from the care of Kodzo Dobosu, the Harlem man who had once won national acclaim as a Father of the Year but is now being accused of sexually abusing several of his children.
In a strongly worded decision, Judge Edward M. Kaufmann of Family Court in Manhattan ruled that removal of all the children was necessary to protect them "from imminent risk to their health."


Lendl Says the Spirit Is Still There
If 32 is too old in a sport overrun with players born after 1970, that is news to Ivan Lendl.
If he has lost a step or two and perhaps a couple of miles off the high, hard one, that is bigger news to Lendl.
And if marriage and a family are supposed to create a life incongruous with the demands of professional tennis, that, to Lendl, is simplified, unreadable fiction.
That last point has been a contention of John McEnroe's, directly related to his struggle to re-establish himself as a Big Mac and Cheese of the men's tennis tour.
A polar opposite of McEnroe's in every imaginable way with the obvious exception of their bank accounts, Lendl today predictably dismissed the notion that the three daughters born to him and his wife, Samantha, over the last 15 months bear any responsibility for the noticable, if not considerable, decline in his game.
"Not at all," Lendl said following his 6-2, 6-2 wipeout of Arnaud Boetsch of France in today's second round of the Volvo International, when asked if juggling his family and career had anguished him as much as McEnroe, who later struggled mightily with his game and temper before defeating Luis Mattar of Brazil, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4.
"It hasn't changed the way I approach the game at all. It just makes more pleasant the time I spend after tennis." Golf Put Aside
Once upon a recent time, Lendl would finish off a match like today's 62-minute exercise, spar with the media until reporters tired of him slipping questions and head for the golf course.
That is one change in his life of fatherhood he will concede.
Golf, a longtime passion, has been replaced on Lendl's by-hours in his ample Greenwich, Conn., backyard.
"I've played golf three times since January," Lendl said.
He said he would take the children with him to the course, if only he could keep them quiet.
So that is another alteration: he who used unspectacular talent and indomitable will to become a groundstroking behemoth, who worked desperately to control his environment and leave nothing to chance, now gets run ragged by 15-month old Marika and his twins, Isabelle and Carolyn, who were born July 29.
To a degree unmatched since he became one of tennis's best, if not popular, players, opponents this year have also had their way with Lendl.
Currently ranked fourth in the world, his lowest standing since August 1982, Lendl has one tournament victory in 1991, though he did reach the finals of four other tournaments, including the Australian Open.
Losing to Lesser Lights
But his 1991 record does suggest another similarity to the 33-year-old McEnroe: he is losing to players who, from a rankings perspective, are not even visible in his rear-view mirror.
His eight-month roster of conquerors includes Wally Masur, Cristiano Caratti, Omar Camporese, Magnus Gustafsson, Renzo Furlan, Grant Connell, Andrei Chesnokov and David Wheaton.
As proud and stubborn as a boxer in twilight, Lendl refuses to acknowledge time as a factor, mentally or physically.
His problem, he insisted, has been nothing greater than a flick of his surgically repaired right wrist.
"I was having a pretty good results until mid-April, and then I hurt the hand," he said.
"Now it's just a question of hitting balls and playing points, points, points."
The challengers get younger all the time and there seem to be more of them than ever.
He concedes them nothing.
Unlike McEnroe, who plays for one last fortnight of Grand Slam greatness, Lendl still entertains notions of again being No. 1, at the same time admitting his obsession to win Wimbledon, the one Grand Slam event to elude him.
"My expectations are not any different than they used to be," he said.
"Definitely not. I think it's possible, but it's difficult to say what the chances are," he said of the prospect he would reach No. 1.
"Every year the game is getting deeper."
Lendl said he never believed Pete Sampras could win the United States Open last summer, that Jim Courier would win the French Open last June or that Michael Stich would win Wimbledon last month.
"You have the top three or four but the next 15 can win, I guess," he said.
His sigh suggested that life is much too unpredictable now, on and off the court.
Durie Stuns Garrison
MANHATTAN BEACH, Calif., Aug. 14 (AP) -- Jo Durie stunned fourth-seeded Zina Garrison, 6-3, 6-7, 7-5, eliminating the world's 11th-best player today in the second round of the Virginia Slims of Los Angeles tournament.
Durie, ranked 160th, won the first set of the nearly three-hour match even though Garrison had four break points in a fifth game that went to deuce eight times.
Durie held on to win to take a 4-1 lead.
The ninth game went to deuce six times with Garrison fighting off four match points to take a 5-4 lead.
"On the game that I was serving for the match, I felt a cramp in my left leg, and I couldn't do anything about it," Garrison said.
Becker Advances Easily
INDIANAPOLIS, Aug. 14 (AP) -- Top-seeded Boris Becker easily advanced today to the third round of the United States Hardcourts tennis tournament, while Tim Mayotte's booming serve powered him past No. 4 Guy Forget.
Becker spent more time waiting than he did playing, but defeated David Pate, 6-3, 6-2, in their rain-delayed second-round match.
Meanwhile, Mayotte had four of his eight aces in one game en route to a 7-6, 6-1 upset of Forget while winning on 82 percent of his first serves.


Helping Hands Await Immigrants in Ontario
Toronto Welcome House, an Ontario agency helping 40,000 immigrants a year get jobs and settle into this city's ethnic enclaves, is something of a family enterprise for the Xus, formerly of Beijing.
Both Xu Huilian, who holds a doctorate in plant science, and his wife, Xu Liwei, who has a master's in economics, are using it to improve their English and learn computer skills.


Tartabull Slam in 11th Sends Yanks Packing
A pitcher's duel was the last thing anyone expected last night at Yankee Stadium.
Eric Plunk versus Mark Davis?
A couple of relief pitchers starting their first games of the year for the Yankees and the Royals?
Let's see them pitch past the third inning.
Both did, but it did not matter in the end.
What mattered was that Yankee Manager Stump Merrill let Steve Farr talk him into walking George Brett to load the bases in the 11th inning with two out so Farr could face Danny Tartabull.
No matter.
Tartabull clubbed a grand slam off an 0-2 pitch off the plate that lifted the Kansas City Royals to a 5-1 victory over the Yankees.


Dow Slips 3.35 While Smaller Issues Gain
Blue-chip stocks ended up giving ground yesterday after making strong gains earlier, while smaller issues advanced.
The Dow Jones industrial average fell 3.35 points, to 3,005.37, while the Nasdaq composite, made up of smaller issues, scored a new all-time high for the second consecutive day, rising 3.28, to 517.68.


Gravestone Quest That Led To Rampage Ends in Arrests
For Adam Orna's 18th birthday last week, the police said, the Queens teen-ager and some friends decided on the perfect present: a gravestone.
Instead, hundreds of graves were vandalized, and Mr.
Orna and his friends were arrested.


Clark Clifford: Dupe or Knave?
Of all the mysteries surrounding the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, one of the most baffling concerns Clark Clifford.
Was this venerated Washington insider duped by crooks?
Or did he know, or suspect, that B.C.C.I. secretly owned the big Washington bank holding company he headed for the last decade?
Mr.
Clifford's sterling service to Presidents Truman, Kennedy and Johnson as counselor and confidant, and his influence in the Democratic Party, earned him a towering reputation.
His bravery as Secretary of Defense in standing up to Lyndon Johnson on the conduct of the Vietnam War added to a lustrous career.


The Road To Real Campaign Reform
Debate on a campaign reform bill is likely to be furious when Congress reconvenes next month.
The Senate has already passed a partisan Democratic measure, and the House will start considering a similar bill.
But the debate will be off the mark because the Democrats will try to focus on campaign spending limits.
The issue shouldn't be about how much money is spent, but about where the money comes from.


Events: Embellishments, Indoors and Out
Wright's Interiors  American Craft Museum, 40 West 53d Street; (212) 956-3535.
An exhibition of decorative objects and furnishings designed by Frank Lloyd Wright, including tables, chairs, leaded glass windows and glazed porcelain dishes, starts today and runs through Oct. 27.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Tuesday through Sunday (until 8 P.M. Tuesday and Friday).
Admission: $4.50; $2 for students and those 65 and older; members and children 12 and younger, free.


Will Diversity Subvert Vision In a New York City District?
As much as any of New York City's 51 new Council seats, the five miles and many neighborhoods of District 7 illustrate the difficulty of mandating diversity and matching a seat to a particular racial or ethnic group.
The complexities come in the form of more than 66,000 registered voters of all stripes -- poor blacks in the public housing projects of Manhattan Valley; upper-middle-class blacks and whites who own homes in a historic section of Harlem; Irish and Jewish New Yorkers who fled to Inwood when blacks began moving into the area in the 1950's and 60's, and a relatively recent wave of immigrants, primarily Hispanic, in Washington Heights.
New Yorkers of All Persuasions
When the New York City Districting Commission created District 7, its members expected that it would be represented by a black who would replace the white incumbent whose district was being folded into the new tuning-forked shape creation.


Tyson Named in Suit
Former heavyweight champion MIKE TYSON is a "serial buttocks fondler" who molested 10 of 23 contestants at the 1991 Miss Black America Pageant, the pageant owner, J. MORRIS ANDERSON, alleged in a lawsuit filed on Tuesday in Philadelphia.
The $21 million lawsuit charges that the reputation of the 24-year-old contest has been ruined by allegations that Tyson sexually assaulted some of the contestants.


Corrections
An article on Friday about a dispute over plans for a movie about Malcolm X misstated his age at his death.
He was 39 years old.


U.S. BACKING AWAY FROM SAYING DIOXIN IS A DEADLY PERIL
In a rare official reassessment, several top Federal health authorities are backing away from the position that the chemical compound dioxin is toxic enemy No. 1.
Exposure to the chemical, once thought to be much more hazardous than chain smoking, is now considered by some experts to be no more risky than spending a week sunbathing.
For years the Federal Government has required industrial companies to invest billions of dollars to prevent dioxin's release into the environment and to clean up what is already there.
In the most dramatic move to protect citizens, the Government in 1982 and early 1983 permanently evacuated all 2,240 residents of Times Beach, Mo., where the dirt roads had become contaminated with dioxin.
Review Is Begun
But now some scientists believe that the Government's stringent health standards for dioxin are not supported by the latest scientific evidence.
The Federal Environmental Protection Agency has opened a yearlong review to develop a new formal opinion of the risks of dioxin.
"I don't want to prejudge the issue, but we are seeing new information on dioxin that suggests a lower risk assessment for dioxin should be applied," said William K. Reilly, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, who asked for the review.
"I know the stakes and that I'm unraveling something here," Mr.
Reilly said.
"There is not much precedence in the Federal establishment for pulling back from a judgment of toxicity. But we need to be prepared to adjust, to raise or lower standards, as new science becomes available."  Hindsight on Evacuation
The human dimension of this change in approach emerged most vividly several months ago when the Federal scientist who made the original decision to evacuate Times Beach said he believed he had erred.
"We used the best scientific evidence at the time to make the decision we did," said the scientist, Dr.
Vernon N. Houk.
"Given what we now know about this chemical's toxicity and its effects on human health, it looks as though the evacuation was unnecessary," Dr.
Houk, the assistant Surgeon General and Director of the Center for Environmental Health and Injury Control at the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta, said in a recent interview.
Environmental groups say the latest data confirm the original assessment of dioxin's danger, and they assert that the Government's changing position is a political move aimed at reducing pollution control and cleanup costs for industry.
But Dr.
Houk said, "If it's a carcinogen, it's a very weak carcinogen and Federal policy needs to reflect that."
The revised view of the dangers of dioxin has raised serious concern in the E.P.A., which used many of the same procedures to determine the hazards of dioxin as it did to set air and water pollution limits for most of the other chemicals that the agency regulates.
If Dr.
Houk is right and dioxin is much less dangerous than had been determined, that could mean the Government's regulations for other compounds will need to be adjusted.
Under the current Federal guidelines, the E.P.A. says that ingesting more than .006 trillionths of a gram of dioxin for each kilogram (2.2 pounds) of body weight daily over an average lifetime may cause one fatal cancer among each million people.
Thus a man weighing 80 kilograms, or 176 pounds, is urged by the Government not to eat, drink, or breathe more than 0.5 trillionths of a gram of dioxin every day.
Such an amount would be roughly equivalent to slicing a grain of sand a billion times.
Standard Used for Water
The same statistical method used to calculate the safe exposure to dioxin was also used by the Environmental Protection Agency to set a safe level in water of 13 parts per quintillion and by the Centers for Disease Control at 1 part per billion in soil.
The World Health Organization supports the revised view of dioxin's danger and suggests that the United States exposure standards are wrong.
Earlier this year the group officially set a new limit for the daily intake of dioxin at 10 trillionths of a gram of dioxin per kilogram of body weight, a concentration that is 1,600 times greater than the level set by the Environmental Protection Agency and closer to the concentration considered scientifically accurate by Dr.
Houk and others.
Scientists at leading environmental groups say the Government's original assessment of dioxin's dangers is supported by the new data.
They also contend that the researchers are narrowly interpreting the new data to reduce the cleanup and disposal costs of industries whose manufacturing processes produce dioxin as a byproduct, particularly paper pulp mills, hazardous waste incinerators and municipal incinerators.
"Nothing that has been learned about dioxin since 1985 when E.P.A.  first published its risk assessment finding on dioxin in the environment supports a revision of science-based policy or action," said Dr.
Ellen K. Silbergeld, professor of pathology at the University of Maryland in Baltimore.
"We know more about the cellular events that appear to underlie dioxin's multiple toxic effects, and what we know confirms that it is a remarkably potent agent." 'Protected Industries'
Dr.
Mary H. O'Brien, a botanist and a director of the Dioxin-Organochlorines Center, a research group in Eugene, Ore., said: "What's being protected here is not people or the environment but industries favored by the Government. The Government begins with the assumption that these industrial activities have to go on and they adjust the data to make the existing pollution practices acceptable."
Soil at 28 sites in the St.
Louis region, including Times Beach, was found to be contaminated with dioxin at levels higher than 1,000 parts per billion.
Because the Centers for Disease Control thought the exposure to dioxin would be highest at Times Beach, the state and Federal governments bought the property of residents for $37 million.
Cost at $100 Million
Cleanup work at the other sites has been going on for a decade and has cost $100 million.
About 100,000 cubic yards of soil contaminated with dioxin from the sites is being stored, awaiting the construction of an incinerator at Times Beach.
It is expected to take 10 more years and cost $150 million more to tear down the buildings at Times Beach, burn the contaminated soil, bury debris in specially designed landfills and convert the land into a park.
The work is being paid for by the Syntex Corporation, under a court-sanctioned agreement with the Enviornmental Protection Agency that will not be affected by any reassessment of dioxin's danger, said Gary J. Pendergrass, who heads the Syntex cleanup program.
Produced during chemical reactions that involve heat and chlorine compounds, dioxins comes in 75 different varieties, with one form thought to be the most dangerouus: 2,3,7,8 tetrachlorodibenzo dioxin or TCDD.
In the early 1980's, the compound's deadly reputation was based in large measure on its ability to cause cancer in laboratory animals, even when the animals were exposed to very small doses.
Guinea pigs fed minute amounts died within weeks.
Subsequent studies have shown trout and salmon may be even more sensitive.
Studies of workers exposed to dioxin in chemical plants during routine operations, and as a result of explosions, showed conclusively that exposure to dioxin at levels of several hundred parts per billion could cause chloracne, a potentially disfiguring skin disease.
Other effects were less certain, said scientists in and out of Government.
For every study that found dioxin could raise a person's chance of developing cancer or some other disease, another study reported that there was no effect at all.
At the center of the debate is an inexact science known as risk assessment.
It uses animal studies and human health studies, when possible, combined with statistics and formal scientific assumptions and a great deal of expert opinion to develop an estimate of how much exposure to a chemical is likely to cause cancer and birth defects in people.
The technique, which the experts agree is as much art as science, was widely employed by the Government in the 1970's and 1980's because there was almost no other scientifically acceptable means for determining a compound's hazards.
But because every step in the process is open to interpretation, two scientists looking at the same data can come up with sharply differing conclusions.
Scientists say better techniques are now available to more accurately reflect the toxic properties of chemicals, particularly those used by molecular biologists.
More is known about how chemicals react with biological organisms, how they exert their toxic effects on cells and what the ultimate result is likely to be.
Industrial groups argue that the Government's risk assessment work needs to be modernized because the old methods have produced outdated environmental standards that are costing them billions of dollars in unnecessary pollution control equipment.
Vietnam veterans exposed to dioxin in the defoliant Agent Orange blame it for cancer, nervous system disorders, a host of other injuries, and for producing birth defects in their children.
Legislation passed this year requires the Department of Veterans Affairs to pay disability benefits to soldiers who can prove they were exposed to Agent Orange and suffer from chloracne, non-Hodgkins lymphoma, soft-tissue sarcoma and a liver disease called porphyria cutanea tarda.
A Death and Dioxin
In lawsuit involving a death attributed to exposure to dioxin, a St.
Louis jury last month awarded $1.5 million to the family of a truck driver who died in 1984 of soft-tissue sarcoma.
The loading area where he worked had been sprayed with the same oil that contaminated Times Beach.
In the late 1970's, dioxin contamination lead to the ban of a weed killer, 2,4,5-T, a component of Agent Orange, once used widely in American farming and forestry.
The environmental agency said it caused miscarriages and birth defects.
In the 1980's the paper industry came under criticism for producing dioxin when bleaching pulp, polluting rivers and streams.
For the former residents of Times Beach, the new debate over dioxin has added to the hurt, anger and exasperation that many feel every day.
"You just don't know what to think," said Marilyn Leistner, the former Mayor of Times Beach who now works for the state at the site.
"If dioxin is less dangerous, that should be good news. The truth is, it's not. People have been hurt, their lives ruined by what happened in this area. One minute it's bad. The next it's good. It's a roller coaster that just won't stop."
For Mrs.
Leistner and the other 2,239 former residents of Times Beach, the introduction to dioxin came out of the blue in December 1982.
Soil samples the Environmental Protection Agency collected weeks earlier contained dioxin at levels exceeding 100 parts for every billion parts of soil.
The agency's samples had been taken as part of an investigation of dioxin contamination in the St.
Louis region.
The inquiry began after a hazardous waste trucking company sprayed roads and parking lots for dust control with waste oil containing dioxin in the early 1970's.


It's Thursday in the Park With Paul
This is what Ken Harlin did at lunchtime yesterday: Checked the weather forecast for today. (Humid, with a chance of thundershowers.) Looked at the sky. (Hazier by the minute.) Changed his mind about spending last night in Central Park. (Some New Yorkers will consider doing anything for a good seat at tonight's Paul Simon concert.)
Almost anything, anyway, which is why Mr.
Harlin set his alarm clock for 6 A.M. and planned to head for the park as soon as he got up.
Mr.
Harlin -- who is 44 years old and says he has attended "every single New York Philharmonic concert and Metropolitan Opera performance in the park for the last 15 years, even when it rained" -- said he would stake out his territory and plant the red-and-yellow flag he made during Mr.
Simon's last concert in the park, with Art Garfunkel, in 1981.


Company to Repair Home Heaters Over Fire Risk
Under an agreement reached with a Federal consumer panel, the manufacturer of a popular home heater has agreed to repair up to 3.6 million of the oil-filled portable electric devices after Government research indicated that they posed a fire hazard.


Ex-Hostage Arrives in U.S. for Tests
Throwing his arms over his head in jubilation, Edward Austin Tracy returned to the United States today, his first visit to this country since 1965 and one in which doctors will try to determine the effects of his nearly five years as a hostage in Lebanon.
Met by more than 100 well-wishers, doctors and a few family members, Mr.
Tracy, the 60-year-old American freed on Sunday, smiled broadly at the crowd gathered at Hanscom Air Force Base, 20 miles west of Boston.


Corrections
The Talking Deals column in Business Day on Aug. 1, about Time Warner Inc., misstated the amount of stock rights distributed by the company in its recent offering.
For each share of common stock, a shareholder received six-tenths of a right to buy a share of common stock at $80.


Alaska Offers Californians An Additional Water Spigot
California gets two-thirds of its gasoline from Alaska, so why not water also?
That, in essence, is the proposal Gov.
Walter J. Hickel of Alaska brought to Southern California today to solve this parched region's water problems.
"We have an awful lot of fresh water," he said.
"Can we get it down cheap enough? That depends on how thirsty you get."


Camcorder! Action! Lives Become Roles
Enough of "America's Funniest Home Videos." Let's look at America's Phoniest Home Videos.
The script for one of them was recently described in the syndicated newspaper column Dear Abby.
"It all started," writes Retired in San Diego, "when my son bought one of those video cameras. He's been driving everyone crazy sticking that camera in their faces."


Checketts Counting On Ewing Back at Center
Forget the talk of Patrick Ewing's possible escape from New York via the trade route.
Dave Checketts, the Knicks' president, said yesterday that he expected Ewing to be the starting center when New York opens its National Basketball Association season on Nov. 1 against the Magic in Orlando, Fla.


Old-Fashioned Coolers
Angelo L. Montaperto Company  262 Mott Street (near Houston Street),  New York, N.Y. 10012; (212) 226-4991.
Angelo L. Montaperto restores antique furniture and specializes in marquetry, wood carving and French polishing.
But when the weather is warm, clients often bring him decorative European fans to repair.


New York City Sues Landlord Of Produce Market in Bronx
New York City announced a $1.8 million lawsuit yesterday seeking back rent from the landlord of the Bronx Terminal Market, where reports of an assortment of illegal activities are being investigated.
The suit against the Arol Development Corporation was announced by city Commissioner Wallace L. Ford of the Department of Business Services in a news conference at the market.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
IT'S harder than it looks to sand wood or other materials to a smooth surface.
How coarse or fine should the sandpaper be?
What kind of backing should it have?
What should the abrasive be made of, and how dense should it be?
One step to successful sanding is selecting the right grade or grades of sandpaper and using them in the correct order.
These grades, with their grit numbers and typical uses, are most common:


Hoping for a Big Breakthrough at the Met Open
Mike Diffley has been on the fringe of winning a major golf tournament in the metropolitan area several times in his nine-year career as a professional, but he has failed to break through, or get it down from the fringe, as they say.
The left-handed Diffley, head professional at Pelham Country Club in Pelham Manor, N.Y., has never been closer to the hole going into the final day of a major tournament than he was today after the second round of the 77th edition of the Met Open, which has prize money of $75,000.


Market Place; Valuing Stocks In Terms of Gold
THE American stock market finally reached a new high this year, breaking the record set 15 years ago.
But even now, prices are only 11 percent above the peak in 1976.
If that paragraph sounds absurd, it is because you are no doubt used to thinking of stock prices in terms of dollars.
In terms of gold, it is true.


Teaching Albany About Hate Crimes
Two weeks ago the Houston police began a decoy operation to stop a wave of violence against homosexuals, including the July 4 killing of a man leaving a gay bar.
Within a week, 3 undercover officers were attacked and 13 people had been arrested.
Such "gay bashing" incidents persuaded the police department to expand its definition of hate crimes to include those who are motivated by sexual preference as well as race, religion or ethnicity.
New York's State Senate, which for four years has resisted passing a law that would increase penalties for bias-related crimes, could learn a lesson from Houston.


Judge Says Copyright Covers Writer's Ideas Of a Jefferson Affair
Whether Thomas Jefferson and a mulatto slave named Sally Hemings were lovers may never be conclusively known.
But it is clear from a recent court ruling that imagined scenes from the former President's love life may be protected by copyright.
This verdict has emerged from a two-year court battle between two authors, both of whom were inspired by a historian's account of Jefferson's involvement with the slave, whom he owned.


Drug-Sniffing Dogs Win Taste of Fame
They don't wear uniforms and their hair is a bit shaggy.
But the heroes of the newest series of trading cards are nothing if not team players.
There's Moose from Virginia, Charlie and Magnum from Texas, Dufus and Tommy from New York.
They don't play baseball or star in TV shows.


South Africa Won't Compete In the World Championships
South African track and field officials have voted not to accept an invitation to the world championships, which begin next week in Tokyo.
The decision was announced in Johannesburg yesterday, the last day officials had to accept an invitation from the sport's world governing body, the International Amateur Athletic Federation.
South Africa would have had a team of nearly 30 athletes who met international qualifying standards.
But enough officials of a newly formed national federation in South Africa, an amalgam of three former organizations representing different racial groups, thought it was still too soon for the country to return to international competition.


Ruth a Strikeout For Oriole Park
The Baltimore Orioles' new ball park could be named after the team or the rail yard the stadium is built near, but it won't be named after Babe Ruth, who was a Baltimore native, a state official said.
Bruce H. Hoffman, director of the Maryland Stadium Authority, said on Tuesday that Gov.
William Donald Schaefer and the Orioles' owner, Eli Jacobs, had narrowed the name possibilities down to either Oriole Park or Camden Yards.


Domestic Auto Sales Fall 9.4%
The recovering United States automotive market stumbled in early August, as sales of cars and trucks made in North America fell 9.4 percent from levels a year earlier.
Moreover, the seasonally adjusted annual rate of car sales from Aug. 1 to 10 was 6.2 million, down from 6.7 million in late July and 6.9 million for all of July.
The rate for the year so far has been 6.2 million, including the dismal sales of late winter and early spring.


To Avoid Shopping in the Dark
New Yorkers lost an important consumer protection last June when the State Legislature, under intense pressure from the food industry, let expire a longstanding law requiring that clear price tags be placed on individual supermarket items.
The New York City Council can set a better example when it takes up the issue today.
On the agenda is a measure that would reinstate the requirement of prices on each item in city supermarkets.
Such item pricing is far more helpful to most consumers than is a price label attached to a shelf, both for comparison shopping and to guard against overcharges at the checkout counter.


J.F.K. Journal; His Drill: Keep Jet Set Cavity-Free
It may happen, if you are situated just right, that an Afghan Freedom Fighter will walk into your office surrounded by armed guards and you will welcome him as if discovering an old school chum in the middle of the desert.
He will point to a dark corner in his mouth that has not been looked at in years and you will heal it in time for him to catch the next plane back to Kabul.
Upon his leaving, you will present him with a toothbrush with your office phone number.
You are the airport dentist.
The job is filled right now by the only sort of man who could find contentment a floor above the main greeting area and down an anonymous corridor in the International Arrivals Building at Kennedy Airport.
Dr.
Robert Trager stands at about 5 feet 4 inches tall, has a smooth, round face and impossibly pale eyes that place him unavoidably in the background.
But there is shrewdness behind the eyes.


As Salvador Talks Halt, Fighting Flares
After spurts of progress toward ending the 11-year-old Salvadoran civil war, the negotiations have run into roadblocks, and both sides show signs of wanting to raise the already intense level of combat.
People involved say the talks have been halted by a series of interlocking conflicts.
They include the timing for constitutional and military reforms and their linkage to a cease-fire, questions of the territory to be left to the guerrillas and the kidnappings of two members of the governing party.


Corrections
A front-page article on July 9 about the use of the chemical Alar on apples misstated the Federal law governing Environmental Protection Agency decisions on banning chemicals believed to cause cancer.
The law requires the agency to balance the risks and the economic benefits of such chemicals.
It is an agency goal to ban chemicals that could cause more than one cancer case per one million people over a lifetime.
The error was pointed out by readers as early as July 11; this correction was delayed by a succession of editing lapses.


Reform New York City Council's Outdated Voting Procedures; Whose 'Best Interests'?
To the Editor:
Peter F. Vallone's "What City Council Did in Budget Negotiations" (letter, Aug. 5) is most disturbing.
He writes, "our goal is to act in the best interests of the entire city."


Tandem Buys Stake in S.I.I.
Tandem Computers Inc. said today that it had taken an equity stake in System Integrators Inc., a Sacramento, Calif., producer of automated publishing systems for newspapers.
The size of the stake in the privately held company was not disclosed.
Tandem also said that System Integrators would become its preferred vendor to the newspaper industry, formalizing a relationship that has existed for about 10 years.


INSIDE
Economic War in Yugoslavia
As rail and air traffic falters and rival republics reject checks from each other's banks, the Yugoslav economy is paying the price.
Page A6.
Salomon's Misdeed
Salomon Brothers acknowledged to the Government that it violated rules governing bids for Treasury bonds at the April auction.
Page D1.
Auto Sales Fall 9.4%
The recovering auto market stumbled in early August, as sales of North American-made vehicles fell 9.4 percent from a year earlier.
Page D1.
Jefferson and Copyright
A judge ruled that copyright laws protect a novelist's imaginings about Thomas Jefferson's love affair with a slave.
Page C13.


Old Sewers Tied to Closing Of Nearly 2,400 Beaches
Obsolete sewage treatment systems, coupled with rapidly increasing levels of polluted storm water draining from cities and suburbs, are responsible for closing thousands of beaches each year, an environmental group said today.
In a new study, the Natural Resources Defense Council documented the reasons for 2,400 beach closings in 10 states in 1989 and 1990 and found almost all of them were caused by antiquated sewer systems.


Too Much Hanging-Around Time
Is that a worried look across Joe Prokop's face?
Prokop has been the Jets' punter the last three seasons.
The problem is he has a sore thigh and isn't punting these days.
And on Saturday night, in the exposure of a Jets-Giants game, a virtual unknown named Louie Aguiar will be trying to boom them for the Jets.


Hill &amp; Knowlton Makes Appointments in 2 Units
Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc., New York, announced two senior executive appointments yesterday at Hill &amp; Knowlton U.S.A. and at its New York office.
Kenneth Altman, 39 years old, an executive vice president at Hill &amp; Knowlton U.S.A. and the head of the media services group in the New York office, has been promoted to a new position, chief operating officer of Hill &amp; Knowlton U.S.A., a company spokesman said.
The spokesman added that Mr.
Altman's new duties, to carry out policy and coordinate activities at different offices of the public relations firm, had previously been handled by Thomas E. Eidson, president of Hill &amp; Knowlton U.S.A. and chief operating officer of Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc., to whom Mr.
Altman will report.


Martin X. Solow, 71, An Advertising Writer
Martin X. Solow, an advertising writer who played a major role in broadening the use of Yiddish words in mainstream American advertising, died on Tuesday at Southampton Hospital on Long Island.
He was 71 years old and lived in Sag Harbor, L.I.
He died of a heart attack, his son Steven said.


Scientist Again Defends His AIDS Research
A scientist charged with possible misconduct in connection with the discovery of the AIDS virus has declared that he is innocent and has attacked the way the National Institutes of Health investigated him, according to reports in the journal Science.
The scientist, Dr.
Mikulas Popovic, was the chief deputy to Dr.
Robert Gallo in the N.I.H. laboratory, which shared credit for identifying the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, as the cause of AIDS.
Scientists have been arguing for several years about who first discovered the virus, who first proved that it was the cause of the disease, and ultimately who should profit from the commercialization of a test for the AIDS virus antibodies, the most widely used test for infection with the virus.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.65
5.56
8.18
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.30
5.30
7.46
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.35
5.40
7.35
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.64
7.73
8.50
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.06
8.16
8.75
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.05
*9.12
9.85
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.03
7.04
7.45
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Route Sales Put T.W.A. in Black
Trans World Airlines Inc. said yesterday that it earned $336.9 million in the second quarter, mainly because its sale of prized London routes erased what otherwise would have been a loss.
T.W.A. said its $53 million operating loss was more than offset when the carrier sold London routes out of New York, Los Angeles and Boston to American Airlines for $445 million.


U.S. May Use Smaller Satellites to Study Earth
Instead of launching a few giant satellites in a major program to study the Earth's environment, the space agency is considering using numerous smaller spacecraft, the agency's chief scientist said today.
The official, Dr.
Lennard A. Fisk, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's associate administrator for space science, said the change would give the project more flexibility and assurance against catastrophic failure.
He said the agency was studying whether to divide the experiments that had been planned for six large, complex Earth Observing System satellites among as many as 18 smaller spacecraft flying in similar orbits.


3 Children Die in House Fire
Three children died early today in a fire that engulfed their mountain home here, 80 miles east of Los Angeles.
Their father was severely burned when he rescued three other children, the authorities said.
The bodies of two girls, 5 and 6 years old, and a 2-year-old boy were found in two bedrooms of the house, said Roy Kinney, an investigator for the San Bernardino County Coroner's office.
The names were withheld because the mother had not been notified, he said.


Manufacturers Hanover And Chemical Fill Jobs
The Chemical Banking Corporation and the Manufacturers Hanover Corporation yesterday announced a new round of senior executive appointments to become effective when they merge at the end of the year.
The 16 positions filled yesterday are in addition to the 13 executives named in mid-July when the merger was announced.
Analysts said the most recent appointments were an effort to prevent defections by top officers who are worried that their jobs could be in jeopardy.
The companies expect to cut about 6,200 jobs either through dismissals or attrition as part of a plan to reduce expenses by $650 million in three years.


Prime Posts A Deficit
Prime Computer Inc., the ailing minicomputer manufacturer that was acquired by J.H.
Whitney &amp; Company in 1990, announced a second-quarter loss of $284 million along with plans to lay off another 900 employees.
The deficit resulted from a one-time restructuring charge of $304.5 million to cover layoffs and the closing of several operations.
Of that charge, $225 million is a non-cash charge for accelerated amortization of good will, according to Russell E. Planitzer, chairman of Prime and also chairman of DR Holding Inc., the holding company created to oversee the acquisition of Prime.


Unisys Near Radar Accord
The Commerce Department announced today the settlement of a price dispute with the Unisys Corporation that clears the way for the company to complete the installation of a new national weather radar system expected to cost more than $1 billion.
The settlement calls for a payment of $56 million to Unisys to cover added production costs in developing the complex radar system.


Bombay Journal; Coming Out in India, With a Nod From the Gods
Indian movie music blared over tinny speakers as two young men in tight jeans squeezed through the open front of a small bar, just steps from the waterfront Taj Mahal Hotel, and through a door into a dim, air-conditioned room in the back.
At about a dozen tables, well-dressed men with short haircuts, some with earrings, sat talking loudly, drinking beer.
Some of the men bent their heads over the table in private conversation.
Some held hands.


Amid the Ruins, A Ball for the 90's
They call it the Creditors' Ball: a hundred or so bankruptcy lawyers, bankers and investors, sipping cocktails and feasting on shrimp in the Hamptons in an unabashed celebration of the impoverished 1990's.
This party of the well-paid, the well-connected and the well-coiffed is quickly becoming the social event of the bankruptcy set, just as the Predators' Ball was a highlight of Wall Street's social calendar.
That Beverly Hills extravaganza, sponsored by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., ended with the brokerage's downfall in 1990.


Professor Steps Off a Plane Into a Furor Over His Words
A City College professor stepped off an airplane last night and into the controversy that has been swirling since he delivered an angry attack on Jews at a state-sponsored cultural festival last month.
But the professor, Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., did not hear the cheers and jeers of hundreds who jammed the International Arrivals Building at Kennedy International Airport as he returned from a trip to Africa.
Dr.
Jeffries was quietly taken off his Air Afrique flight and whisked through customs, out of earshot of the crowd.


Once Upon a T Square, Long, Long Ago
WHEN the next generation of children reads fairy tales like "Beauty and the Beast," it may learn not only that beauty isn't skin deep, but that style matters too.
Next month four fairy tales, each illustrated or written by the architects Charles Moore, Robert A. M. Stern, Stanley Tigerman and John Hejduk, will be published by Rizzoli.
Since adults generally choose books for young children, the series is for those who fancy themselves members of the design cognoscenti.
"We're dealing with parents who care about how their children look at things," said Howard Reeves, the editor of children's books at Rizzoli.


New York Squirrels Say Nuts to Drugs
To the Editor:
More on "drug-crazed" squirrels in New York, as alleged in a recent story in The Daily Mirror, a British tabloid (news article, Aug. 2).
I wish to report that the squirrels of Washington Square Park can still navigate busy streets, cross dog- and cat-infested gardens and climb up four-flight fire escapes for their daily ration of nuts.


Pop in Review
Paul Bley, Gary Peacock  and Jimmy Guiffre  Sweet Basil
A trio including the pianist Paul Bley, the bassist Gary Peacock and the saxophonist Jimmy Guiffre made it to Sweet Basil on Tuesday night, and until a death rattle in the sound system derailed the show, they were moving in the right direction.
The trio eased from free improvisation built around motifs to swinging and expansive standards, and they made the case for empathy as the dominant rule in improvisation.


McRae Fields Questions Gracefully
Brian McRae is tired of hearing the same questions over and over, but he fields them as gracefully as he does a pop fly.
He is the center fielder for the Kansas City Royals and his father, Hal, manages the team.
Look out, here come those questions.
McRae expects them in each city, just as he expects a fastball on a 2-0 count.
Only three other players have played on teams managed by their fathers, so McRae knows the questions will not stop soon.


A 'Citizen Statesman' Faces New Challenge
Nicholas deBelleville Katzenbach, who was named on Tuesday to succeed Clark M. Clifford as chairman of First American Bankshares Inc., has many of the personal attributes of his predecessor: He is a luminary of the Democratic Party, was an adviser to Presidents and has never worked in a bank before.
But by accepting the post at the troubled bank, which was recently revealed to be secretly controlled by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, Mr.
Katzenbach is expanding the role he has developed over the last three decades as a troubleshooter in both politics and business.


In This Schoolhouse, No Fear Of Breaking the Rules
JOHN FUNT went for a drive five years ago and fell in love.
The object of his affection was 90 years old, had had a face lift of sorts and numerous instances of minor surgery, but the ravages of time and neglect had still taken their toll.
What Mr.
Funt saw as he wound in and around the verdant landscape of Litchfield County was a lonely school house, deserted first by children and later by adults and reaching out for rescue.


Review/Theater; Light, Outdoor Fare Based on a Novel
Just before dusk, three mysterious hooded strangers rush through the audience uttering incantations and a rider on horseback races across a field.
The Williamstown Theater Festival's free outdoor version of "The Moonstone" begins with a swirl of suspense, as befits an adaptation of a novel by Wilkie Collins.
"The Moonstone" and other Collins works like "The Woman in White" were forerunners of modern detective fiction, and, as such, are naturals for light summer theatrical fare.
This was the case several years ago when the New York Shakespeare Festival presented its open air version of Charles Dickens's "Mystery of Edwin Drood."


For Immigrants' Children, an Adult Role
As more children take on the role of interpreter for parents who do not speak English, some social science experts express concern that the practice could interfere with the children's psychological development.
City officials say 42 percent of the 57,000 students in Boston's public schools are from homes where the principal language is not English and parents speak little or no English.


BRIEFS
*
Hoescht-Roussel Agri-Vet Co., Somerville, N.J., said its North American Animal Health Business unit would restructure its organization effective Sept. 3. *
NovaCare Inc., Valley Forge, Pa., said it had completed its previously announced merger with Rehab Systems Co.


N.C.A.A. to Alter Hockey Tourney
Independent college hockey teams will have to earn berths in the 12-team Division I tournament after 1993, the National Collegiate Athletic Association announced today.
Phil Buttafuoco, N.C.A.A. assistant director of championships, said the association had accepted a recommendation by the Division I ice hockey committee to end the eight automatic berths for independent teams.


Cash and Debt Concessions Save Oakland Tribune
Robert C. Maynard, the owner of The Tribune in Oakland, Calif., told cheering employees yesterday that the debt-ridden and unprofitable paper had been saved by concessions by the Gannett Company regarding a debt and by an infusion of cash from the Freedom Forum, a journalism foundation.
"It's wonderful to be able to tell employees they have jobs and tell a town it has a newspaper," said Mr.
Maynard, who is the only black owner-publisher of a general-interest newspaper in the nation.


Subaru Says Buy Machine, Not Mystique
AN eagerly awaited campaign for Subaru of America, the first from its new agency, Wieden &amp; Kennedy, breaks ground by introducing a healthy dose of reality into the fantasy world of auto advertising.
The campaign, scheduled to be announced at a news conference today, portrays Subaru as the right car for consumers who, when confronted by the typical hype and hoopla, assume a cynical, show-me stance.


CHRONICLE
They are writers from different literary worlds who have sold at least one million books each, been on the New York Times best-seller list for at least 10 weeks and received literary prizes.
They also have a common geographic bond: New Jersey, where each works, lives or vacations.
With those requirements satisfied, ARNO PENZIAS, GAY TALESE, BARBARA COHEN, ROBERT L. CHAPMAN and JERRY IZENBERG are to be inducted into the New Jersey Literary Hall of Fame at a banquet on Sept. 29 at the Hazell Center ballroom of the New Jersey Institute of Technology in Newark.


Green Pepper: $3 Million Deal
The Giants and linebacker Pepper Johnson ended their contract dispute today with Johnson reporting to practice here this afternoon after signing a three-year contract.
Terms of the pact were not disclosed, but it is reportedly worth a total of $3 million.
Johnson was not available to discuss the deal or anything else.
He quickly left the field after practice and scurried into a truck with some teammates.


Gaines Hospitalized
ROWDY GAINES, who won three gold medals in the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles, is likely to face extensive physical therapy after being hospitalized since Friday with a rare neurological disorder.
The 23-year-old swimmer has an 80-percent chance of fully recovering from Guillain-Barre syndrome, which strikes about one in 100,000 people and can cause partial paralysis, said his physician, DR.
KEN SUMIDA.
Gaines is not paralyzed, Sumida said.


Corrections
A drawing on the Consumer's World page on Saturday with an article about inhalers for asthma patients showed use of an inhaler incorrectly.
It should be held with the canister above the mouthpiece.


White Canarsie Resident Charged In Group Attack on a Black Man
A white unemployed mover was charged yesterday in the slashing of a black man in a playground in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn earlier this month.
The attack was one of 14 bias-related incidents in Canarsie since July 1, the police said.
The suspect, Richard Ferrente of 2125 Rockaway Parkway in Canarsie, was identified by the victim from a police lineup yesterday evening, the police said.


Woman Riding in Van Killed by Stray Bullet
A 48-year-old Brooklyn woman traveling in a van full of parishioners headed for a church service was struck and killed last night by a stray bullet that the police believe was fired in a drug dispute.
The woman, Evelyn Sintron, was wounded shortly before 8 P.M. when a bullet pierced the back of the van while it was stopped for a red light at Liberty Avenue and Crescent Street in the East New York section, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.
Ms.
Sintron, who lived at 88 Lincoln Avenue in East New York, died at Jamaica Hospital at 10:38 P.M.


Victor F. Condello, 73, Lobbyist On Legislation for New York City
Victor F. Condello, who served three New York City mayors as the city's lobbyist in Albany, died on Tuesday at Albany Medical Center.
He was 73 years old and lived in Albany.
He died of a heart attack, a spokesman for the family said.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Duracell Inc., Bethel, Conn., named Charles E. Kiernan senior vice president for marketing and manufacturing of Duracell U.S.A., an operating unit. *
Lehman Brothers, New York, a division of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., which is a subsidiary of American Express Co., named Richard D. Donovan director of institutional futures sales.


Despite the Odds, 'Glengarry' Is Being Filmed
David Mamet's "Glengarry Glen Ross," a play about real estate hucksters who do dishonest things to survive, won a Pulitzer Prize in 1984 and had a highly successful run on Broadway.
But when the producer Jerry Tokofsky bought the film rights and commissioned Mr.
Mamet to turn his play into a screenplay, the big Hollywood studios were not entirely enthusiastic about "Glengarry Glen Ross" as a movie.
"It's got no women, it's got no sex, it's got no violence and it's got no special effects," said the actor Jack Lemmon, who will be in the film.
"So even if it's a Pulitzer Prize-winning play, it's got nothing that the studios are interested in."


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about James Roosevelt, a former Congressman and a son of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, misstated the number of his siblings in some copies.
He was the second of six children, including a boy who died in infancy.
In other copies, because of an editing error, the article referred incorrectly to a political campaign by Mr.
Roosevelt in 1965.
He was defeated in a nonpartisan primary for the Los Angeles mayoralty.


POPE TELLS YOUTHS TO KEEP THE FAITH
Pope John Paul II called on a crowd of one million young people today to unite for a new "civilization of love" and for the sake of the "old European continent."
"It is necessary," he said, "for all that has been forcibly separated in Europe over the long decades to come closer together and for Europe to seek a future unity for the benefit of the entire family of man by returning to its Christian roots."


Grains and Soybeans Drop Following a Selloff of Corn
Corn futures prices fell sharply yesterday, leading the grain and soybean markets lower amid heavy selling by speculative funds that apparently have lost hope for further gains this growing season.
Corn for September delivery settled 7 3/4 cents lower, at $2.43 1/2 a bushel, on the Chicago Board of Trade.
September wheat finished 5 cents lower, at $2.96 a bushel; September oats were 7 1/2 cents lower, at $1.22 1/4 a bushel, and August soybeans settled at $5.38 1/2 a bushel, down 10 cents.


She's No Barbie, Nor Does She Care to Be
IT'S turning out to be a rough year for Barbie.
Last year Mattel celebrated her 30th anniversary, a gala affair with a black-tie dinner and great new clothes.
But in February, the world's most popular plastic teen-ager faced some stiff competition: a line of Miss America dolls, made by the Miss America Pageant and Kenner Products, with up-to-date names like Devon, Tanya, Justine and Raquel.


Farmer Unearthed: He Planted the Corn
Daniel Perez worked the soil of upper Broadway in obscurity until the results of his labors -- six-foot-high cornstalks -- began to speak for themselves.
Now, he is something of a reluctant celebrity, blinking in the lights.
Yesterday Mr.
Perez stood proudly beside what he calls "his little farm" -- the center divider of Broadway north of 153d Street -- and admitted that he was the urban farmer who planted the unlikely crop of corn.


Tigers' Anderson Does It Best of All
When Sparky Anderson was winning National League pennants in Cincinnati in the 1970's with Pete Rose, Joe Morgan, Johnny Bench, Tony Perez, George Foster, Dave Concepcion and Ken Griffey, he was given little credit for his managing.
Anyone could win with that lineup, Anderson's detractors said.
It was a push-button job.
With the Detroit Tigers, however, the dean of major league managers has proved more than once just how talented and effective a manager he is.
Certainly, no one has been better.
Look no further than the Tigers' performance this season to see why.


Cuban Seeks More Room to Run in '92
She doesn't have an agent.
She has a work group.
Before she set Pan American records, she helped build the stadium with her own hands.
A select number of athletes need be called by only one name: Reggie.
Magic.
Martina.
Ali.
Pele.


U.S. Accuses G.E. of Fraud In Israeli Deal
The Justice Department has accused the General Electric Company of defrauding the Pentagon of more than $30 million on the sale of jet engines and support services to the Israeli Air Force, according to a lawsuit made public yesterday.
The civil fraud charges are the first against an American military contractor in the case, which has already led to a guilty plea in Israel by an Israeli Air Force general on fraud and bribery charges.
The case has deeply embarrassed the Israeli military, which receives $1.8 billion from the United States annually to finance weapons purchases from American contractors, and has led to a Federal criminal investigation in the United States of General Electric and several of its current and former employees.


Pop in Review
David Sanborn  Saxophonist Beacon Theater
The alto saxophonist David Sanborn risked alienating his regular fans on Monday night when he opened a two-night stand at the Beacon Theater.
His quintet featured a pianist, Kenny Kirkland, and an acoustic bassist, Charlie Haden, and it played mainstream jazz rather than the pop-jazz Mr.
Sanborn usually records.
But Mr.
Sanborn ignored heckling and assuaged some disgruntled concertgoers by bringing out an unannounced guest, the guitarist Pat Metheny.


Tape of 'Home Alone' Lacks Star in Pepsi Spot
Fans of Macaulay Culkin who were hoping to see the young star do double duty on the videocassette of his hit film, "Home Alone," will have to content themselves with watching just the movie.
Plans for him to appear in a commercial for Pepsi-Cola, to be placed on the tape ahead of the film, have fallen through.
Pepsi and its advertising agency, BBDO New York, ran into scheduling conflicts that kept the spot from being filmed in time for the videotape release next Thursday, said Andrew Giangola, a Pepsi spokesman.
Instead, the eight million copies of the tape, to be released by Fox Video, will carry a Pepsi spot called "Cool Kids" that was previously shown on television.
Pepsi has been a pioneer in videotape advertising, creating special spots for the home release of films like "Top Gun."


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE adventures of summer -- swimming, riding a horse or camping in the woods -- help children build self-confidence.
But they can also instill fear.
All children develop fears, most of which go away by themselves, or with a little help.
Some children are afraid of things their friends enjoy.
Psychologists have found patterns underlying those fears that do not quickly disappear.
By recognizing the patterns, parents can help children overcome their fears.


Architecture Dean Named
Frances Halsband has been appointed dean of the School of Architecture at Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, effective Sept. 1.
In making the announcement, the president of Pratt, Dr.
Warren F. Ilchman, praised Ms.
Halsband as representing an "essential balance between practice and theory." Ms.
Halsband, a graduate of Swarthmore College and Columbia University, is a founder of R. M. Kliment &amp; Frances Halsband Architects.
She is president of the New York Chapter of the American Institute of Architects.


Ask Computer Picks 3 To Head New Units
Ask Computer Systems Inc. said yesterday that it would split into three parts in an effort to decentralize and promoted three vice presidents to be presidents of the new units.
Ask, which produces software to automate manufacturing, also gave Les Wright, its executive vice president and chief financial officer, the additional title of chief administrative officer.
Eric Carlson, 47 years old, was named president of Ask's applications business unit; he has been executive vice president and general manager of the applications products division.
Dennis McGinn, 46, was named president of the Ingres business unit, the data base software company that Ask acquired last year; he has been executive vice president for field operations.
David Sohm, 42, was elevated to president of Data 3 Systems; he has been vice president and general manager of Data 3 since its acquisition by Ask in 1989.


Winfield Belts 400th As Angels Top Twins
Dave Winfield of the California Angels tonight became the 23d player in major league history to hit 400 career home runs, hitting his 22d of the season in a 7-4 victory over the Minnesota Twins.
The Twins' lead in the American League West shrank to a game and a half over the White Sox, who beat the Tigers.


Cuban Boxers Continue to Rule Ring
Cuba continued its domination of the boxing competition this evening as its boxers won four of four semifinal bouts and ended the night with a crushing performance by Felix Savon, the highly touted Cuban heavyweight.
The 6-foot-5-inch, 201-pound Savon flattened Tom Glesby of Canada with 50 seconds left in the first round.
Savon cut Glesby early in the fight and eventually decked the Canadian with an overhand right.
Glesby struggled to his feet, but the Canadian coaches threw in the towel.


Pop in Review
Chris and Cosey  Rock Duo Building
Sex is a somber, obsessive business in the songs of Chris and Cosey, the English duo that performed Friday night at the Building.
Cosey Fanni Tutti, dressed in a black-leather body suit, black tights and black boots, calmly sang and chanted phrases: "Desire me." "Take control." "Taste the whip, break the stick, lay me on the bed of sin." "Why do you do those things to me?" "Show me how to do those things to you." Chris Carter sat impassive behind a keyboard and other electronic equipment.
Behind them a screen flickered with nudes, psychedelic swirls and other images, running slightly ahead of the songs.


Books of The Times; The C.I.A. and Intrigue In Tom Clancy's Novel  lithium deuteride.
The Sum of All Fears  By Tom Clancy  798 pages. G. P. Putnam's Sons. $24.95.
Nobody can accuse Tom Clancy of not giving fans their money's worth.
"The Sum of All Fears," his latest guaranteed best seller, leaves newspaper headlines in the dust.
His hero, Jack Ryan, the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, who likes to reflect on the world's religions, mankind's capacity for folly and war and peace in general, needs a lot less time than Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d took to organize a Middle East peace conference.
Readers will also be brought up to speed on ethnic turmoil in the Soviet Union, sex in the power centers of Washington, military one-upmanship and much more.


Abortion Exhibit Splits Campus in Queens
One day after a student art exhibit supporting abortion rights was covered over with black paper, La Guardia Community College officials have ordered that the exhibit remain on display through Aug. 29, as scheduled.
Students had contended that the college in Queens was engaging in censorship when, in response to complaints from students and politicians, the display was covered over.


In a Mix of Cultures, An Olio of Plantings
JUAN GUERRERO grows tomatillos on a scrap of land that used to be a chop shop for stolen cars in the South Bronx.
It's his little piece of Mexico.
"He says you cut them up with hot pepper for salsa," said Jose Garcia, who grew up in Puerto Rico.
Mr.
Guerrero left of Puebla, Mexico, four years ago, but he speaks little English, so Mr.
Garcia was translating.


Salomon Violations Detailed
Salomon Brothers Inc. said yesterday that it had provided the Government with evidence that it had violated rules governing bids for Treasury bonds at the April auction.
The disclosure followed its report last week of transgressions at three other auctions.
The firm also said that it had routinely overstated the quantities of Treasury securities it traded so that it could increase its chance of being allocated enough of each new issue to satisfy all its customers.
It pledged to discontinue the practice.


Town Hall Anniversary Will Feature 2 Series
Two continuing series, Century of Change and Not Just Jazz, will be featured during the 1991-92 season at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, as part of the hall's 70th anniversary.
"Century of Change," devoted to 20th-century American culture, is to open on Nov. 7 with a revue called "From Ragtime to Broadway." The revue is to be directed by Charles Strouse and will feature the songs of Jerome Kern, Irving Berlin and others.
The series includes a showing of early Charlie Chaplin films, with Bill Irwin as the host, on Nov. 11, and a performance of "Treemonisha," Scott Joplin's folk opera, on Dec. 5.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 15


Willamette Deal
Willamette Industries said today that it had agreed in principle to pay cash for all the stock of Bohemia Inc. for $24 a share, or a little over $120 million.
Bohemia, a forest-products company with operations in Oregon and California, also said it would sell its California land and facilities to Sierra Pacific Industries for an undisclosed price, with the proceeds being used to reduce Bohemia's debt.
Bohemia of Eugene, Ore., reported a net loss of $4.7 million on sales of $291.7 million in the fiscal year that ended April 30.


Accounts
*
The Bonne Bell Company, Cleveland, to Genova Hartwick Juliano, Greenwich, Conn., for its skin care and cosmetics products account.
The agency said annual billings were planned to be $4 million.
The previous agency was Wyse Advertising, Cleveland.


Kodak Sues Cetus Over Technology
The Eastman Kodak Company has filed a lawsuit seeking to stop the Cetus Corporation from transfering some of its key technology to Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., Cetus announced.
The lawsuit appears to have the potential to disrupt the planned acquisition of Cetus by the Chiron Corporation, which was announced last month.
A Cetus spokeswoman, however, said the company would not comment on what effect, if any, the lawsuit might have on the acquisition.


Bid Denied By Dillard
Dillard Department Stores Inc. yesterday denied published reports that it was bidding for Carter Hawley Hales Stores Inc.
"That's an erroneous story," said William Dillard Sr., the founder of the department store chain based in Little Rock, Ark.
"The creditors came out and solicited us to make a bid, but they didn't have any figures to give us."


Some Chinese Provinces Forcing Sterilization of Retarded Couples
With the aim of improving the "population quality," a number of Chinese provinces are banning mentally retarded people from marrying unless they are sterilized first.
If they evade sterilization and become pregnant, abortions are obligatory.
Gansu Province in northwestern China in 1988 became the first to adopt a law of eugenics, the study of how to improve a population by limiting reproduction of those who are deemed to be less capable.
That law has led to the sterilization of more than 5,000 mentally retarded people in Gansu.
Since then several other regions in China have adopted similar eugenics laws and Prime Minister Li Peng has backed such measures.
A national eugenics law is also being drafted.


Once-Lofty Japanese Bank Tarnished by Scandal
When the Sumitomo Bank disclosed last year that an official had arranged illegal loans for an indicted stock manipulator, many attributed the wrongdoing to an aggressive profit-driven culture.
When Fuji Bank admitted recently that an executive had forged nearly $2 billion worth of deposit receipts in a loan scheme, some shrugged it off as part of a dash for growth.


Times Beach Warning: Regrets a Decade Later
For Dr.
Vernon N. Houk, the Federal official who urged the evacuation of Times Beach, Mo., nearly a decade ago and now believes it may have been a mistake, there is only one regret.
"The only thing I would have done differently," Dr.
Houk said, "I would have said we may be wrong. If we're going to be wrong, we'll be wrong on the side of protecting human health.


Washington at Work; A Spy's Bequest: Riddles He Might Love
Now is the summer of conspiracy in Washington: new disclosures about the Iran-contra affair, the confirmation agonies of President Bush's nominee for America's spymaster, more questions about whether the 1980 Reagan-Bush campaign engineered a politically convenient delay in the release of the Teheran Embassy hostages.
And one man stands at the center of this web of intrigue spinning around the White House: the late William J. Casey.
Four years dead, the former Director of Central Intelligence is more of a force in working Washington than most of the living.


Hints of an Ouster Strain Bhutto's Successor
A year after the abrupt ouster of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, her successor, Nawaz Sharif, is widely believed to be under threat of an equally sudden and unceremonious exit.
Mr.
Sharif is spending much of his time this week forcing a smile for photographers and trying to reassure political allies and his opponents that he expects to retain his post for some time.


Assistant Prosecutor Raped In Her Brooklyn Apartment
A Brooklyn assistant district attorney was raped in her apartment early yesterday by a man who climbed through a slightly open window and grabbed her as she came out of her bedroom, the police said.
He put a pillow over her face, tied her hands with a telephone cord, raped her and then stole a number of items from her Brooklyn Heights apartment, the police said.


16 Lost and 168 Saved as Barge Sinks Off Hong Kong
At least 16 men died in the stormy South China Sea after a barge carrying nearly 200 oil workers capsized and sank this morning, 65 miles off the coast of Hong Kong.
Officials said at least 168 workers had been rescued from the turbulent sea by helicopters and ships, including vessels from Taiwan, China and the Soviet Union.
A typhoon whipped up waves as high as 60 feet.


Johnson's Chance To Come Back
It was just about this time four years ago in Rome that BEN JOHNSON of Canada screamed through the 100-meter final of the world track and field championships in 9.83 seconds, a world record.
The 1991 championships open a week from tomorrow in Tokyo, and Johnson will be present but in a far diminished role.
After serving a two-year suspension for drug use after the 1988 Seoul Olympics and running unimpressively outdoors, he has made Canada's team only as part of the 400-meter relay team.


Sports of The Times; Big Events Can't Leave Third World
Every morning, the lines form at Coppelia, an ice-cream parlor in a park, well before the 10:15 opening.
Foreigners waving George Washingtons can probably jump the line, but anybody who does that, it says here, is an exploitative capitalist dog.
People say there were lines at Coppelia months ago, and as far as they can see, there will be lines in lots of places long after the foreign roller skaters and pole-vaulters are gone.


Mourning 87, They Sit and Wait, Stone-Faced, for Justice
Francisco Gamoneda carries heavy bags under his eyes and moves with a sad, slumped shuffle.
But he is stronger than he looks.
For the last 17 months he has kept his sworn pledge to attend every court date, from pretrial hearing through jury selection to trial, regarding the Happy Land Social Club fire, which killed two of his strapping young sons -- 87 people in all -- and scorched an immigrant dream.
He has walked patiently through metal detectors to sit in a room at the Bronx County Courthouse and stare at the back of Julio Gonzalez, a slight man accused of using a dollar's worth of gasoline to commit the worst mass-murder in the nation's history.
And he has kept his composure. 'They Have to Convict'
Yesterday was no different.
As the lawyers summed up their cases after a six-week trial, Mr.
Gamoneda and his wife, Leticia, sat in a packed courtroom surrounded by reporters, well-wishers and other relatives of the victims -- 59 of whom were recent Honduran immigrants like the Gamonedas -- and waited for what they believe is inevitable.


Speed Kills as Lendl And Edberg Are Upset
One day after saying he didn't think wide body racquets and power tennis detracted from the sport, Ivan Lendl was run over today by Marc Rosset's serve, traveling at speeds up to 126 miles an hour.
Hours later, Stefan Edberg had a worse collision.
When he went down, the highest Richard Krajicek's serve was clocked at was 127 m.p.h.


Questions, Questions, Questions
EVERY so often I sit right down and write myself a letter.
Mail is encouraging.
Lately, I've posed questions.
It seemed important, after four months back doing this, not to start thinking I know everything.
Again.
Who will replace Bud Harrelson?


What It Takes to Sit on the Supreme Court; N.A.A.C.P. Opposition
To the Editor:
Opposition by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People to the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas for the Supreme Court is grounded in the organization's 82-year campaign for civil rights and constitutional protections.
This is a constant struggle.


Correction
A sentence in a letter last Friday on securities prosecutions by Arthur L. Liman appeared incorrectly.
It should have read, "The young prosecutors were not ineffective as trial lawyers."


Review/Film; A Blind Date And a Large Body Count
"Mystery Date" is an exceptionally unfunny farce about the worst night in the life of Tom McHugh (Ethan Hawke), a college student whose elder brother, Craig (Brian McNamara), arranges a blind date for Tom with the new young woman next door.
She is Geena Matthews (Teri Polo).
Geena is pretty but far less mysterious than the plotting of this movie, which was written by Parker Bennett and Terry Runte and directed by Jonathan Wacks.
Craig, it seems, is not quite the paragon Tom believes him to be.
He's a cheerful blackmailing scamp, playing a dangerous game with crooked cops and the members of a drug-dealing Chinese gang.


Mexican Ruling Party Reinvents the Pork Barrel
So unpopular was the governing Institutional Revolutionary Party on the dirt streets of this poor satellite town in 1988 that the prospect of a visit from the party's presidential candidate, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, filled local officials with dread.
"There was real concern," recalled the mayor of Chalco, Marco Antonio Tapia Sanchez.
"There was a risk that people would behave in a way that was, let us say, not cordial to the candidate."


Review/Theater; From Runyon, Some Guys and a Few Dolls
On Damon Runyon's Broadway, the toughest guys are the softest touches, especially when it comes to pretty dolls.
The role models for these mugs may have been real gangsters like Frank Costello, but when the stories were filtered through the author's imagination, they turned into myth.
Although Runyon's world has been memorialized in countless films and shows, there is something novel about encountering his people in their original prose context, as is the case in John Martello's "Damon Runyon's Tales of Broadway." This one-man show at the Double Image Theater can be approached as an easygoing curtain-raiser to "Guys and Dolls," due for revival on Broadway this season.
Sit long enough eating borscht in Mindy's restaurant and Nathan Detroit or Nicely Nicely Johnson may walk in the door.


Our Towns
At 7:15 P.M. on Saturday, Cari Weisberg called to her seven housemates and guests to come inside from a deck overlooking the ocean.
The moment, she announced, had arrived.
Slices of lime and a box of salt appeared.
Shot glasses were distributed and filled with a golden liquid known for its numbing properties.


Traffic Alert
Harlem Week Uptown Saturday Night Fair: 125th Street will be closed tomorrow between Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard and Lenox Avenue from 11 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.
India Day Parade: Madison Avenue will be closed Sunday between 38th and 57th Streets from 12 P.M through late afternoon.
India Day Street Fair: Madison Avenue will be closed Sunday between 23d and 26th Streets from noon to 9 P.M.


Japan Chip Maker In A.T. &amp;T. Deal
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company announced a joint venture with a Japanese maker of equipment used to produce computer chips.
Under the agreement, a United States division of the Hoya Corporation of Japan will distribute A.T.&amp; T. chip-production components called masks in the United States.
Also, the two companies will undertake joint research into new chip-making technologies.
Masks are extremely fine screens used to produce computer chips.


Top Bonneville Official To Take Job in Missouri
James J. Jura will spend his last day today as administrator of the Bonneville Power Administration, one of the nation's largest electricity wholesalers.
On Sept. 3, he will take the helm of a smaller utility, the Associated Electric Cooperative Inc. of Springfield, Mo., so that he can spend more time with his family.
He succeeds Gerald F. Diddle as chief executive and general manager.
In mid-September, a new administrator is expected to be named for Bonneville, a Federal agency based in Portland, Ore., with revenues of $3 billion.
The agency supplies power to utilities that serve half of the people living in the Pacific Northwest.


Paperwork on Theus
The Nets completed the paperwork yesterday that would allow REGGIE THEUS to buy his way out of the final year of his contract so that he can sign a contract with Pallacanestro Varese of the Italian League.
Before that can happen, however, the 34-year-old Theus has 48 hours to clear waivers, which he is expected to do.


Review/Pop; Local Occasion, Nationwide Crowd
"These are the days of miracles and wonder," Paul Simon sang last night to a standing-room-only crowd estimated by the police at 750,000 people on the Great Lawn of Central Park.
They are also the days when multimedia tie-ins -- a live Home Box Office telecast, national radio broadcasts, the possibilities of a home video release and perhaps even a live album -- make it possible for a hit-maker to present a free concert and throw in a $400,000 donation to New York City.
The audience treated the concert as a local occasion.
Every mention of New York or New Jersey in a lyric drew a cheer; so did lines like "and the moon rose over an open field," in "America," or "ten thousand people, maybe more" in "The Sound of Silence." But Mr.
Simon didn't encourage such one-time-only responses, perhaps with an ear to the wider electronic audience; he stuck to the music and said only a few sentences that weren't lyrics.
The set was virtually unchanged from Mr.
Simon's recent appearances at Nassau Coliseum and Madison Square Garden.


Pope Advises Poland's Youth To Reject Materialism's Lure
Pope John Paul II appealed today to young people to shun materialism in favor of spirituality.


What It Takes to Sit on the Supreme Court; Religious Freedom
To the Editor:
The debate on the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court reflects the limits placed on the religious freedoms of citizens: We have freedom of or from religion, but we are not free to adhere to our religious beliefs while holding public office if they are in opposition to what may or may not be a majority view.


Report on Starts of Housing Helps to Push Dollar Ahead
The dollar finished higher yesterday against most major currencies as an encouraging report on United States housing starts outweighed the effects of a long-awaited rise in German interest rates.
The Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, increased the nation's discount rate a full point, to 7.5 percent, and the Lombard rate a quarter-point, to 9.25 percent.


Jeffries Misses Brooklyn Rally On Racial Issues
A crowd of vocal supporters crammed the balcony, pews and aisles of a Brooklyn church last night to get a glimpse of Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr., the City College professor whose comments about Jews last month touched off a vehement racial debate.
But Dr.
Jeffries did not come to the church, the Bethany Baptist Church in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section, and the crowd of more than 1,000 had to settle for a videotaped replay of the lecture that started the controversy.


Infusion for Orion From Metromedia
The Orion Pictures Corporation announced that the Metromedia Company, the majority Orion stockholder, had agreed to put approximately $50 million of new equity into the company.


Daniel Haberman, Poet, 58
Daniel Haberman, a poet associated with the Poets' Corner at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine in Manhattan, died on Aug. 8 at Montefiore Medical Center.
He was 58 years old and lived in Lewisburg, W.Va.
He died of lymphoma, said His wife, Barbara Nissman Haberman.


Auctions
The recession may be starting to shake up the rock-and-roll collectibles market.
On one hand, economic pressures seem to be leading many hoarders of adolescent treasure troves to recalculate the comparative merits of cash and sentiment and to consider parting with their memorabilia.
On the other hand, there is a growing feeling among rock collectors that after 10 years of rising prices, the memorabilia market is bound to level out.
So collectors of a more speculative bent are unloading rare items and hoping to catch the crest of the wave, while those who are still hunting for relics hope that a softening market will yield some bargains.
Either way, the eyes of those fascinated by the changing values of rock ephemera will be on London this month, where the three biggest auction houses are holding sales, by now a summer tradition.
Phillips included about 230 rock-related pieces among the 492 lots of collectors' items it auctioned on Wednesday, but many rock items went unsold because the bids failed to meet the consignors' reserves.
Among the items that did bring reasonably high prices were a limited edition bronze bust of John Lennon, which sold for $2,400, and a Jimi Hendrix royalty agreement for the "Electric Ladyland" album, which sold for $1,500.


Two Good Guardians at the F.D.I.C.
President Bush's nomination of William Taylor to head the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation removes some of the bad odor from last year's attempt to dump the incumbent, William Seidman.
Mr.
Seidman has been too independent for the Administration's taste, but a worthy public servant.
Mr.
Taylor, with a strong background in regulating banks for the Federal Reserve, should prove an able successor.
The F.D.I.C. was created in the Depression to insure bank deposits and regulate state-chartered banks that aren't Fed members.
It has grown in role and stature of late, in response to crises in the savings and loan industry and now in banking.


Treasury Security Prices Mixed
Prices of Treasury securities were mixed in light trading yesterday, as traders took profits by selling long-term bonds but continued to buy shorter-term issues.
Prices, which have risen for the better part of two weeks, continued to rise during overnight trading in Asia and later in Europe, but selling began after the Government announced that housing starts rose by a stronger-than-expected 3.7 percent in July.
The rise was the fourth in a row in a sector that in the past has been an important element in previous economic recoveries.


Settlement By Northrop
The Northrop Corporation has tentatively agreed to pay the Government $600,000 to settle charges that it improperly billed the Air Force for work at a logistics depot in Georgia.
Northrop said in a quarterly report to the Securities and Exchange Commission that the reported violations had occurred at a depot in Warner Robbins, Ga., that maintains C-141 transport planes and other aircraft.


Downgrading Dioxin
Dioxin, once the most feared chemical in America, is undergoing a reassessment by the Environmental Protection Agency that may downgrade its notoriety.
Federal officials now believe they may have overreacted in setting extremely low exposure limits for dioxin and in permanently evacuating all the residents of Times Beach, Mo., where the roads were contaminated with dioxin.
They are sensibly considering new evidence that could lead to relaxation of the current strict and costly regulatory standards.


Accounts
*
Matrix Essentials Inc., which makes hair- and skin-care products, to Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York, for television creative work for existing brands and new products, with a budget of $10 million.
Print advertising will continue to be handled in house by Matrix. *
Panasonic Home and Building Products Group, a new division of the Panasonic Company, Secaucus, N.J., to Levine, Huntley, Vick &amp; Beaver, New York, for strategic planning and trade advertising for a new product line.
The review included four other unidentified agencies.
An agency spokeswoman placed billings at around $2 million.


Montreal Journal; Quebec's New Minority Issue: Blacks Charge Bias
"Every black person is supposed to be a criminal. Police can't tell the difference between one black man and another. Is that justice? Justice for blacks?"
The 32-year-old man talking on the street near the office of the Black Coalition of Quebec, in a mixed neighborhood in western Montreal, is from Gabon and teaches computer science at Quebec University.


Soviet-Chevron Oil Venture Mired In Fears of Capitalist Exploitation
The largest Soviet-American business venture ever, a Chevron Corporation plan to develop huge oilfields in Kazakhstan, has become enmeshed in this nation's traditional fear of capitalism and the new muckraking of its free press, leaving President Mikhail S. Gorbachev pressing to get the deal back on track to reassure skeptical foreign investors.
The proposed 25-year, multibillion-dollar venture between Chevron and its Soviet partners in the rich Tengiz oilfields is being restudied and renegotiated at the highest levels of the Gorbachev Government after a series of critical newspaper articles that warn of capitalist greed exploiting Soviet resources under the guise of perestroika, Mr.
Gorbachev's program of economic restructuring.


The Spoken Word
WALKING TOUR AND LECTURE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Peddler's Pack" walking tour, an examination of the Lower East Side's Jewish heritage, Sunday at noon, followed at 2 P.M. by "Are You Game?," a look at the lives and life styles of turn-of-the-century children.
Walking tour fee, $12 ($11 for the elderly, $6 for students); lecture: $7 ($6 for the elderly, $5 for students).
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"American Life in American Art" by Leslie Heiner tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "John Baldessari" by Mr.
Heiner, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.; free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.
GALLERY TALKS, Museum of Modern Art."Mostly White I" by Mina Roustayi, today at noon; "Looking at Modern Art: Matisse," today at 1 P.M. by Barbara Larson; "Mostly White II" by Ms.
Roustayi, today at 3 P.M.; "American Art: 1910-1930" by Gail Stavitsky, tomorrow at 1 P.M.; "American Art: 1940-1960" by Ms.
Stavitsky, tomorrow at 3 P.M.; "Friedlander Nudes" by Susan Cooke, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "The Sculpture Garden" by Ms.
Cooke, Sunday at 3 P.M.
Free with museum admission of $7 ($4 for students and the elderly; free under age 16).
Information: (212) 708-9480.
LECTURES AND GALLERY TALKS, Metropolitan Museum of Art.
All free with museum admission of $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3764.


Israelis to Be 'Very Flexible' on Captive Exchange
Israel's chief negotiator in the Middle East hostage talks said today that his Government would be "very flexible" about trading prisoners, but he repeated warnings that nothing would take place until Israel learns what happened to seven of its servicemen long missing in Lebanon.
Other officials here said that discussions with the United Nations Secretary General in Geneva on Wednesday had produced no new information about the missing men.
That dashed hopes for an early breakthrough that might lead, among other things, to freedom for the remaining Western hostages in Lebanon.


Search for News Leak Spurs Ohio Phone Sweep
Law-enforcement officials in Ohio have searched the records of every telephone user in southwestern Ohio to determine who, if anyone, called a Wall Street Journal reporter to provide information that the Procter &amp; Gamble Company said was confidential and protected by state law.
The investigation goes far beyond examining the telephone records of current and former employees of the giant consumer products company, an inquiry the Hamilton County prosecutor's office confirmed on Monday.
The Journal reported the scope of the investigation yesterday.


18 Hospital Deaths Under Inquiry By Georgia and Alabama Agents
Investigators in Georgia and Alabama are looking into as many as 18 mysterious deaths in the intensive care units at two hospitals over four months earlier this year, health authorities disclosed.
A nurse who worked at both hospitals surrendered his nursing license to Georgia health authorities on Wednesday and today he surrendered his Alabama nursing licence, although he has not been charged with any crime, officials said.


More Airlines Reduce Fares
Pan American Airways and Virgin Atlantic Airways yesterday announced lower fares on some international flights.
The announcements follow fare cuts by British Airways, American Airlines, United Airlines, Continental Airlines and Northwest Airlines.


Diner's Journal
Japanese Fast Food Downtown
If the Japanese have an equivalent of the American fast-food restaurant, it is the soba parlor, a rapid-fire, noodle-slurping storefront where one can refuel in minutes.
Yet like pizzas, salads and bottled water, noodles have gone gourmet.


A Bullet Goes Awry, and a Life of Piety Is Ended
A pious woman, Evelia Cintron believed that a local church should be a place of healing, and more, that it should reach out to those in the neighborhood who wanted a safe haven from the ever-encroaching madness of drugs and crime.
As a deacon of a Pentecostal church called House of God, she helped plan a rally for last night with neighbors in the East New York section of Brooklyn invited to join in prayer and hand-holding as a tonic against the senseless killings that seem to have been growing around them.


Thornburgh Defends His Record in Farewell Speech


Corrections
An entry in the Finance Briefs listing in Business Day on Wednesday misidentified the lead underwriter of an offering of $129.8 million worth of revenue bonds for Erie County, Pa.
It was Russell, Rea &amp; Zappala, a Pittsburgh-based investment house.


Quotations of the Day
"If someone from management says you need a haircut, then you get a haircut." -- Yankee manager Stump Merrill.  [ A1:1. ]
"Maybe I don't belong in the organization anymore." -- First baseman Don Mattingly.  [ B11:1. ]


Critic's Choice/Music; In Mendelssohn's World
Historical positioning has a lot more to do with a composer's reputation than music lovers want to admit.
Would Felix Mendelssohn, for example, appear to us as a genuine giant today had he not stood -- slightly orphaned -- between the Romantic and the Classical eras?
We like our musical politics clear cut, and this is a composer who is hard to categorize.
Mendelssohn's elegant Romanticism -- or if you insist, his Romantic elegance -- will be considered at length beginning today at Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., when Bard College undertakes a festival of concerts, lectures and symposia dedicated to Mendelssohn and his world.
Music by his sister, Fanny, will be played and talked about tomorrow at noon in a free Symposium on Women and Music, featuring Joan Tower, the composer.
There will be orchestra and chamber-music concerts.
Indeed, Mendelssohn will be performed in every shape and size, and on instruments old and new.
There will also be the music of his colleagues and subsequent transcribers.


Awards in Suits Over Asbestos
A Federal jury in Brooklyn awarded $91.25 million yesterday to survivors of 45 workers injured or killed by exposure to asbestos in electric-generating plants in New York.
The plaintiffs were among a group of about 700 workers who claimed asbestos-related injuries related to their work in generating stations in New York City and upstate New York.


Despite Curbs, Fare Beating Is Surging Again in Subways
A year after New York City began an aggressive campaign to combat rampant fare beating in the subways, transit officials acknowledge that the number of people sneaking into the system is rising again.
The Transit Authority says it has spent about $4.5 million on new anti-fare evasion efforts this year, including posting dozens of security guards and plainclothes police officers at turnstiles and installing higher railings, electronically controlled fare gates and a new device in fare boxes to prevent thieves from inserting aluminum sleeves that catch tokens.


Peru Delegates Charge Ex-Leader
Peru's House of Delegates voted late tonight to begin the process of stripping a former President, Alan Garcia, of his immunity from prosecution.
Mr.
Garcia has been accused of illegal dealings with the Bank of Credit and Commerce International,
After six hours of stormy debate, the House voted 88 to 76 to accept a report by an investigating commission on the charges against Mr.
Garcia.
This was the initial step in a parliamentary process that could result later this year in the first criminal investigation of a former President by the Supreme Court.


INSIDE
Plea in Japanese Fraud
A former stockbroker with a Japanese brokerage house pleaded guilty in a $120 million scheme involving a fictitious "growth fund." Page D1.
Ruling on Census Suit
A judge enhanced the possibility that states may redraw political districts by using unofficial data instead of the actual census head count.
Page A10.
Setback for All-Male Schools
Detroit's plan to open three all-male schools that would devote attention to the plight of black youths was struck down by a Federal judge.
Page A10.
Marietta Tree Dies at 74
Marietta Tree, a representative to the United Nations in the 1960's and a longtime worker for New York City causes, died yesterday.
Page D16.


Citicorp in Talks On Brokerage Sale
Citicorp is talking with parties interested in buying a brokerage firm it bought in 1986, in which it invested more than $20.3 million.


False-Start Reprimand
BOB KERSEE, women's head track and field coach at U.C.L.A., has been reprimanded by the N.C.A.A.
Men's and Women's Track and Field Committee for instructing an athlete to intentionally false-start in the N.C.A.A.
Championships at Eugene, Ore., in June.
"The committee considers Mr. Kersee's action a flagrant violation of the misconduct rule," MARK YOUNG, the committee chairman and head women's coach at Yale, said in a statement released yesterday by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
"Mr. Kersee's decision to instruct his student-athlete to false-start lacked integrity, made a mockery of the rules and discredited the championships. In addition, he deprived another student athlete from participating in the event."


Key Bank's Chairman To Consolidate Units
Big mergers joining one-time competitors are not the only consolidations occurring in the banking industry.
At Keycorp, a rapidly growing Albany-based banking company, the consolidation of its three independent New York banks into one is the first order of business for Gary R. Allen, chairman of the newly created Key Bank of New York.


'Steel Chin' Challenge
Back in June, JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ, the World Boxing Council super lightweight champion, saw a still-active former champion, LONNIE SMITH, at the airport in Las Vegas, Nev.
For months, Smith had been badgering Chavez to give him a title shot.
So Chavez walked up to Smith and said: "You're Lonnie Smith. I'm going to fight you. I'm going to beat you. I have a steel chin."


New Fears on A-Plant Mishap
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission said yesterday that the accident at the Nine Mile Point 2 nuclear reactor on Tuesday might have broader implications than first believed and announced it would send a bigger, higher-ranking team to investigate.
A spokesman, Joseph Fouchard, said the seven investigators who arrived on Tuesday had raised concerns about the possibility of accidents at reactors with similar electrical systems.
Another question, he said, was "the adequacy of regulatory requirements."


Beware of a Blizzard of Fake Documents
To the Editor:
Your article on the use of computers in photo fakery (July 24) discusses only a relatively small aspect of a much larger computer-fraud problem.
Desktop forgery is joining computer crime and computer viruses as negative byproducts of the Information Age.


2 Held in Taped Rape Are Beaten by Inmates
Two men charged with raping a Bethel, Conn., woman and videotaping the attack were beaten by other inmates in the Bridgeport Correctional Center, a prison spokesman said.
The two defendants, Beau William Kotach and Chester Hrostek 3d, were attacked on Tuesday afternoon, said a State Department of Correction spokesman, William Wheeler.


Art in Review
'The Gulf War Remembered' 'A Video Presentation' International Center of Photography Midtown 1133 Avenue of the Americas, at 43d Street Through Sept. 1
These days television tends to provide immediate news of events, but photographs, which linger in the memory, define them once the heat of the moment has passed.
In the Persian Gulf war, both the electronic and the print media were severely controlled, with the result that the public saw few images of the war itself.
Arguably, the most striking images to come out of the gulf war were of an abstract, distanced sort: the delicate tracery of Scud and Patriot missiles pirouetting in the night sky, or grainy video images of smart bombs zooming to their targets.


Review/Film; One Family. Lots of Problems.
Rainswept hills, flocks of grazing sheep, hayricks and dank cottages form the picturesque backdrop of "On the Black Hill," but this is no happy bucolic scene.
The story of the Jones family, for 80 years farmers on the Welsh-English border, has such a dark psychological undercurrent that in contemporary terms they seem the ultimate dysfunctional family.
But the film, which opens today at the Bleecker Street Cinema, is deliberately traditional and backward-looking.
Like the 1982 Bruce Chatwin novel, on which it is based, the movie could never have existed without Thomas Hardy.
These are Hardyesque country people rooted to a natural world that is less than benevolent.
They are bound to one another in relationships that are part emotional necessity, part torture.
Sheepshearing is the least of their problems.


Blanket of Humanity for Simon in the Park
From up where the apricot-colored moon and the man-made satellites reside, it looked like some vast teeming ant colony swarming across New York's front lawn: people spread out on a kaleidoscopic array of blankets -- plain, plaid, psychedelic.
People huddling under tents -- fancy store-bought ones and makeshift shelters built of tree branches and painters' plastic dropcloths.
People downing beer and baked beans, champagne and potato chips.
And mineral water.
All this to see a man who, from not too far back on the Great Lawn, seemed no more than three millimeters tall.


Mattingly Chooses Seat on Yank Bench Over Barber's Chair
Don Mattingly, the team's best player, asked the Yankees to trade him two months ago and they said nothing doing.
Yesterday, the Yankees asked Mattingly to get a haircut and he said the same thing.
As a result, Mattingly was benched, fined and left bristling as he repeated his request to be sent elsewhere.
For the rebuilding Yankees, it seemed like old times.


C. G. Suits, 86, Electrical Inventor Who Devised Synthetic Diamonds
Chauncey Guy Suits, a former director of research for the General Electric Company who helped develop the process for creating synthetic diamonds and contributed to understanding electric arc behavior, died Wednesday at his home in Pilot Knob, N.Y.
He was 86 years old.
He died of cancer, said a spokesman for the family and the company, Peter Van Avery.


Art in Review
'Reveries and Wanderings'  Met Life Gallery 24 East 24th Street Through Sept. 28
Each of the seven artists represented here takes photographs in exotic locations around the world, but for the most part these are not typical travel photos.
There are no sun-filled piazzas in Alex Gotfryd's Venice, for example, but only moody alleyways and dank palaces.
Mr.
Gotfryd's grainy black-and-white pictures, taken from his book "Appointment in Venice," suggest the mood of a Gothic romance, or the melodrama of Nicolas Roeg's movie "Don't Look Now."


Under Pressure, A.M.A. Halts Publishing Plan
The American Medical Association has canceled plans to publish medical reports sponsored by drug companies, according to officials of the group.
The association is the largest doctors' organization in the world and publishes a prestigious medical magazine, The Journal of the American Medical Association, as well as nine other respected journals.


U.N. Decides to Permit Iraq Oil Sale Worth $1.6 Billion
The Security Council adopted resolutions today that would allow Iraq a one-time opportunity to sell up to $1.6 billion worth of oil but would require that nearly a third of any revenue go toward the billions of dollars in war claims against Baghdad.
In a long speech before the Council voted, the head of Iraq's delegation to the United Nations, Abdul Amir A. al-Anbari, protested that the plan would make "a trusteeship of Iraq."


Sounds Around Town
Newton Two Ways
James Newton, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, Manhattan, (212) 749-2228, and at the Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Washington Avenue, Crown Heights section, (718) 638-5000.
James Newton may well be the best flutist in jazz, and he performs too rarely in New York City.
Mr.
Newton applies his dizzying speed and sumptuous tone to everything from Duke Ellington to enigmatic chamber jazz, and this weekend he is performing in two different groups.
Tonight and tomorrow at Birdland, he is introducing a new quartet that includes Thurman Barker on drums.
Sets begin at 9 and 10:30 P.M. and midnight; there is a $10 cover, plus a $10 minimum at tables; a $5 cover and a one-drink minimum at the bar.
On Sunday afternoon at the Brooklyn Museum, he and the tenor saxophonist David Murray, who can make his instrument speak in tongues, will play a special concert of spirituals as part of the museum's Gospel Meets Jazz series.
Sunday at 3 P.M.; admission is $5 ($4 for museum members, students and the elderly).
Double Bill of Blues
Robert Cray and Los Lobos, the Beacon Theater, Broadway at 74th Street, Manhattan, (212) 496-7070.
Robert Cray has merged the blues with 1960's Southern soul in songs with a distinctly up-to-date perpective.
With his stinging guitar solos and his aching, elaborate vocal turns, Mr.
Cray details the pain, jealousy and guilt of infidelity, playing the betrayed husband in one song, the compulsive womanizer in the next.
Los Lobos, from East Los Angeles, can play raw-boned blues themselves, but they also take on rhythm-and-blues, rock and the bouncy polkas of Tex-Mex norteno music, turning their dual Mexican and American heritage into a multicultural bounty.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.; tickets are $27.50.
Gillespie and Makeba
Dizzy Gillespie and Miriam Makeba, World Financial Center Plaza, West and Vesey Streets, Manhattan, (212) 945-0505.
Dizzy Gillespie, the be-bop trumpeter with the puffed-out cheeks and the sly timing, and Miriam Makeba, the South African singer with an international repertory, are to perform together for the first time, backed by a big band.
Sunday at 4 P.M.
Free.


Fleet Settles S.E.C. Case
The Securities and Exchange Commission said today that it had settled a complaint against the Fleet/Norstar Financial Group's accounting of the group's stock portfolio.
Without admitting or denying guilt, Fleet agreed not to repeat the offenses.
The case involved Fleet's accounting for investments in the marketable securities of some New England bank holding companies.


Review/Opera; Mozart's 'Goose' and Someone Else's Gangsters
It was a tossup which was the stranger apparition on Wednesday night in the Cranwell Opera House: a Chicago gangster forcing an impresario to give singing roles to his two mistresses, or a giant goose with flashlight eyes that quacked ominous warnings to a tyrannical father.
But the latter was, at any rate, Mozart's own invention.
It came from a rarely performed and incomplete comic opera, "The Goose of Cairo," a tale in which plotting lovers use a fake talking goose to overcome a father's opposition to their marriage.
The first apparition also came from a performance of a Mozart opera, "The Impresario," which, until now, has probably not been set in the Roaring Twenties.


Corrections
Because of a computer processing error, the Bridge column yesterday omitted several words in the opening paragraph.
Its second sentence should have read: "However, the Flannery two diamonds, showing four spades and five hearts, has a considerable following, and there are splinter groups of experts around the world using a variety of hypermodern ideas at the two-level, nearly all showing unbalanced hands with less than opening-bid strength."


Six to Start in Travers, but No Edge at the Gate
Six of the best 3-year-old colts in the country, five of them alumni of the Kentucky Derby, were entered today in the Travers Stakes, the "midsummer Derby," which will be run here Saturday for high stakes -- $1 million in prize money and a shot at taking the lead in the chase for the year's ultimate honors.
Nobody won or lost the race this morning when the draw was held for post positions.
With only six horses entered, all carrying 126 pounds for a mile and a quarter, even the horse on the far outside will not be far from the rail.
No edge, no alibi.


Veteran Officer Is Named Chief Of Police Dept.
With a mandate to carry out community-oriented policing over the next few years, Chief of Patrol David W. Scott, who grew up in a Harlem housing project, was named yesterday to become the 46th Chief of the New York City Police Department.
As Chief of Department, the 30-year veteran will be the third ranking official under Commissioner Lee P. Brown and First Deputy Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly and will be the highest uniformed official.
Mr.
Brown said he chose Chief Scott, who is 56 years old, because he had "a proven track record, leadership ability, and respect of not only the people within the agency but people within the community."


Just When Defeat Seemed at Hand, Victory!
Just when it appeared that Mike Diffley would let the Met Open slip away the same way he had blown so many other possible tournament victories over the years, he broke through in grand fashion today and became the first left-handed golfer to capture the nation's oldest regional tournament.
The 32-year-old Diffley, the head pro at Pelham Country Club in Pelham Manor, N.Y., held off Jim Albus and Mel Baum, two experienced fellow professionals with several major titles to their credit, and won by three strokes, the margin he held going into the final round today.
Albus and Baum played with him in the last group of the day in the 77th edition of the $75,000 tournament.


Israel Resumes Deporting Palestinian Spouses
The Israeli military administration has again begun deporting Palestinian women and children who were temporarily allowed to enter the occupied territories to rejoin their families, Israeli human rights organizations said today.
Three non-resident Palestinian women have already left and at least 20 others have received orders to leave immediately, according to Yizhar Beer, the director of B'Tselem, an Israeli human rights organization.


California Moves to Force Insurers To Pay $2.5 Billion in Policy Rebates
The California Insurance Department acted today to force the insurance industry to pay $2.5 billion in rebates to consumers.
A spokesman for the industry said it would almost certainly fight the move in court.
In the latest effort to impose the rate-cutting provisions of an insurance-overhaul initiative passed by the voters nearly three years ago, State Insurance Commissioner John Garamendi outlined new regulations that he said would result in rebates to holders of 20 million automobile, homeowner and fire policies in effect during 1989.
Mr.
Garamendi said the rebates for auto insurance would average more than $100 a car for that year.


Corrections
A caption in The Home Section yesterday with an article about ethnic gardens in New York misidentified the location where Jose Garcia and his grandson Jose Santiago were photographed.
They were in Mr.
Garcia's tomato garden in the Bronx.


Task Force Investigates Serial Killing Claim


William S. C. Dolan, L.I. Obstetrician, 79
Dr.
William S. C. Dolan, an obstetrician-gynecologist, died on Tuesday at Howard County General Hospital in Columbia, Md.
He was 79 years old and lived in Norway, Me.
He died of a hypertensive disease and a series of strokes, a brother, Dr.
Jerome Dolan of Jersey City, said.


Market Place; For American Medical, Junk Bonds Outdo Stock
Junk-bond buyers love American Medical Holdings Inc., the hospital company.
But stock buyers seem much less enthusiastic.
The highly leveraged company yesterday issued the lowest-rated junk bonds to be sold since the collapse of that market last year.
The issue, with a coupon of 13.5 percent, was a success and immediately traded at a premium.


Lewis Hits Soft Spot In Jets' Defense
The Jets' linebacker corps was at the heart of the team's dismal defensive performance last year, so the team's coaches are looking to an infusion of youthful talent as a way to make the corps the center of a stronger defense this year.
The Jets' defense finished No. 22 in the National Football League last year.
And it was dead last in average yards per carry allowed (4.8), a shortcoming attributable to a combination of poor run-stopping ability and an effective pass rush.


NEWS SUMMARY
INTERNATIONAL A2-8
A plan to develop Soviet oilfields would be the largest Soviet-American business venture ever.
The plan has become enmeshed in the nation's fear of capitalism and the new muckraking of its free press.
Page A1
A resolution to allow Iraq to sell oil, up to $1.6 billion worth, was adopted by the Security Council on the condition that a third of any revenues go for war claims.
But Iraq said it would not sell under the conditions.
A8.
The chief Israeli hostage negotiator said his Government would be "very flexible" about trading prisoners, but he repeated that nothing would take place until Israel learned what happened to its missing servicemen.
A8
The United Nations' intermediary in the hostage talks has been Giandomenico Picco, an Italian-born diplomat who has kept a low profile while conducting some of the most delicate United Nations missions.
A8
Israel is deporting Palestinian women who joined spouses A8
Criminals in France and Spain are gaining special notoriety this summer by branching out beyond their usual games of picking pockets and snatching suitcases.
A1
A barge capsized near Hong Kong, killing 16 in the stormy South China Sea.
At least 168 were rescued after the barge carrying nearly 200 oil workers sank.
A3
Jailed Chinese dissidents start hunger strike A6
A draft peace accord in South Africa has been agreed on by the Government and the country's two largest black political organizations.
The accord is intended to end the violence that afflicts black townships.
A7
Montreal Journal: Quebec's new minority issue A4
Support for the Mexican Government seems to be growing, in part because of a huge program for local projects like repaving roads.
Officials hope the program will restructure the ruling party's grass-roots support.
A3 NATIONAL A10-13, B6
The disclosure at Salomon Brothers that three top officals knew about illegal bidding has moved an unfolding scandal from an embarrassment to a serious threat to the future direction of the investment house.
A1
The resignation of Clark M. Clifford as chairman of a Washington bank was the result of a campaign by the Federal Reserve Board, which was worried that the bank could fail because of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal.
A1
A former New York stockbroker pleaded guilty to wire fraud in a $120 million scheme to defraud her company, Nikko Securities, one of Japan's largest brokerages, and a Swiss investment bank.
D1
The Federal deficit will hit a record next year of $362 billion, despite the end of the recession.
The Congressional Budget office blamed spending for banks and savings and loans, as well as higher Medicare costs.
A1
A judge ordered the Census Bureau to give California figures it devised to correct the undercount in the census.
The ruling opens the possibility that states and cities might redraw political boundaries on their own.
A10 Arkansas Governor forms Presidential panel A13
All phone users in Southwestern Ohio had their records checked in an effort by law-enforcement authorities todetermine who called a reporter to give information that Procter &amp; Gamble said was confidential.
A10
Hospital deaths under inquiry by Georgia and Alabama agents A11
Outbreak of salmonella poisoning traced to cantaloupes A13
The American Medical Association has canceled plans to publish medical reports sponsored by drug companies.
Federal officials warned that the plan might violate laws on drug promotions.
B6
Insurance rebates to Californians are being sought by the state's insurance department, which is seeking $2.5 billion for consumers.
A spokesman said the industry would almost certainly fight the move in court.
B6
Housing starts rose by 3.7% in July D1
Oakland Journal: Newspaper is author of its own image A10
Judge rules Detroit school plan is illegal A10 REGIONAL B1-5
Fare beating on the subways is rising again, a year after New York City began an aggressive campaign to combat people who sneak into the subways.
Transit officials say they are puzzled about the reasons.
A1
A stray bullet killed a church deacon in East New York as she was riding in a van bought so parishioners could travel through the neighborhood safely.
An anti-violence rally was canceled for her memorial service.
A1
Families of the Happy Land victims go to court every day in the hope of seeing Julio Gonzalez convicted of 87 murders.
But they are frustrated by what they see as bureaucratic impediments to justice.
B1
New chief for New York City police B4
New fears on nuclear plant mishap B2
Sewage plants: smelly, but controllable B3
Tape of CUNY professor's speech draws 1,000 in Brooklyn B3
Paul Simon's concert in Central Park was one of those collective events where everyone was bound together electronically even if they were not there in person.
And a lot of people were there in person.
B1
Traffic agents wrote false tickets or wrote them by memory, Mayor Dinkins said, announcing that 10 agentswere disciplined.
Rather than writing tickets, they shopped or loitered in candy shops or restaurants.
B5
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. put forward a new tax plan, which legislators immediately pronounced unpassable.
The plan had the shortest lifespan yet among the dozens proposed -- about half a day.
B1
The march Jesse Jackson is leading in Connecticut hit its fifth day, as a crowd of about 200 walked into the city of Meriden.
The march, called "Rebuild America," seems curiously in tune with the unsettled state.
B2
An inquiry into New Jersey hospitals was ordered by Gov.
Jim Florio after the state received a deluge of complaints from people who did not get tax rebate checks because hospitals said they did not pay their bills.
B1 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Weekend
A walk around Manhattan C1
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
"Damon Runyon's Tales" C3
Film: At the Movies C8
"On the Black Hill" C8
"Mystery Date" C9
"Terezin Diary" C11
Music: Berkshire Opera Company C3
A trio from Japan C5
Art: Collections of three art dealers C1
Alland's optimistic photographs C14
Art in Review C20
Auctions C10
Restaurants C18
Word and Image: Stories by Padgett Powell C21
TV Weekend C22 Law Page B16
Asbestos cases pose test for a court ringmaster Obituaries D16
Chauncey G. Suits, ex-research director for General Electric
Marietta Tree, delegate to the United Nations Sports B8-14
Don Mattingly would not cut his hair so the Yankees benched him and fined him minutes before the game against the Kansas City Royals.
For the rebuilding Yankees, it was just like old times.
A1
Baseball: Yanks vs. Mattingly B9
Cardinals beat Mets B11
Boxing: The unknown champion B9
Columns: Vecsey on Cuba B9
Lipsyte has some questions B11 Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A22
Republicans and the homeless
Downgrading dioxin
Two good F.D.I.C. guardians
Little women


Asbestos Cases Pose Test for a Court Ringmaster
Those who have watched him work say Charles R. Weiner, a Federal District Judge in Philadelphia, is all business, briskly decisive.
Last August, when he joined 10 other judges at a private meeting to work out a solution to the wave of asbestos lawsuits that has begun to drown their courts, something made Judge Weiner unhappy, and he got up and left.
Accounts differ over why he walked out, although some participants say he disapproved of their efforts to hand over to three judges thousands of pending Federal asbestos cases.
Ultimately, the agreement disintegrated when a Federal appeals court challenged it.
Now, however, it is Judge Weiner, all by himself, who has inherited this enormous caseload.


Standard Brands
The Standard Brands Paint Company said today that it had received "indications of interest" from several investor groups proposing a number of deals, including replacing bank financing and debt and equity financing.
The share price of Standard Brands fell 12.5 cents today, to $5.50, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange.


Jersey Turnpike's $423 Million Issue
As the first phase of a large refunding, the New Jersey Turnpike Authority plans to sell about $423 million in revenue bonds next week, according to a spokesman for Lazard Freres, the authority's financial adviser.
The First Boston Corporation will be the lead underwriter.
Altogether, the authority plans to issue about $2.8 billion in debt for the refunding.
The program will also include the purchase of 4.4 miles of Interstate 95 from the State of New Jersey to help ease the state's financial problems.


Marietta Tree, Former U.N. Delegate, Dies at 74
Marietta Tree, a daughter of privilege who won plaudits as a representative to the United Nations in the 1960's and as a tireless worker for New York City causes, died yesterday at New York Hospital.
She was 74 years old.
She died of cancer, her son-in-law, James Sterba, said.


Little Women
Barbie has a competitor.
She is, in human terms, 36-27-38 to Barbie's 36-18-33.
She also has a shorter neck, shorter legs and bigger feet.
Call her Stubby.
No, that's not fair.
Her real name is Happy to Be Me, and she's the brainchild of one Cathy Meredig, who has sunk her every cent into designing a wholesome alternative for little girls who like to dress up dolls.
The child raised with Happy to Be Me, she figures, may be less likely to assume that beauty requires a bigger bustline than hipline and legs that start just south of the shoulders.


On Stage, and Off
A Home for 'Moe'
Talk about slow.
Only 12 of the 37 Broadway theaters are operating this summer, one of the dreariest ever.
So all hopes are riding on potential bookings for the new season.
And when one of those shows is a musical produced by Cameron Mackintosh ("Miss Saigon," "The Phantom of the Opera"), the competition for where it will be staged is fierce.


On My Mind; Glad, Not Grateful
The diplomats from the West, Israel and the United Nations who are trying to get the hostages freed are keeping their mouths zipped about some of the basic realities underlying the negotiations process.
That is fair enough.
It is not the job of those diplomats to serve as educators of the public about the whole vicious story of hostage-taking, how it works, or the dangers of it happening again.
Their job is to get the hostages out as soon as possible.


On a March to Hartford, Jackson Rallies Crowds
It had taken two days to cover the 20 miles from New Haven, 20 miles of hot pavement lined with factories and warehouses, car dealerships and fast-food restaurants, tire stores, tanning salons and kung fu schools.
People had come out to watch: A half-dozen salesmen and yard workers from Colony Lumber in Wallingford.
The salesmen and mechanics from Century Toyota.
Construction workers.
An elderly couple in front of their house on hot, straight Route 5, which had not seen so much excitement, they said, since the neighborhood store had a big lottery winner.


BRIEFS
*
Amoco Netherlands Petroleum Co., The Hague, said it had signed an agreement to set up a plant to begin producing natural gas from discoveries off the coast of the Netherlands by late 1993. *
Compuadd Corp., Austin, Tex., said that as part of an expansion it will open its 100th computer retail store this weekend.


Executive Editor Is Appointed at Daily Variety
Steve West, assistant business editor of The Los Angeles Times, has been named executive editor of Daily Variety, the 58-year-old entertainment daily.
He succeeds Peter Pryor, who was the third editor in the publication's history and the son of a former editor, Tom Pryor.


Pop/Jazz; Japanese Trio With Songs Of Animals And Oysters
Shonen Knife is a trio of young women from Osaka, Japan.
They write simple, spare pop songs about friendly animals and things that are good to eat, like "I Wanna Eat Chocobars" and "Bear Up Bison"; onstage, they wear bright red lipstick and dress in matching costumes.
Tonight, when Shonen Knife plays its first show in New York City, at CBGB, the members will celebrate by wearing their favorite costume: knee-length white dresses with bold geometric black lines and boxes of bright colors, like Mondrian paintings.
Although the members of Shonen Knife say they are excited to be on a mini-tour of the United States -- their show tonight caps a week of performances in cities including Los Angeles, San Francisco and Hoboken, N.J. -- they are a bit overwhelmed by all the attention they have been receiving.
In Japan, they perform once every month or two in small clubs to audiences of 100 to 200 people; their latest album, "712," is their first on a Japanese major label (Nippon Crown), after several independent releases.


WALL STREET SEES A SERIOUS THREAT TO SALOMON BROS.
The disclosure that Salomon Brothers' three top officals had known for several months about illegal bidding by the firm in the Treasury securities market has moved an unfolding scandal from an embarrassment to a serious threat to the future status of the investment house.
The view of traders and analysts on Wall Street seemed to turn markedly against Salomon, after the firm's disclosure on Wednesday that John H. Gutfreund, the chairman and chief executive, knew in April about one illegal bid made by the firm, as did Thomas W. Strauss, the firm's president, and John W. Meriwether, a vice chairman.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Wednesday from The Associated Press about a dispute over the broadcasting of miracle healings in Britain misidentified an evangelist, Morris Cerullo.
He is the president of Morris Cerullo World Evangelism Inc.; he left the Assemblies of God about 10 years ago.


Turning Sewage Plants Into Friendly Neighbors
In sewage treatment, smell comes with the territory.
But unlike the city's experience at the North River sewage plant in Harlem, odors can be controlled.
Engineers say doing so requires a well-designed plant, good control of the treatment process and a more intangible element: strong morale among plant workers.


Hearst and Dow Jones To Test Joint Magazine
Hearst Magazines and Dow Jones &amp; Company announced Wednesday that they had signed an agreement regarding the long-expected test of their personal-finance magazine, Smart Money, The Wall Street Journal Magazine of Personal Business.
A trial issue of the joint-venture magazine is to appear on March 2.
The project will be overseen by John Mack Carter, Hearst's director of magazine development, and Norman Pearlstine, the executive editor of The Journal.


A Hole in the Schedule? It's Tennis to the Rescue
CBS had this two-hour hole in its schedule on Sunday, Aug. 25, the day before the United States Open Tennis Championships begin.
The network told the United States Tennis Association to fill it.
It wasn't so much an order as an element in the new five-year contract between CBS and the U.S.T.A. to air the Open.
So the U.S.T.A. emerged with the idea to stage a meaningless made-for-TV exhibition.
Who shall star?
How about two men?
Nah, they're playing the finals of the Hamlet Challenge on Long Island.


Florio Orders Investigation Into Hospitals
New Jersey has received a deluge of complaints from people who did not get tax rebate checks because hospitals said they did not pay their bills.
Today Gov.
Jim Florio called for a broad investigation of what is going on at the hospitals, saying officials had discovered what appears to be a widespread pattern of duplicate billing, poor accounting and lax collection procedures by a number of hospitals in the state.
A particular focus of the inquiry will be operations of the fund that covers health care for uninsured residents, a fund that is $831 million in debt.


Return of the Highwayman: Tourists Are Prey in Europe
July and August are vacation months for everyone in Europe except thieves, and they are gaining special notoriety in France and Spain this summer by going beyond picking pockets and snatching suitcases.
In southern France, their new specialty is to break into sleeper compartments on overnight trains and remove belongings so silently that travelers never notice.
On occasion, the so-called "train pirates" are said to have used gases to insure that the passengers slept on.


Census Office Told to Give California Adjusted Figures
Opening the possibility that states and cities could use unofficial census figures to redraw political boundaries, a Federal judge has directed the Census Bureau to give the California Senate the numbers the bureau had wanted to use to correct the 1990 count.
Those numbers were rejected by the Bush Administration a month ago.
Political scientists and lawyers said that, if upheld, the ruling, issued Wednesday by Judge Consuelo B. Marshall of the Central District of California, could substantially alter the districts in which candidates for the State Assembly and Senate and possibly Congress will run starting next year.
The changes could add political strength to the largely minority areas where the undercount was greatest, they said.


Military Honors for Former Astronaut


Law Firm Spared in '$92 Million Boo-Boo'
For more than five years, it was widely known on Wall Street as the "$92 million boo-boo" -- the one that those who deal in high finance hope they will never make.
In this case, it involved a $92,885,000 mortgage by the Prudential Insurance Company on eight container ships owned by the United States Lines, in which the final three zeros were inadvertently dropped when the mortgage was filed in 1986.
The mistake meant Prudential's lien on the ships was listed as only $92,885.


Review/Film; Remembering the Horrors of the Nazis' 'Model Camp'
"Terezin Diary," a new addition to the list of films about the Holocaust, documents the history of the so-called model camp established by the Nazis in 1941 at Terezin (Theresienstadt), an old fortress town near Prague.
A 1944 Nazi propaganda film, "The Fuhrer Gives a Town to the Jews," presented the camp as an idyllic setting where children, their parents and old people could live, work and play far from the cares of a world at war.
About the same time, a Red Cross team inspected the camp and gave its approval.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Assix Inc., Tampa, Fla., which manufactures automotive wheel balancing equipment, named George Crook president of its Assix Automotive N.A. division, succeeding Ron Shamlaty who has resigned.
Mr.
Crook also continues to hold the position of vice president-group operations. *
BDM International Inc., McLean, Va., a Ford Motor Co. subsidiary that provides technical and professional consulting services, named James S. Cassity senior vice president-systems for command, control, communications and computers.


CHRONICLE
When MARVIN S. TRAUB steps down in November as the chairman of Bloomingdale's, a farewell party of large proportions at the New York Hilton will celebrate his 41 years in retailing.
The theme of the event on Nov. 11 will be Harvard University, where Mr.
Traub received a bachelor's degree in 1947 and an M.B.A. in 1949.
NEIL L. RUDENSTINE, the new president of Harvard, will address the gathering, and proceeds will aid needy Harvard undergraduates.
A footnote to the tribute is that YVES SAINT LAURENT, who "has never, ever put his name to a committee for any event, anywhere," has signed on for the dinner committee, a spokeswoman for Mr.
Traub said.


CHRONICLE
KARL MALDEN has been elected to a third consecutive one-year term as president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
With 4,985 voting members in the industry, the prime function of the academy, which has headquarters in Beverly Hills, Calif., is the annual Oscars ceremony.


Jailed Chinese Dissidents Start Hunger Strike
Two leading Chinese dissidents, each serving a 13-year jail term for his role in the Tiananmen Square democracy movement, have started hunger strikes to protest poor prison conditions, relatives and people close to the families said today.
One of the prisoners, Wang Juntao, a 33-year-old editor and democracy advocate, told his parents on Tuesday that he would start refusing food that day, as a protest against prison conditions and in response to the authorities' sudden cancellation of a visit by his wife, usually a monthly event.


Corrections
Because of a mechanical error, the continuation of a front-page article yesterday about William J. Casey omitted the first several lines.
The affected paragraphs should have read:
"Who could tell Senate investigators just when Robert M. Gates, Mr. Bush's nominee for Director of Central Intelligence, learned about the plot to finance the Nicaraguan contras with money from the sale of arms to Iran? Was it before or after Mr. Gates has said he learned of the affair?


No Laughing Matter As Cards Sweep Mets
The lineup posted in the clubhouse included these names: Cobb, Ruth, Dickey, Appling.
"My fantasy lineup," said Bud Harrelson.


Covert-Disclosure Bill Is Signed by President
President Bush today signed a bill on covert operations intended to close a loophole blamed for the Iran-contra scandal.
But he made it clear that he would use his own discretion on whether to follow the law's tighter requirements on notifying Congress about secret intelligence operations abroad.
Mr.
Bush vetoed another version of the bill, the 1991 Intelligence Authorization Act, last November.
Among other things, the earlier version would have classified as a covert act that required Congressional notice any request by the Government that a third party conduct a secret operation.
Mr.
Bush said today that he was pleased that the new version did not include that provision and others to which he had objected.


Mattingly Flap: Hair Today, Gone Tomorrow?
On opening day of his first season as principal owner of the Yankees, George Steinbrenner surveyed his players as they lined up along the first-base line during introductions.
Taking an envelope from his jacket pocket, he jotted down a series of numbers.
After the game, he gave the envelope to Ralph Houk, the manager, and instructed him to tell the players belonging to those numbers to get their hair cut.
Houk, who would leave at the end of the season, would have no part of it and tossed the envelope into the trash.
Four years later, during the 1977 season, Thurman Munson, angry with Steinbrenner, defied club rules and grew a beard during a road trip.
The reticent Munson bristled as the beard attracted more and more attention and questions and gave the owner an excuse to criticize Manager Billy Martin for supposedly losing control of his players.
Wishing to add no more fuel to the Steinbrenner fire that would consume Martin, Munson eventually shaved in a motel room in Syracuse, where the team was playing an exhibition game.


U.N. Troubleshooter: Shuttling to Free Hostages
A week ago amid reports that the release of at least two Western hostages in Lebanon was at hand, Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations was asked the whereabouts of his chief troubleshooter, Giandomenico Picco.
"My people are in the place I need them," Mr. Perez de Cuellar replied.
Three days later, when the British journalist John McCarthy arrived in Damascus after being held captive in Lebanon for five years, Mr.
Picco was at his side.


LEAP IN U.S. DEFICIT IS SEEN NEXT YEAR DESPITE 1990 LAW
The Congressional Budget Office said today that even though the recession has ended, the Federal budget deficit will leap to a record $362 billion in the coming year, from $279 billion this year, because of increased spending to rescue troubled financial institutions and their depositors, and an "explosion of Medicaid costs."
The nonpartisan agency said it "now projects much bigger deficits" than it did last winter, despite the budget package devised last fall by Congress and President Bush in an effort to reduce the deficit.


'A Big Jump' For Revlon's Campaign
FOR the first time in five years, Revlon Inc. is making over the advertising for its flagship cosmetics products.
The campaign, to make its debut next month, is a sharp departure from the elegant glamour of current ads.
Models are dressed in denim and leather, for example, not evening gowns and designer dresses, and they are smiling and laughing, not pouting and staring.
And in altering the way the company sells what its co-founder, Charles Revson, once called "hope in a jar," television commercials will feature the pop group Technotronic rapping a jingle with lyrics like "Yo! C'mon, move this, shake that body for me."


Dow Slips From Early Gain, Losing 6.94
The stock market yesterday repeated its pattern of recent days, scoring impressive gains in the morning but sliding back at the close.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which had been perched just above 3,000, closed below that barrier, and even secondary stocks, which had shown strength throughout the week, finally fell.


Economic Scene; The Broad Impact Of the Gulf War
IT'S been a year since Iraq invaded Kuwait -- and half a year since the United States and its coalition partners defeated Iraq in a land war that lasted 100 hours.
This seems like a good time to assess the effects of the Persian Gulf war on the American economy.
This was a unique war in American history in terms of its effect on the budget and the economy, both because it was fought out of inventories and because America's allies paid for the war, at least in the short run.
Indeed, the United States made a "profit" on the war during the fiscal year 1991, which ends on Oct. 1.


Bill Passed Requiring Stores to Mark Prices
The New York City Council unanimously passed a bill yesterday requiring stores to mark prices on most items, replacing a less-stringent state consumer law that expired this summer.
But Mayor David N. Dinkins has threatened to veto the measure as still too weak.
The bill would impose a maximum first-time fine of $1,000 on violators, a figure the Mayor contends is a "slap on the wrist." He said that "for a modest size supermarket" the fine "would be identical to a $5 parking ticket for the average citizen -- nothing less than a license to ignore the law."


The First Bozo Probably Wasn't a Clown
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 2 Law page article on the litigation between Bozo the Clown and Bozo's Hot Pit Bar-B-Q cites confusion over the origin of the name, and Bozo the Clown mentions a book about gypsy comedians written in either the 11th or 13th century.


S.E.C. Sues An Investor
The Securities and Exchange Commission charged a New York investor yesterday with operating "an elaborate free-riding scheme" that cost 15 brokerage houses about $3.6 million.
The suit, filed in Federal court in Manhattan, accused Peter Adler, a self-employed New York investor, of violating securities laws by defrauding the firms.


Oakland Journal; City Finds Its Newspaper Is Author of Its Image
The misunderstood city of Oakland almost lost its voice this week and in the process learned how much it needed its hometown newspaper, the nation's only major black-owned daily.
"This newspaper tells the world how a minority-government city is run," said Edward J. Blakely, the chairman of the department of city planning at the University of California at Berkeley and an Oakland resident.
"It is a testament to who we are and what we're doing."


TV Weekend; Three Short Stories About Men and Women
Women and Men 2," Sunday at 9 P.M. on HBO, is viewer friendly. By far the best of these dramatizations of three short stories comes first, leaving about an hour free for a good book. The offering in last year's tribute to 20th-century American writers consisted of works by Ernest Hemingway, Mary McCarthy and Dorothy Parker. Tonight brings Irwin Shaw, Carson McCullers and Henry Miller.
"Return to Kansas City," punchily adapted and directed by Walter Bernstein, is based on Shaw's tightly wrought story of a boxer (Matt Dillon) who is under pressure from his wife (Kyra Sedgwick) to go for the big fight and the big money before he feels ready.
She wants the cash so she can take the baby to visit the folks back in Kansas City.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 16


Art in Review
'Kingdoms of Land, Sea And Sky: 400 Years of Animal Illustration'  New York Public Library Fifth Avenue at 42d Street Through Aug. 24
This is the final week for an extraordinary display of animal illustrations drawn entirely from the holdings of the New York Public Library.
The images, which are on individual framed sheets and in open books shown under glass, date from 1500 to 1900 -- that is, before the wonders of photomechanical printing methods.
Thus lithographs, woodcuts and engravings, many of them handcolored, predominate.


What It Takes to Sit on the Supreme Court; A Catholic Education
To the Editor:
Lest some credulous person accept Carol Delaney's view of Roman Catholic education of women (letter, July 23), from my experience as a student in Catholic elementary and high schools in New York City, she is sounding a false alarm.


3 Law Firms Accused of Data Misuse
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation has filed suit against three law firms, charging two of them with disclosing confidential documents and a third with using the information to generate lawsuits against the company.
Two of the firms denied the charges, with one suggesting that Westinghouse was trying to divert attention from troubles with equipment it sold to electric utilities.
The third firm did not respond to calls seeking comment.


At the Movies
Other End of the Knife
"I'm always drawn to stories about characters who are somewhat isolated inside themselves by their inability to communicate in some way," said Randa Haines.
"That's what interested me about 'Children of a Lesser God.' That's what interested me here, too."


South African Black Groups Move Toward Accord
The South African Government and the country's two largest black political organizations have agreed on the outlines of a draft peace accord intended to end the violence that continues to afflict black townships.
The progress was announced today after a session lasting until late last night involving representatives of Pretoria, the African National Congress and the Inkatha Freedom Party.
Much of the violence has involved factional fighting between supporters of Inkatha and the congress.
The negotiations were held under the auspices of a committee of 12 church and business leaders that was formed after a Government-sponsored conference late in May.
The congress, which boycotted that conference on the ground that the nation's security forces were instigating the violence, sent a three-member delegation to the talks last night, as did Inkatha and the Government of President F. W. de Klerk.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Royal Oak, Mich., is offering $105.8 million in hospital revenue bonds through First Boston, which priced them to yield 7.10 percent for the 2020 maturity.
They are rated AA by Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's.


Review/Art; Vision of the 60's, From 2 Dealers Who Shaped It
SOMETIMES it seems that American art will never get over the 1960's, the halcyon decade when art movements, from Pop Art to Conceptualism, emerged at an astounding clip and the United States ruled the international art scene.
It's no wonder that the 70's seemed a bit quiet in comparison, or that the livelier 80's were constantly measured against their glittering grandparent.
The heady atmosphere of the 1960's is captured in an unusual exhibition at the Guild Hall Museum in East Hampton, L.I., one of the best shows held at this institution.
Spread throughout three of the museum's galleries, the show includes 39 artworks, paintings, drawings and sculptures that range from the proto-Pop efforts of Jasper Johns and Robert Rauschenberg to the sly Conceptual sorties of Joseph Kosuth and John Baldessari.
Together, they offer a fast-moving outline of the 60's that is unusually high in quality.
This may be because the art on display belongs to two of the era's most eminent art dealers.
The exhibition, which has been organized by the art historian Sam Hunter, is titled "A View From the 60's: Selections From the Leo Castelli Collection and the Michael and Ileana Sonnabend Collection."


10 Traffic Agents Accused Of Citing Phantom Vehicles
Some New York City traffic-enforcement agents, instead of ticketing illegally parked vehicles, have instead been loitering in candy shops, writing falsified tickets in fast-food restaurants or shopping, city investigators said yesterday.
In announcing the findings, Mayor David N. Dinkins said 10 traffic agents had been or would be disciplined for writing 104 falsified tickets or for writing up other offenses from memory.


Around Manhattan, Step by Step
DANNY and I walked around the perimeter of Manhattan Island and we're real proud.
There may have been greater pedestrian achievements -- the folks who walked to the North Pole and those on the moon, for two.
But sometime around halfway between the dawn when we were babies pulling ourselves up from all fours and the dusk when we will shuffle through a final doorway, we began and finished a special walk.
My just-purchased pedometer sneeringly insists we trudged 24.6 miles, but our calculations indicated the stinking little instrument was at least 10 percent stingy.
So we figure we hiked at least 27 miles in one full day on what, decidedly, was not a direct course.
We walked through 98-degree heat and a three-hour rainstorm; we got lost a half-dozen times, dodged bikes, cursed joggers, begged mongrel curs for our lives and were, truth to tell, somewhat the worse for wear.


Restaurants
In an age when the reigning philosophy says less is more, Palio remains an oversize nonconformist.
From its splendiferous bar to its tag team of greeters to its leather-bound menu and a copious wine list that's the thickness of a small-town telephone directory, this five-year-old institution goes all the way.
The restaurant name comes from a centuries-old horse race in the central plaza of Siena, Italy, called the Palio.
This theme is strikingly depicted in the ground-level bar with a bold wraparound mural by Sandro Chia showing the tumultuous annual competition.
The bar is a wonderful place for pre-theater drinks and snacks, although service there can be exasperating.
As you head to the second-floor restaurant, a greeter checks your reservation and ushers you into an elevator.
At the dining-room entrance, another greeter addresses you by name (more often than not, he picks the right person to address) and seats you.


Della Femina, McNamee Retains Shuttle Account
Della Femina, McNamee, New York, yesterday placed its first advertisements for the new Delta Shuttle, as the former Pan Am Shuttle's new owner, Delta Air Lines, announced that the agency would continue on the account.
Delta acquired the shuttle as part of its $1.7 billion purchase of Pan Am assets on Monday.
The agency has handled the shuttle since January, when Pan Am moved the account from Grey Advertising to consolidate all its accounts at Della Femina.


U.N.'s Intermediary In Freeing Hostages
United Nations officials date the involvement of Giandomenico Picco, troubleshooter to Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar, to the beginning of the organization's discreet involvement in efforts to win the release of Western hostages held in Lebanon.


Where the Fairs Are
Today
HISPANIC CARNIVAL, Amsterdam Avenue, between West 190th and West 193d Streets, Manhattan; sponsored by Carnaval Hispano de New York.
Today, tomorrow and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Information: (212) 740-2027.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.68
5.58
8.25
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.29
5.30
7.50
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.33
5.35
7.47
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.64
7.64
8.64
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.08
8.06
8.92
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.08
9.05
9.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
7.03
7.03
7.45
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Divi Hotels Sells Resort
Divi Hotels N.V. said its St.
James Inc. unit had completed the sale of the St.
James Resort in Barbados to a subsidiary of the Barbados Shipping and Trading Company for $5.3 million.
Divi said it expects to sell the land adjacent to the resort to Barbados Shipping next spring.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Claimed Jose Gonzalez, outfielder, off waivers from the Pittsburgh Pirates.
Optioned Mauro Gozzo, pitcher, to Colorado of the Pacific Coast League.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Assix Inc., Tampa, Fla., which manufactures automotive wheel balancing equipment, named George Crook president of its Assix Automotive N.A. division, succeeding Ron Shamlaty who has resigned.
Mr.
Crook also continues to hold the position of vice president-group operations. *
BDM International Inc., McLean, Va., a Ford Motor Co. subsidiary that provides technical and professional consulting services, named James S. Cassity senior vice president-systems for command, control, communications and computers.


Republicans and the Homeless
Finally, a humane policy toward the homeless may find a home in the executive branch.
The eight Reagan years were dark ones for Federal mental health policy.
The homeless -- many of them mentally ill -- became grimly familiar features of city streets.
But the Reagan Administration did worse than ignore them; it magnified the problem.


At the Bar; Bringing Tears to the Eyes of Lawyers and Comfort to the Lives of Aliens
When Manlin Maureen Chee was growing up in Singapore, she heard much from her parents about the Confucian hierarchy of occupations.
At the top, Confucius placed the educated class, who, because of their schooling, he said, bore a special obligation to serve others.
After that came farmers and laborers.
Both last and least were businessmen, whom the Chinese philosopher considered exploiters of other people.
Confucius created no separate category for lawyers, though in our era of lawyers-as-businessmen, their niche is arguably clear.
But by her good deeds Ms.
Chee has exemplified the Confucian ideal.
The 39-year-old lawyer, who lives in Greensboro, N.C., is one of five winners of this year's American Bar Association's "pro bono publico" award.
But she was the only one among them who moved many of her listeners, including Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, to tears as she accepted her award.


Fund Sweetens Offer To Carter Hawley Hale
The Zell/Chilmark Fund L.P. yesterday sweetened its offer for Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., the operator of 89 specialty stores in the Southwest and the West Coast that filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code last February.
After determining that some unsecured claims against the company may not be carried on Carter Hawley's books, Zell has offered to include such claims in its offer until they can be resolved.
At least 80 percent of the total face value of claims against the company and at least two-thirds of the trade claims must be tendered under the offer.


CHRONICLE
American Express is setting out to help increase tourism in Eastern Europe with a $500,000 allocation to train students going into the tourism business.
"Tourism will be a major source of jobs and hard currency for countries in Central and Eastern Europe, which are reshaping their economies," said TOMMASO ZANZOTTO, the president of American Express Travel Related Services International in New York.
He announced this week that the money would go for tourism training in Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland.


Behind Clifford's Resignation: Months of Pressure by the Fed
Clark M. Clifford's resignation this week from the chairmanship of Washington largest banking company was the result of a slow, tense three-month campaign by the Federal Reserve Board, which had become concerned that the international scandal surrounding the Bank of Credit and Commerce International could eventually cause the already weakened Washington bank to fail.
The movement to oust the 84-year-old Mr.
Clifford, one of Washington's leading lawyers and lobbyists, from the chairmanship of First American Bankshares Inc. began in June and came to a difficult conclusion last Friday, with Mr.
Clifford's formal agreement to resign, according to interviews with more than a half-dozen people involved in the negotiations.
The final vote to replace him took place in First American's board room, where a huge oil portrait of Mr.
Clifford gazed down on the deliberations.
No Face-Saving Offer
In effect, Washington's consummate lobbyist was lobbied out of the bank; no "golden parachute," no face-saving advisory job.
The fear among Federal Reserve officials -- increasingly shared by the bank's directors -- was that if Mr.
Clifford and his law partner, Robert A. Altman, stayed any longer as bank executives, depositor confidence might erode in a bank suffering losses from bad real estate loans.
The Federal Reserve's concern intensified late last week because of heavy withdrawals from First American's bank in Georgia.


Agent Johnson Reports for Duty
Pepper Johnson explained today why he and not an agent had negotiated his $3.1 million contract with the Giants, and why he had signed for three years and not two.
The bottom line was apparently the bottom line.
He said he had received maximum money and security by signing for three years.
At the same time, he held open the door to renegotiate in two years, although he said the contract said nothing about that.


Alan Haber, 34, Dies; Landmarks Panel Aide
Alan J. Haber, the spokesman for the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission in the early 1980's, died yesterday at Long Island College Hospital in Brooklyn.
He was 34 years old and lived in Brooklyn Heights.
He died of pneumonia resulting from AIDS, his sister said.


Nintendo Consolidates Account at Leo Burnett
Nintendo of America Inc., Redmond, Wash., yesterday fulfilled the predictions that many advertising executives made earlier this summer by consolidating its $45 million-plus account with Leo Burnett U.S.A., Chicago.


Quiet Champion Longs to Leave Obscurity Behind
The only sound in the room is the low, dull whir of the electric fan near Terry Norris.
Everywhere else -- in the living room, where his sparring partners are resting comfortably, and outside -- there is a silence and serenity that seems appropriate for Norris.
He rushed into measured prominence this year with resounding victories over Sugar Ray Leonard and Donald Curry, but Norris, who defends his World Boxing Council superwelterweight title tomorrow night in San Diego, remains a quiet champion, and still widely unknown.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The disclosure that Salomon Brothers' three top officals had known for several months about illegal bidding by the firm in the Treasury securities market has moved an unfolding scandal from an embarrassment to a serious threat to the firm.  [ Page A1. ]


For Children
Children's Art Show Paramount Gallery Long Island University 1 University Plaza DeKalb and Flatbush Avenues Downtown Brooklyn (718) 783-3077 Recommended ages: 7 and up Through Sept. 13
This exhibition of artwork by Brooklyn junior and senior high school students reflects the borough's diversity.
Working in conjunction with the Brooklyn Arts Council, the "Adopt-a-Landmark" show features paintings, drawings, dioramas, handmade hats and photographs directly related to Brooklyn.
The lonely shots of gritty, surreal Coney Island, taken by students from three local intermediate schools, are personalized by handwritten comments.
In one of Gus Kiste's photographs, two people are sleeping against a cinderblock wall.
"I feel bad for these people because they have no life," he wrote.
"They seem to fit into the graffiti." Fantastical hats that hang from the ceiling (which unfortunately prevents viewers from seeing them up close) were inspired by a Caribbean arts exhibition and are meant to evoke the students' experiences.
One hyper-stylish hat is decorated with sneakers as luscious-looking as tropical fruits.
And a detailed architectural scale model of the Dutch Colonial Wyckoff-Bennett Homestead in Midwood (it is a private home) was built by Edward R. Murrow High School students with Wei Ping Dei, an artist.
It can be seen in a display window facing the street.
The lobby gallery is open Mondays through Fridays from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission is free.
The Q, R, B, D, M and N trains stop at DeKalb Avenue, right next to the university.


Man in Photo Is Not a Suspect
A man whose photograph was distributed by the police on Wednesday is not a suspect in a series of rapes on the East Side of Manhattan, the police said yesterday.
The photo, which appeared in several newspapers and on television, was distributed in error, the police said, because of a malfunction at an automatic teller machine.


Guilty Plea In Fraud At Nikko
A former stockbroker in the New York office of the Nikko Securities Company, one of Japan's largest brokerage houses, has pleaded guilty to wire fraud in a $120 million scheme to defraud her company and a Swiss investment bank, the United States Attorney's office in Manhattan said yesterday.
During 1987 and 1988, according to a complaint filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, the former stockbroker, Mona Sun, created a fictitious company called the Chinese International Growth Fund.
She obtained the signature of Nikko's president, Kiichi Suzuki, on an unrelated document and attached the signature to a series of documents she used to sell investments in the fund.


Concert Fans Carpet Central Park


The Brown Inheritance
Paul Brown's two sons will inherit his shares in the Cincinnati Bengals, according to the late team founder's will.


Quick Rebuff for New Weicker Tax Plan
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. gave the state some new budget and income tax proposals today that were almost immediately dismissed by lawmakers as unpassable.
The plan broke a record for having the shortest lifespan yet -- about half a day -- among the dozens put forward over the last six months.
And the fiscal pace shows every sign of quickening.
Legislative leaders said late in the day after a meeting in the Governor's office that Mr.
Weicker had promised to veto any further attempts to keep the state running temporarily.
Connecticut, now the only state without a budget in place, has been meeting its obligations since the July 1 start of the fiscal year by passing two-week resolutions while lawmakers struggled to reach a compromise over Mr.
Weicker's effort to create an income tax.  3 Budgets, 3 Vetoes
The leaders said that the threatened veto, which the General Assembly could probably not override, would force a vote on a full-year budget as early as Monday, though no one was at all sure what kind of budget lawmakers might be called to vote upon and whether forcing a vote would actually end the crisis.
The current extension expires at 12:01 A.M.
Monday, but Mr.
Weicker has said he will keep the government running that day.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 554 money market mutual funds increased by $661.5 million, to $461.06 billion, for the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 205 institutional funds increased by $1.81 billion, to $137.20 billion.
The assets of the 259 general-purpose funds fell by $730.7 million, to $176.22 billion.
The 90 broker-dealer funds decreased by $420.8 million, to $147.63 billion, the institute said.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Agassi Is Upset Fabrice Santoro, seeded 14th and playing his second three-set match in less than four hours, upset an ailing Andre Agassi, 2-6, 7-5, 6-2, yesterday in the third round of the United States men's hardcourt championship in Indianapolis.
Agassi, the sixth-ranked player in the world, never found his power game against his 18-year-old foe.(AP)


Sounds Around Town
Rockabilly Legends
Rockabilly Jamboree, Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival, Damrosch Park, (212) 875-5400.
Hayden Thompson, Billy Riley and Ronnie Dawson are rockabilly legends not because they made the definitive recordings of rockabilly's heyday in the mid-to late 1950's, but because they've survived to present the music in its original state to new generations.
Mr.
Thompson and Mr.
Riley both recorded briefly for Sun Records (Jerry Lee Lewis was their piano sideman before he made it big), then moved to smaller labels as the 50's came to a close.
Mr.
Dawson, the Texas rockabilly singer and bassist, scored minor hits like "Action Packed" and "Rockin' Bones" in the late 50's.
The upright bassist Ray Campi worked out of Texas in the 50's and, later, Los Angeles.
The Jamboree also includes performances by Ray Campi and His California Rockabilly All-Stars, the Sun Rhythm Section, the Virginia rockabilly group the Foddrells, and a tribute to Johnny Burnette.
Tomorrow at 4 P.M.
Free.
Images of the West
Chris Whitley, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
With his foot-tapping rhythm on a miked floorboard and a National acoustic guitar in his hands, Chris Whitley is a rarity in current rock music: an un-self-conscious performer who seems to play for his own sake rather than the audience's, no matter how many people surround him.
The songs on his debut album, "Living With the Law" (Columbia), have a strange, hushed poetry that comes partly from the folk-blues influences he draws on, partly from the dry desert imagery and crazy-eyed outlaws that fill his narratives.
Sunday at 9 P.M.
Tickets are $6.
Village Cajun
The Levee, 76 East First Street, Manhattan, (212) 505-9263.
After the dinner rush has thinned out, the waiters and waitresses at this Cajun restaurant in the East Village clear away the big round table in the corner to make room for live music.
There's no stage in the technical sense, but otherwise the atmosphere is ideal.
The hazy orange-gold lighting reflects off Mardi Gras beads strung up behind the bar; the tables and booths are crowded but comfortable; the margaritas are more than respectable, and the popcorn shrimp is addictive.
Bands range from Big Louise, which plays genial, folk-rocky guitar pop, to the Blue Chieftains, rootsy rock-and-rollers.
And the fact that the bands are practically playing on your table top encourages spontaneity and audience participation.
It's informal music the way it's meant to be heard -- informally -- and as good a reason as any to leave your living room at the end of a long week.
Tonight, the David Brooks Trio plus Big Louise; tomorrow, the Blue Chieftains.
Music starts at 11 P.M.
There is no cover charge.


Review/Photography; An Idealistic View of What New York Could Be
If good intentions alone could make good pictures, Alexander Alland might have been a great photographer.
As it was, he was an energetic, imaginative professional who cared deeply about the social issues that catalyzed political debate in the 1930's and 40's.
He described himself as a "social-minded photographer," and he enlisted the medium in support of his beliefs about public policy, notably his strong commitment to racial integration.
"The Committed Eye: Alexander Alland's Photography" at the Museum of the City of New York, organized by Bonnie Yochelson, the museum's curator of prints and photographs, offers a thorough survey of Mr.
Alland's career, underscoring the connection between his photographs and his politics.
In doing so, this welcome exhibition also offers a case study of the possibilities and limitations of using photography to promote social change.


Books of The Times; A Potpourri of Characters and Their Stories
Typical  By Padgett Powell  207 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $19.
"We were, by 1980, out of a job, is what we were. It goes without saying it, that is life. They were some old-timers that just moped about it, and some middle-lifer types that had new jobs in seconds, and then us Young Turks that moped
mad.
We'd filler up and drive around all day bitching about the capitalist system, whatever that is, and counting ice houses.
We discovered new things, like Foosball.
Foosball was one of the big discoveries.
Pool we knew about, shuffleboard we knew about, Star Wars pinball we knew about, but Foosball was a kick."


What It Takes to Sit on the Supreme Court; Stay Affirmative
To the Editor:
I am tired of the hypocrisy inherent in such arguments as Stephen L. Carter's in "I Am an Affirmative Action Baby" (Op-Ed, Aug. 5).
He benefited from affirmative action initiatives but now opposes them for others.
Why?
Has racism disappeared?
Is there now equal opportunity for inner-city blacks, for whom he expresses some sympathy?
Mr.
Carter clearly has conflicts about preference policies that can only superficially be resolved by opposing such programs.


Arkansas Governor Forms Presidential Panel
Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas said today that he would form a committee to explore a run for the Presidency next year and would resign as chairman of the Democratic Leadership Council.
"I want to make it clear that I have not made a decision as to whether to seek the nomination," Mr.
Clinton said in a news release.
"But forming an exploratory committee will give me a means to look into this in a lot more detail and get the kind of information I need to consider right now."


Puerto Rico Kills U.S. Hope for Gold in Basketball
The United States' downward spiral in international basketball continued in stunning fashion this evening as Puerto Rico, bolstered by raucous support from Cuban fans, overcame a 10-point deficit and won, 73-68, in the semifinals of the Pan American Games.
The loss marks the fifth consecutive major competition in which the United States men's basketball team has failed to win a gold medal.
Puerto Rico moves on to meet Mexico in the championship game on Saturday, while the Americans will meet Cuba in the bronze-medal game.


What It Takes to Sit on the Supreme Court
To the Editor:
Geoffrey K. James argues Judge Clarence Thomas is unqualified to serve on the Supreme Court because he lacks "nuts-and-bolts legal experience" and has "never presided over a jury trial" (letter, July 23).


Legal Decisions Add to Adoption Problem for Child Agencies
To the Editor:
Andrew Stein, New York City Council President, oversimplifies the problem of freeing children for adoption (letter, July 22) by asserting that "bungling" by the city's Child Welfare Administration is the cause.
Terminating parental rights is a legal decision.
The child's social worker must prepare a case to be presented to the judge that supports the assertion that the parents are unfit to care for their child.
The burden of proof generally lies with the social worker.


Leslie Fay to Sell Sportswear Unit
The Leslie Fay Companies., a large manufacturer of women's apparel and active wear, said it would sell its Head sportswear division to the Odyssey International Group for $47.5 million in cash or assumption of debt and the value of merchandise sold until the deal is closed in mid-September.


Grains and Soybeans Gain As Rains Are Discounted
Prices of grain and soybean futures closed higher in active trading yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade as speculators took advantage of the previous day's selloff in soybeans to buy into the market.
The rally in soybeans was attributed to heavy buying by professional funds, said William Biedermann, an analyst with Allendale Inc. in Chicago.


Holding a Library in Your Hands
If the Sony Corporation has its way, handheld computers will no longer be novelties.
Sony, in its aggressive search for new markets, is preparing to introduce its own handheld computer, the Data Discman, that plays disks containing a shelf full of reference works.
The company wants millions of consumers to punch these devices for, say, an encyclopedia entry on asteroids, the proper spelling of accommodate, or the right wine to serve with veal.
Several much smaller companies have tried for years to build a market for such products, with only limited success.
The Franklin Electronic Publishing Company of Mount Holly, N.J., has sold more than four million palm-sized computers, but is still struggling to make a profit.
The entrance of a company with the technical and marketing prowess of Sony will provide the first real test of the consumer's appetite for portable information devices.


Gun for Sale Kills Teen-Ager
A 16-year-old Brooklyn youth was shot and killed yesterday afternoon in a Coney Island housing project when a gun that a woman was trying to sell went off, the police said.
The teen-ager, Louis Harper, who lived in the Gravesend Houses at 60 Carleton Avenue in the Fort Greene section, was shot at 1:24 P.M. inside the lobby of 2841 West 33d Street at the project.
The police arrested a 35-year-old woman, Maureen Bowman of 3201 Neptune Avenue, as she ran from the building.


Abroad at Home; A Muted Trumpet
Twenty-eight years ago, in the Gideon case, the Supreme Court held that every poor person charged with a serious crime was constitutionally entitled to a lawyer provided by the state.
The Court later extended that rule to all criminal trials.
The Gideon decision is a solid precedent, hailed from all corners of legal philosophy.
The current Supreme Court, even while narrowing other rights of criminal defendants, has described the right to counsel as fundamental.


Duties on Japanese Screens For Laptops Cleared by U.S.
The International Trade Commission cleared the way today for anti-dumping duties to be placed on imports of certain types of computer and television screens from Japan.
The decision was a victory for small American manufacturers of such screens and a blow to American manufacturers of laptop and notebook computers, which now import their screens from Japan.


69 Die as Burning Jet Crashes in Eastern India
An Indian Airlines jet flying from Calcutta caught fire and plunged into the hilly jungle of remote eastern India today, news reports said.
All 69 people aboard were killed, officials said.
The crash came a day after the airline received a hijack threat, an airline official said.


Arizonans Mourn Buddhists As a 3-Day Funeral Begins
Nearly a week after the biggest mass murder in Arizona history, law enforcement officials are no closer to discovering who executed nine Buddhists, including six Thai monks, in their temple west of here on Aug. 10.
At the temple today, mourners began a three-day funeral ceremony.
Although nine coffins will be displayed at the temple, two bodies will be cremated in the nearby town of Peoria and seven will be cremated in Thailand.


Cleaner Gas Planned in Cities
The oil industry and environmental groups have agreed on a plan to provide cleaner-burning automobile fuels in cities with the worst air pollution problems.
The agreement, signed at a ceremony today, will increase the price consumers pay for a gallon of gasoline by about five cents, said William Rosenberg, assistant administrator for air at the Environmental Protection Agency, which will turn the plan into a Federal regulation.
He said the oil industry expected to spend $3 billion to $5 billion to produce the cleaner-burning fuel.


Tropical Storm Is Off Florida
Conditions were ideal today for a tropical storm brewing in the Bahamas to turn into a hurricane as it crept toward the Florida coast, forecasters said.
Tropical Storm Bob had 45 mile-an-hour sustained winds this afternoon and was threatening the northern Bahama islands, the National Hurricane Center said.
Bob is expected to hug the Florida coast and grow to hurricane force by Monday.


Just Another Night's Work for Giants
A generation ago, it was a special occasion when the Giants played the Jets.
It was the good guys (take your choice) against the bad, our guys against their guys, the traditional against the new.
Now, the rivalry is almost businesslike, at least for the Giants.
When the metropolitan area's two pro football teams meet in an exhibition game here Saturday night, Coach Ray Handley of the Giants will be primarily concerned with evaluating players.


Ex-I.R.A. Member Is Moved to Penitentiary
Joseph Doherty, the ex-Irish Republican Army member held in a Manhattan jail for eight years, was moved this week to a Federal penitentiary in central Pennsylvania, his lawyer and a prison official said yesterday.
Mr.
Doherty, 36 years old, had asked to be transferred because living in the Metropolitan Correctional Center, a jail designed for short stays, was intolerable, his lawyer, Mary Pike, said.
He had been there since 1983.


Salomon Still Facing Broad Legal Problems
The leadership of Salomon Brothers, by saying yesterday that they would resign, made a dramatic effort to restore investor confidence in the powerful but troubled investment banking firm.
But Salomon still faces many legal and regulatory problems in connection with its admitted irregularities in the giant Government securities market.
It is too early to say how they will eventually affect the firm.
But unlike Drexel Burnham Lambert and E. F. Hutton, both of which faced major financial scandals, Salomon Brothers -- once its scandal became public a week ago -- moved quickly to try to mitigate its problems.
And this could help.


Bronx Jury Begins Deliberations In Social Club Mass-Murder Trial
Almost 17 months after Julio Gonzalez was arrested for setting a fire that killed 87 people at the Happy Land Social Club in the Bronx, a jury charged with deciding the worst case of mass murder in the nation's history has begun deliberating his fate.
Mr.
Gonzalez, a 37-year-old Cuban refugee, faces 177 counts, including two murder counts for each victim -- one for acting with depraved indifference, the other for felony murder, or death resulting during the commission of a felony, in this case arson.
The other charges include two counts of arson and one count of assault.


INSIDE
Jetliner Safety Order
The F.A.A. directed steps to avoid a malfunction that is believed to have occurred on a Boeing 767 whose crash last spring killed 223 people.
Page 6.
No AIDS Meeting in U.S.
Organizers said they will not hold the 1992 AIDS conference in Boston, citing American limits on visitors infected with the virus.
Page 6.
A Yankee Reconciliation
Don Mattingly agreed to cut his hair, the Yankees agreed to put him back in the lineup and his $250 fine was trimmed to nothing.
Page 27.


The Great Escape! (But Is It Worth It?)
Ah, Friday afternoon in August in Manhattan!
Another opportunity for thousands of New Yorkers to drive themselves toward madness in hectic pursuit of a weekend away from the hectic pursuits of every other day of the week.
Remember!
Have the bags packed Thursday night.
Make sure to leave the travel clothes out, and wear them to work, if possible.
Gas up the car.
Make sure the doorman will come up and feed the fish.
Get to the office early Friday.
No afternoon appointments, please.
Rush home.
Load up.
Hit the road early enough to get caught in a traffic jam with all the other people who thought they were leaving early enough.


Letter: On Cyprus; Peace Can't Be Achieved by Numbers
To the Editor:
"A Chance for Peace in Cyprus" (Op-Ed, July 20) by Representative Edward F. Feighan reflects an erroneous approach common among sympathizers of the Greek Cypriot cause: that is, underestimating Turkish Cypriots and assuming they are only entitled to second-rate status on the island by reason of their numbers.


Paine Webber In Staff Shifts
Paine Webber Inc. this week made changes in its fixed-income sales organization this week, a spokeswoman for the firm said yesterday.
Pat McDonald, a managing director who previously headed mortgage-backed securities sales, was named national fixed-income institutional sales manager.
Mr.
McDonald will assume duties that had been jointly performed by individuals from both sales and administration.


Ally Who Soured on Gorbachev Warns of a Stalinist-Style Coup
Aleksandr N. Yakovlev, an estranged confidant and reform strategist of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, quit the Communist Party today with a warning that party reactionaries were planning a vindictive Stalinist coup d'etat.
Mr.
Yakovlev's departure had been expected for months.
But he left with a melodramatic flourish, cautioning the nation that while the party leadership was losing influence, it was nevertheless "making preparations for social revenge, a party and state coup."


Public &amp; Private; Run, Mario, Run
The hot topic is how the Democrats can win in '92, and Lord, how poor is the outlook.
No matter who prognosticates about the future, about the Clintons and the Wilders and the Gores, the consensus seems to be that unseating George Bush will require something akin to multiplying the loaves and fishes.
I'm not worried about figuring out which Democrat can win, because worrying about winning is part of the problem.
I want the Democrat who doesn't mind losing for the good of the nation.


EXECUTIVES
*
Avon Products Inc., New York, the direct sales cosmetics company, named Gail Blanke senior vice president of corporate affairs and communications. *
Aircraft Service International Inc., Miami, an airline service company and subisidiary of Dial Corp., appointed Christianus T. Rademaker president and chief executive.


Patents; A System to Restore Water-Damaged Books
Eric Lundquist, the owner of a company in San Francisco that restores books and documents damaged by water, has invented a way to dry them without causing them to warp or buckle.
The system is designed to save material -- primarily office records -- that has been flooded or hosed down during a fire.
Mr.
Lundquist said the new method was a variation on freeze-drying techniques.
In that process, a book is placed in a vacuum chamber in which the temperature is chilled to about 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
Because of the low pressure inside the chamber, the water in the book converts directly from ice to gas and leaves the book dry.


Sports of The Times; Michael Becomes Heir Apparent
Just when the Mets seemed to be taking on the skin the Yankees shed when George Steinbrenner outsmarted himself and had himself banished for life, if not longer, the Yankees have let the Mets know it wasn't theirs for the taking.
Gene Michael obviously learned his lessons well as Steinbrenner's administrative assistant, scout, coach, minor league manager, major league manager and general manager.
Now he has inherited the owner's role as the man in the disciplinary hirsute.
Soon he may inspire the kind of prankish behavior in his players that prompted this bulletin-board note in the Yankees' clubhouse one Steinbrenner spring:


Seles Out of Olympics After Excuse Is Denied
The summer of censure for Monica Seles, the No. 1 women's player in the world, continued yesterday when she learned that the International Tennis Federation had banned her from participating in the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain, because of her withdrawal from last month's Federation Cup competition in Nottingham, England.
Less than a week before that event, Seles informed the I.T.F. that the same leg injury that had caused her 11th-hour withdrawal from Wimbledon would also prevent her from joining Yugoslavia's Federation Cup squad.
Yesterday the I.T.F., noting that Seles had played two matches at an exhibition in New Jersey the week before the Federation Cup, took the rare step of denying the validity of the medical excuse Seles provided for her absence.


The Best Home for Older Adults
Even when they're well managed, nursing homes are not the destination of choice for most older Americans.
A survey by the American Association of Retired Persons finds that 86 percent of the elderly want to live out their lives just staying put.
Society can help relieve them, and social spending, by helping.
More and more, in fact, are doing so.
Tamar Lewin reported recently in The Times that an increasing number of elderly are living in NORC's -- naturally occurring retirement communities, buildings and neighborhoods in which many older adults remain after the young people leave.


R. David Swindell Jr., Writer, 44
R.
David Swindell Jr., a travel writer and editor, died on Wednesday at Mercy Hospice in Daphne, Ala.
He was 44 years old and lived in Manhattan and Gulf Shores, Ala.
He died of complications of AIDS, friends said.


Review/Pop; Paul Simon's Audience Is Eager to Participate
These are the days of miracles and wonder," Paul Simon sang on Friday night to a crowd the police estimated at 750,000 on the Great Lawn of Central Park. They are also the days when multimedia tie-ins -- a live Home Box Office telecast, radio broadcasts, a possible home video and a live album -- make it possible for a hit-maker to give a free concert and throw in $400,000 for New York City.
Concertgoers treated the show as a local occasion, cheering every mention of New York or New Jersey.
But Mr.
Simon did not encourage them, perhaps with an ear to the electronic audience.
He said only a few words that weren't lyrics.


Chrysler Sets Rebates
The Chrysler Corporation announced a $700 rebate on its stripped-down Dodge Shadow and Plymouth Sundance America models on Thursday, cutting the base price for Chrysler's least expensive car below $8,000.
The Shadow and Sundance have a base sticker price of $8,184.
The cash rebate drops the price to $7,484, among the least expensive new cars.
The America models became the No. 3 United States auto maker's only entry in compact cars after it ended production of the Plymouth Horizon and Dodge Omni in February 1990.
Chrysler also raised the cash back being offered on a variety of other models by $300 to $500.
Financing rates ranging from 2.9 percent to 9.9 percent remain available in lieu of cash, the company said.


Patents; Magic Wheel Could Have Many Uses
A professor of mechanical engineering at the University of New Mexico won a patent this week for what he has nicknamed the "magic wheel," a wheel that expands and contracts and looks something like a circular accordion.
What good is it?
University officials say the strange device could have many applications: as collapsible structures, from tents and buildings to garden planters, or as truck wheels that change diameter to meet the demands of different terrain, or as part of a smooth-shifting, infinitely variable transmission for cars and trucks.


About New York
The morning was worse than most.
Sarah A. had bathed, clothed and fed six grandchildren, and thought it best to sit down.
She has diabetes and isn't getting any younger.
Later, this 53-year-old survivor would attend the funeral of a favorite cousin who was shot three times in the chest the other night.
The TV buzzed loudly and eternally with no one so much as glancing at it.
People of various ages and sizes bounced in and out.
There was Jeanette, the seventh and last of Sarah's children.
She and her three children live in the East Harlem apartment.


George W. Mayer, Restaurateur, 82
George W. Mayer, the retired co-owner of Mayers Parkway Restaurant in the Bronx, died on Thursday at his home in Bronxville, N.Y.
He was 82 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.


Can Electrical Charges Really Stop Wrinkles?
What, if anything, can a jolt of electricity do for scarred or aging skin, even if the current is so low it cannot be felt?
Proponents of electrical stimulators maintain that the right charge in the right dose from the right machine can accomplish a variety of tasks, like temporarily smoothing wrinkled or sagging skin, diminishing acne scars and improving the appearance of stretch marks.
The technique is among the latest in the expanding arsenal of anti-aging treatments available at skin-care salons.


Henry F. Jackson, 52, A Professor at Hunter
Dr.
Henry F. Jackson, a Hunter College professor and an expert on United States foreign policy toward Africa, died on Thursday at Daniel Freeman Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 52 years old and lived in Los Angeles.
He died of toxoplasmosis, kidney failure and pneumonia, said a friend, Franklin D. Roosevelt 3d.


Quotation of the Day
"We cannot let our unfortunate mistake of not taking prompt action, when in April we learned of one unauthroized bid at a February Treasury auction, to harm the firm. We are taking this action to protect the firm, its 9,000 people and its clients." -- John H. Gutfreund and Thomas W. Strauss, announcing they would resign the top positions at Salomon Brothers.  [ 1:3. ]


Transformation in New York: An Exodus of School Leaders
Less than a month before classes begin, more than a sixth of the administrators in New York City's schools have decided to retire, and others are expected to follow them shortly.
This exodus of a record number of administrators, coupled with thousands of teachers' retirements, is expected to transform the leadership of the city's schools.
Education officials say the changes will likely bring short-term chaos, with schools struggling under new management on short notice, but will eventually aive younger people, and more minorities, a chance to run the schools.


Corrections
An obituary on Thursday about Victor F. Condello, a former lobbyist for New York City, misidentified his surviving daughters.
They are Dr.
Virginia Condello of Naples, Fla., and Veronica Coppola of Albany.


Pretoria Said to Advise Zairian Army
In a sign of the political realignment taking place in Africa, South African military advisers have begun training units of the Zairian Army, Western diplomats said today.
It is believed to be the first time that South Africa has been asked to provide military aid to a black-ruled nation.


Traffic Alert
Harlem Week Uptown Saturday Night Fair: 125th Street will be closed today between Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard and Lenox Avenue from 11 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.
Cooper Square Street Fair: Third Avenue will be closed tomorrow between 4th and 14th Streets from 11 A.M to 6 PM.


Music in Review
The Takacs Quartet  Avery Fisher Hall


CHRONICLE
Edinburgh International Festival, FRANK DUNLOP is retiring in a blaze of controversy after he bitterly attacked the Edinburgh Fringe, an arts program that offers alternatives to the mainstream festival's shows.
Both festivals began last Saturday and run through Sept. 1.
At a lunch for reporters, Mr.
Dunlop, 64 years old, who founded the Young Vic Theater in London in 1969 and has directed a number of Broadway successes, including "Camelot," said the Fringe had degenerated into a "third-rate circus" with "very little serious theater." Edinburgh will lose its international artistic credibility, he warned, unless something is done to keep the Fringe under control.


Ted and Joe, 1941: AUGUST 17


PERU LAWMAKERS VOTE FOR CHARGES
Peruvian lawmakers have voted to strip former President Alan Garcia of his immunity from prosecution in connection with his ties to the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
After six hours of strenuous debate, punctuated by insults, shouting and a brief pushing match between two delegates, the Peruvian House voted 88 to 76 Thursday night to accept a report by an investigative commission that asserts that Mr.
Garcia enriched himself in office, including looting the country of as much as $50 million and moving that money through Bank of Credit offices into foreign bank accounts.


Layoffs at Pratt
Pratt &amp; Whitney, the commercial aircraft manufacturing unit of the United Technologies Corporation, said 173 workers at its Connecticut plants had been dismissed.
The layoffs, which are effective Aug. 30, bring to nearly 1,400 the number of Connecticut employees laid off this year, a company spokeswoman said.
The layoffs are part of a continuing program to trim Pratt &amp; Whitney's Connecticut operations by 2,000 positions through attrition and layoffs because of the slump in the aviation industry, the spokeswoman said.


A Voice Scrambler for Cellular Calls
Thousands of cellular phone users in Northern California are buying a new system that scrambles voices to foil eavesdroppers, according to GTE Mobilnet, which markets the device.
But other communications companies say few of their customers have expressed concern about privacy.
GTE Mobilnet began offering the scrambler, the Commando 5000, in June in response to inquiries from the California state government, said Tony Frank, the company's marketing manager for the Pacific region.


F. H. Schneider, 73, Retired Bank President
Frederick H. Schneider, the president of Roosevelt Savings Bank from 1967 to 1983, died on Monday at his home in La Canada, Calif., where he was living in retirement.
He was 73 years old.
He died of lung cancer, said a spokesman for the bank, which is based in Garden City, L.I.


Still Crazy
Thursday night in Central Park turned into a milestone of mellowness and the first reason, obviously, was Paul Simon's music.
He has been writing memorable songs into a
fifth
decade now; and there were at least two generations evident among the 750,000 people in the park, more people than live in the state of Delaware.
A father asked himself what was his first recollection of Paul Simon; it went back to the movie score for "The Graduate," done by Simon and Garfunkel in 1967.
Indeed, the father found himself wishing that some place could have been found in the concert for Art Garfunkel as a gesture to the onetime duo.


Changing of the Guard at Salomon
When John H. Gutfreund, the chairman of Salomon Brothers, was once asked about the United States Government bond market, he responded, "It's a harsh world where mistakes are not charitably dealt with."
Yesterday afternoon, he proved himself right.
At a meeting of the firm's top executives, the tough-willed, 61-year-old chairman announced that he was prepared to submit his resignation, as was the firm's president, Thomas W. Strauss.
In doing so, the two most senior executives accepted responsibility for the trading violations in Treasury securities that the firm said it knew about four months ago but only acknowledged in the last week.


Jury Finds 5 Law Officers Guilty Of Accepting Bribes in Kentucky
A Federal jury today convicted five of six eastern Kentucky law-enforcement officers, including four county sheriffs, of taking bribes to protect drug dealings.
The jury deliberated about 20 hours over three days before returning the verdicts.
It was one year to the day after the six officers were arrested by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League


Bush Chides Protesters on 'Excesses'
In a rebuke of disruptive protests, including anti-abortion demonstrations, President Bush today counseled against "excesses" and said that demonstrators sometimes actually harmed their own cause.
Although the President has said he supports the Justice Department's recent decision to intervene on behalf of anti-abortion demonstrators in Wichita, Kan., his remarks today seemed to indicate that he was displeased at the way these and other protestors had behaved.


Pilot, 86, Killed in L.I. Crash
An 86-year-old pilot died yesterday when his small plane crashed into the Great South Bay about one mile south of Sayville, the Suffolk County police said.
John G. Lauchner of 125 Woodbury Road in Hicksville was piloting the twin-engine Beechcraft when it disappeared from radar screens on its final approach to Islip Airport about 3:40 P.M., said Detective Sgt.
Robert Boyle.
Mr.
Lauchner was believed to be the sole occupant of the aircraft.


Anne Sexton's River of Words
"If I should die before I wake, before these words appear in print, let it be known that I have instructed my daughter, my husband and all my various and sundry shrinks to publish any and all papers, transcripts, letters that they consider relevant to my life as a writer. I do not mean thereby to subvert anyone
else's
privacy, and I do not mean for my personal instructions to become public policy.
I am a poet, not a lawyer or a lawmaker."
So Anne Sexton might have written on the eve of her death in 1974, and so I would write, following her example.


Mayor's Son to Head Schools
The Elizabeth School Board voted 5 to 4 on Thursday night to appoint the son of the city's longtime Mayor, Thomas G. Dunn, to be Superintendent of Schools.
Thomas G. Dunn Jr. has been acting superintendent since December.
He replaces Mitchell Potempa.


Magazine Sale In California
A Santa Monica, Calif., trade-magazine publisher has purchased S.F. and Angeles, glossy home-design and fashion monthlies that appeared doomed when their parent company went under last month.
Steve Goldstein said in a telephone interview that he had purchased all of the assets "and none of the liabilities" of the two publications.
A sister magazine, California, was not included in the deal.


U.S. TRADE DEFICIT LOWEST IN 8 YEARS
A resurgence of exports of manufactured goods, low oil prices and shrinking demand for imports narrowed the trade deficit in June to $4.02 billion, the lowest monthly level in eight years, the Commerce Department said today.
Together with an announcement today by the Federal Reserve that output of the nation's factories, mines and utilities grew in July for the fourth straight month, the reduced trade deficit provided another indication of renewed strength in the manufacturing sector.
The growing competitiveness of American manufacturers in world markets, combined with oil prices below $25 a barrel, has now produced four straight monthly deficits of less than $5 billion.


U.S. and Soviets Press U.N. Role in Salvador Talks
The United States and the Soviet Union have sent a joint letter to the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, urging him to take an active personal role in resuscitating stalled negotiations to end the Salvadoran civil war, State Department officials said today.
The officials said the letter, delivered on Thursday, demonstrated that the two countries were no longer rivals in Central America and that they planned to intensify efforts to push for a settlement of the 11-year Salvadoran conflict.
In recent years, the United States and Soviet Union have supported opposing sides there, and the letter marked the first time that the two countries offered to coordinate efforts to promote peace negotiations.


Fate of One Top Officer Still Appears Uncertain
John W. Meriwether, a fiercely competitive Salomon Brothers vice chairman, is the only one of the three top executives who knew about Salomon's transgressions in the Treasury market last April who has not offered his resignation to the board.
It was too soon to tell yesterday whether, by not offering his resignation, he would be permitted to remain at the firm, or what the extent of his knowledge of the firm's transgressions really was.
Mr.
Meriwether is known within the firm as an ambitious executive who lives and breathes bond trading.
His reputation as a bluff-caller was enhanced by the book "Liar's Poker" by Michael Lewis.
The book opens with a scene where Mr.
Gutfreund approaches him with an offer to play a form of poker based on guessing the serial numbers on a dollar bill.
Mr.
Gutfreund was challenging Mr.
Meriwether to a game for $1 million.
As the story goes, Mr.
Meriwether countered with a $10 million bet.


Man Angry at the I.R.S. Admits Bombings
A soft-spoken aerospace engineer has admitted hurling 13 pipe bombs from a launcher toward one Internal Revenue Service center and trying to blow up three others.
The 45-year-old defendant, Dean Harvey Hicks of Costa Mesa, Calif., who the authorities say was seeking revenge because the I.R.S. had refused him a tax deduction worth thousands of dollars, pleaded guilty to the charges in Federal District Court on Wednesday.
He faces up to 43 years in prison when he is sentenced Oct. 16.


In Baltimore, a Breakdown of Justice
What appears to be an extraordinary breakdown in the American criminal justice system has left almost 100 prisoners languishing in the Baltimore city jail for up to a year with no fixed trial dates, and state investigators say they are seeking evidence of other prisoner rights being violated.
The investigators place the blame for the breakdown on a failure by the city's jailers, prosecutors, public defenders and judges to maintain prisoner records adequately and to review the records periodically.


Coslet Defends Testimony
Bruce Coslet, the Jets' head coach, responded to a report that he may have lied under oath during a hearing for a murder case in California by saying yesterday that he stood by his testimony.
Mike Blatt, a former interim general manager for the Seattle Seahawks, has been accused of hiring two men to kill a man named Laurence Carnegie.
According to prosecutors, Carnegie, who was killed by a crossbow on Feb. 28, 1989, was blamed by Blatt for his failure to get the Seattle general manger's job on a permanent basis.


News Summary
International 2-4
A confidant of President Gorbachev, Aleksandr Yakovlev, a reform strategist who was estranged from the Soviet leader, quit the Communist Party, warning that reactionaries were planning a coup d'etat.
Page 1


BELIEFS
One of the more curious displays of cultural illiteracy has been the consternation and bafflement created by Judge Clarence Thomas's expressions of esteem for "natural law." For some of the critics of the nominee to the Supreme Court, it was as though the man had let slip a reference to torture by thumbscrews.
Others squinted as though Judge Thomas had disclosed an obscure and probably sinister belief in alchemy.
These are strange reactions to a philosophical theory stretching back to Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, propounded by the Stoics, developed anew by medieval churchmen like Aquinas, elaborated in secular terms by Protestant jurists like Grotius and Pufendorf, reshaped to justify "natural rights" by Locke, Montesquieu, Jefferson and Adams, and invoked in the cause of racial equality by Abraham Lincoln, the Rev.
Martin Luther King Jr. and, yes, even the man Judge Thomas has been nominated to replace, Thurgood Marshall.


Man and Heart Mismatched, Hospital Says
A man received a heart from a donor with a different blood type in a transplant operation, and doctors were searching for a compatible heart while the man remained in critical but stable condition, a hospital said today.
Doctors at the hospital, Oregon Health Sciences University Hospital in Portland, said that after the man had passed his first day without serious complications after Wednesday's operation they were somewhat optimistic about his chances of surviving to undergo a second transplant.
The man has been placed at the top of the hospital's transplant list, officials said.


South African Aid to Zaire
In a sign of a political realignment in Africa, South African military advisers are training Zairian Army units, Western diplomats say.
Page 2.


Changing of the Guard at Salomon
Warren Edward Buffett, who is expected to become interim chairman of Salomon Inc., has a reputation for high integrity, brilliant investing and a caustic attitude regarding the foibles of Wall Street.
Mr.
Buffett, 60 years old, has a big interest in getting Salomon straightened out.
In 1987, Berkshire Hathaway Inc., the company he runs and on which he has built his reputation, invested $700 million in Salomon preferred stock.


CHRONICLE
DEWEY STOKES, a 50-year-old police officer from Columbus, Ohio, and a vocal supporter of gun control, was re-elected president of the National Fraternal Order of Police, the nation's largest police organization.
The election took place at the group's 50th convention, which ended yesterday in Pittsburgh.
JAMES BRADY, the press secretary who was shot in the head in the 1981 assassination attempt on President RONALD REAGAN, spoke at the convention, which is held every two years.
He praised Mr.
Stokes and the 225,000-member organization for their support of the gun-control measure bearing Mr.
Brady's name.
"Without your lobbying, it would not have passed," Mr.
Brady said on Wednesday.


Her Students Will Never Forget Her
To the Editor:
In your excellent profile of Judge A. Leon Higginbotham Jr. of the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit (Law page, July 19), the judge, who is black, traces the beginnings of his successful career to pressure exerted by his mother on his high school in Trenton, N.J.
She insisted that her son be allowed to take Latin, and this step put him securely on the academic track.
What you did not state was that Bernice Munce, the Latin teacher mentioned, who also tutored the boy in summer, was herself a black teacher.


Music in Review
Mostly Mozart Festival  Avery Fisher Hall


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Marietta Tree, a former United Nations representative and campaigner for New York City causes, rendered the name of the founding chairman of the Citizens Committee for New York City incorrectly.
He is Osborn Elliott.


An Iranian Speaks of a Hostage Deal
The Iranian Ambassador to Germany said in an interview broadcast today that Bonn's refusal to swap jailed Lebanese guerrillas for German hostages in Lebanon was not blocking an international hostage deal, but he urged Bonn nonetheless to consider a pardon.
In an interview with the German radio, Ambassador Seyed Hussein Musavian urged Bonn to show flexibility in deciding whether to free two brothers, Mohammed Ali Hamadei and Abbas Hamadei, both in their 20's , who are imprisoned here.


Patents; A Paint to Thwart The Graffiti Artist
Robert Riddle, a paint supplier in Deer Park, L.I., obtained a patent this week on a paint composition designed to combat graffiti artists and unwanted advertisers who paste self-stick posters to surfaces in public places.
Mr.
Riddle, the founder of Creative Telecommunications Technologies Inc., said he had developed the paint primarily for refurbishing coin-operated public telephones, which are constantly exposed to abuse.


Sex Abuse Suit Against Ritter Is Thrown Out as Too Late
A lawsuit filed against the Rev.
Bruce Ritter by a former resident of Covenant House who claimed the priest seduced him has been thrown out on the grounds that the statute of limitations had expired.
Darryl Bassile, 31 years old, had charged in court papers that Father Ritter, the founder of Covenant House, had sex with him several times in 1973 when he was 14.
Mr.
Bassile said that Father Ritter told him the sex was part of his counseling.


Corrections
The Advertising column in Business Day yesterday misidentified the advertising agency for Procter &amp; Gamble's Cover Girl cosmetics line.
It is Grey Advertising, not Leo Burnett U.S.A., which is the agency for another Procter &amp; Gamble cosmetics line, Clarion.


BUSINESS SUMMARY
Upheaval at Salomon
John H. Gutfreund said he would resign from Salomon Brothers in the wake of the widening scandal involving illegal bidding in the Treasury securities market.
The powerful chairman molded the firm into the premier bond-trading house on Wall Street.
The firm's president, Thomas W. Strauss, also said he would step down, and Warren E. Buffett, who has a big stake in the firm, said he would step in as chairman temporarily.  [ Page 1. ]
For Gutfreund, the move was a shocking and abrupt end to an otherwise impressive 38-year career.
He has led the firm for 13 years and was once dubbed the "King of Wall Street."  [ 33. ]
Buffett has a reputation for high integrity, brilliant investing and a caustic attitude regarding the foibles of Wall Street.
And with a $700 million investment, he has a big interest in getting Salomon straightened out.  [ 33. ]
Salomon still faces many legal and regulatory problems.
It is too early to say how they will eventually affect the firm.  [ 44. ]
John W. Meriwether did not offer to resign.
It is unclear whether the fiercely competitive vice chairman will stay.  [ 44. ]  The Economy
The trade deficit narrowed in June to $4.02 billion, the lowest monthly level in eight years, on a resurgence of exports of manufactured goods, low oil prices and shrinking demand for imports, the Commerce Department said.  [ 1. ]
Bush said he would sign a bill providing extended unemployment benefits but would block spending of the $5.8 billion.  [ 1. ]
Production rose at U.S. factories, mines and utilities for a fourth straight month in July, the Fed said.  [ 34. ]  Companies
Mazda is expected to announce details of a new luxury-car division next week that will begin operating in the U.S. in 1994.
Mazda hopes to challenge the Infiniti Q-45 and Lexus LS 400.  [ 33. ]
Chevron, Mobil, Shell and Texaco agreed to settle a long-running price-fixing case for more than $180 million, California officials said.
Each company agreed to pay $45 million.  [ 33. ]
Pioneer Hi-Bred's bumpy ride through the 1980's illustrates that the pursuit of wonder products does not necessarily yield wonder profits.  [ 33. ]
Orion Pictures has struck a deal with bondholders that will keep it out of bankruptcy court, and the company's shares plunged.
John W. Kluge, Orion's majority stockholder, will put in $50 million in exchange for the bondholders forgiving $267 million in debt.  [ 35. ]
Electronic Data Systems said it had won its hostile bid for control of SD-Scicon, a British computer services company.  [ 35. ]  Markets
The stock market dropped sharply, shaken by the turmoil at Salomon Brothers and some spotty bad news on earnings.
The Dow ended at 2,968.02, off 30.41 for the day and 28.18 for the week.  [ 33. ]
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed, as dealers kept one eye on new economic data and the other on Salomon.  [ 36. ]
The dollar staged another broad advance, with dealers saying the rise reflected relief that rate increases by Germany's central bank failed to attract much buying of the mark.  [ 41. ]
Platinum futures prices rose more than $5, ending a three-day string of losses.  [ 41. ]  Today's Columns
Many people are scrambling to get a better return with short-term interest rates down to about 5 percent, but in doing so they often expose their principal to risk.
Your Money.  [ 34. ]
A "magic wheel," which expands and contracts and looks something like a circular accordion, has been patented by a professor of mechanical engineering.
Among the strange device's many applications: truck wheels that change diameter to meet the demands of different terrain.
Patents.  [ 34. ]


Delta and Pan Am Face Europe Study
The European Community commission announced that it would examine Delta Air Lines Inc.'s proposed purchase of most of Pan American World Airways' routes in Europe.
The commission will have a month to decide whether Delta's purchase of some of the struggling airline's routes and equipment falls within its scope to investigate large cross-border deals with an interest to the community.
If the deal does fall within its scope and creates serious competition worries in the 12-nation trade bloc, the commission can order an in-depth investigation of up to four months.
Delta does not anticipate any difficulties in getting the international route authorities transferred, a spokesman said today.
Delta has agreed to pay about $1.3 billion for several Pan Am assets including the Pan Am Shuttle and most of Pan Am's European routes.


Long Cleared to Return To Steelers' Practice
Pittsburgh Steelers guard TERRY LONG, who twice tried to commit suicide after tests showed he used steroids, has been granted National Football league approval to practice with the team pending an appeal of his positive test, but won't play tonight in Philadelphia, a spokesman for the Steelers, DAN EDWARDS, said yesterday.
Edwards said that Long hadn't made clear when he would return and that Chuck Noll, the coach, and Dan Rooney, the club's president, would decide how to handle the return.


For Fall Travelers, Bargains Aplenty
If you are planning a vacation this fall, there will be plenty of bargains.
The travel business is still reeling from the recession and the Persian Gulf war, when travel declined sharply.
Autumn is a traditionally slow season for travel, anyway, so there may be even more bargains than usual.
But there is an if, and sometimes it's a big if.
Bargains usually exist if the consumer can buy tickets in advance and travel in a certain time period.


Arts School Gets A in Looks, F in Leaks
"This building is falling down around our ears," said Betty Allen.
"It's only 12 years old, but there are so many things wrong with it." She was speaking of the Harlem School of the Arts, whose award-winning quarters on Nicholas Avenue near 141st Street opened a few months before she became the executive director.
The design, by Ulrich Franzen, was fine, she said.
The main problem was the execution -- by the sub-contractor, who "disappeared" before completing the job, and the contractor, who, she said, went bankrupt before the school could take him to court.


Uecker in Form
BOB UECKER, flashing the sense of humor that transformed him from a mediocre baseball player to a radio and television star, was back at County Stadium in Milwaukee last night for the first time since undergoing surgery to repair a life-threatening aneurysm.
The 56-year-old Uecker said he hoped to return to broadcasting Brewers games within two weeks, and was trying to return to a normal routine.
"I'm eating and doing everything I can do, driving -- pretty much on the sidewalks because I don't want to try the streets yet," he said.(AP)


Suspect in Iranian's Death Eludes the Police
For the second time in 10 days, a suspect in the slaying of former Prime Minister Shapur Bakhtiar of Iran slipped through the hands of the police because of a mix-up, a police spokesman said.
The suspect's hotel registration card was inserted into a police computer after he checked into a downtown hotel on Monday, but a computer failure delayed the indentification process until Wednesday, said the spokesman, Thierry Magnin.


U.S. Issues Steady in Light Trading
Prices of Treasury securities were little changed in light trading yesterday, as dealers kept one eye on new economic data and the other on the unfolding scandal at Salomon Brothers.
Reports on merchandise trade and industrial production were viewed as mildly negative by credit market participants, and bond prices eased after the figures were released.


Platinum Rises by Over $5 After Three Days of Losses
Platinum futures prices rose more than $5 an ounce yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange, ending a three-day string of losses, on news of a work slowdown at the world's second-largest platinum mining company.
Platinum for delivery in October rose $5.10, to $346.10, an ounce after falling a total of $15.60 in the three previous sessions.


Music in Review
New York Chamber Sinfonia  Winter Garden World Financial Center


New York Will Not Discipline Doctor for His Role in Suicide
The New York State Health Department yesterday said that it would not bring charges of professional misconduct against a Rochester doctor who admitted his role in a cancer patient's suicide.
Last month a grand jury in Rochester decided not to indict the doctor, Timothy E. Quill.
But he still faced the possibility of censure or loss of his license from the Health Department.


Aetna Stands Sound
To the Editor:
Your front-page article of July 19 correctly identifies the real problem that insurers now face: consumer misperception that our industry will suffer a savings-and-loan-type crisis.
Yet by continuing to air opinions that have contributed to that misperception, you aggravate the problem.


Reporter Is Buried Amid Questions Over His Pursuit of Conspiracy Idea
A freelance writer who was found dead with his wrists slashed in a hotel room in Martinsburg, W.Va., a week ago was buried near here today amid uncertainty about the cause of death and evidence that he was working on an article about a major Government conspiracy.
The body of Joseph Daniel Casolaro, 44 years old of Fairfax City, Va., was discovered by West Virginia authorities on Saturday in what was tentatively ruled a suicide.


New Rules for Bluefish Give the Poor the Blues
When Jose Rivera of Long Island City, Queens, sails from Sheepshead Bay in Brooklyn in search of bluefish, he is after more than just the thrill of pulling in as many of the fierce, combative fish as he can.
He is trying to put food on the tables of a crowd of other people, including his family, his wife's family and some of their neighbors.
"See how many people are out here on the fishing boat?" he asked on a recent morning, as he stood shoulder to shoulder with 20 other amateur fishermen on the Flamingo III, their lines cast over the side as the bluefish began to bite a few miles into the Atlantic.
"There'll be more people waiting for me when I get back with the fish."


Luigi Zampa Director and Author, 86
Luigi Zampa, a film director, screenwriter and author whose career spanned four decades, died on Thursday.
He was 86 years old.
A close friend reached at home said the director had died in a Rome hospital from complications of surgery.
He had broken a leg in a fall earlier this year.


Corrections
A report in the Home Video column on Thursday about videotapes of authors and their works provided an incorrect telephone number for Atlas Video of Bethesda, Md.
The number is (800) 999-0212.


Gay Benefits Issue to Go to Trial
A lawsuit contending that the domestic partners of the city's gay teachers should be eligible for their health insurance benefits can go to trial, a Manhattan judge ruled yesterday.
Lawyers for the city had asked State Supreme Court Justice Karla Moskowitz to dismiss the suit because the teachers did not meet state and city requirements for proving discrimination.


Dow Off By 30.41; Volume Up
Shaken by the turmoil at Salomon Brothers, in addition to some spotty bad news on earnings, the stock market dropped sharply yesterday.
Blue-chip stocks were hit hard, with the Dow Jones industrial average tumbling after a lackluster week.
The Dow plunged in the morning and was off as much as 46 points at about 1 P.M., with analysts speculating that many traders were dumping stocks in the expectation that further developments from the Salomon Brothers scandal might drive prices lower.


Judge Dismisses Queens Hopeful For Prosecutor
Vincent F. Nicolosi, one of the two major candidates in the special election for Queens district attorney, was ousted from the race yesterday by a judge who said his nominating petitions were pervaded with irregularities and exhibited "at least one case of patent fraud."
Unless Mr.
Nicolosi can overturn the ruling on appeal, it virtually guarantees that his main opponent, Richard A. Brown, who is serving as interim district attorney until Dec. 31, will be elected to serve for the two years beyond that.


Review/Dance; A World With No Chaos, Just an Orderly Disorder
Laura Dean's dances are orderly universes whose sleek surfaces are continuously disrupted by meticulously plotted disorder.
Repetitive and even-paced, Ms.
Dean's choregraphy and percussion scores can be both hypnotic and boring.
For those whose attention drifted during the three pieces presented by Laura Dean Dancers and Musicians at the Lincoln Center Out of Doors festival on Tuesday night, there was a good deal of magic in the rustling of trees around the Damrosch Park Band Shell and in a night sky filled with distant brightly lighted planes.
But to be drawn into Ms.
Dean's world is to experience the excitement of formal progression, whether of steadily building complexity or simply a do-or-die race to the end of a dance.
The dances presented on Tuesday -- "Inner Circle," "Magnetic" and "Sky Light" -- began almost unnoticeably but ended with the triumphant air of a runner bursting through the ribbon at the finish line.


Trial Delay Denied
MARTINA NAVRATILOVA will meet her former companion in a Fort Worth courtroom next month, after a judge's decision yesterday not to delay their palimony trial.
The former companion, JUDY NELSON, and her lawyer had sought a motion to delay the Sept. 9 trial, but State District Judge HARRY HOPKINS rejected the request for a continuance, a court clerk said.
Nelson's lawyer, JERRY LOFTIN, said he wanted more time to prepare his case.


Ethiopia to Let Israel Airlift Remaining 2,600 Black Jews
Ethiopia's new Government agreed today to let Israel fly out 2,600 black Jews who had been left behind after an emergency airlift of 14,000 to Israel in May.
The Foreign Ministry said the first group of 600 black Jews would arrive in time for Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, which begins at sunset on Sept. 8.
The rest are to arrive within three months.


Bridge
When asked whether he was ever sick at sea, Captain Corcoran of "H.M.S. Pinafore" responded "Never," then quickly changed his reply to "Hardly ever." That would be the appropriate response to an important bridge question: "Do you ever take out your partner's penalty doubles?"
The effectiveness of a low-level penalty double hinges on the degree of fit the opponents have found.
To double the opponents at the two-level when they have an eight-card fit is a dubious proposition, and is almost alway wrong when they have a nine-card fit.
Here, Certainly Wrong
On this basis East was certainly wrong to accept his partner's double of two spades on the diagramed deal, for his opponents were sure to have a nine-card fit.
It was played in a pairs event at a regional tournament in Reno at the beginning of the year.
South was Larry Merritt of Fremont, Ga., who showed his opponents the error of their ways.


Two Positive Tests
Two Australian cyclists have tested positive for the use of banned substances and will lose world championship medals they won last Wednesday, the medical jury of the world championships in Stuttgart, Germany, announced yesterday.
CAREY HALL and STEPHEN PATE, first and third in Wednesday's final of the professional sprint event, were the cyclists with positive tests, according to a statement signed by the president of the jury, LOUIS WERMELINGER.


Review/Music; Yo-Yo Ma and His New 'Hyper' Cello
For the premiere of Tod Machover's "Begin Again Again . . ." at Tanglewood last night, Yo-Yo Ma became a sort of bionic cellist, playing a concerto with what the composer calls "hyperinstruments" -- electronic transformations and creations of cello sound.
Mr.
Ma's wrist was fitted with a sensor that measured every move.
A pressure sensor on the bow responded to the cellist's grip and a radio transmitter measured the bow's movement along the strings; the fingerboard was wired with electronic strips as well.
An antenna mounted on the bridge received the information and fed it into a Macintosh IIfx computer.


Guidepost; An Interest in Interest
The sharp decline in interest rates for money-market deposits and certificates of deposit has sent investors in search of higher rates.
Some analysts recommend fixed-income securities like Treasury instruments, which are exempt from state and local income taxes, with maturities of not more than five years.
They recommend a "laddering technique" so the securities come due in consecutive years or at other regular intervals.
Buying directly from the Treasury saves commission fees.
Auction dates are announced in many newspapers and in phone messages at Federal Reserve Banks and branches.
Here are the securities available at auction and the most recent average yield.
Bills: Maturities are 3 months (5.3%), 6 months (5.39%) and 1 year (5.88%).
Minimum purchase $10,000.
Notes: Maturities are 2 years (6.94%) to 10 years (7.94%); 2- and 3-year notes can be purchased for $5,000 or for multiples of $5,000; 4- to 10-year notes, for $1,000 or multiples of $1,000.
Bonds: The 30-year bond (8.17%) can be purchased for $1,000 or multiples of $1,000.


Isomedix Stake Is Sold by Tiger
The Tiger Management Corporation, a Boston-based investment company, sold its entire stake in Isomedix Inc., a sterilization medical products company in Whippany, N.J.
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the investment company said it sold the shares between April 1 and June 28 at $16.75 to $20.75 a share.
Tiger held about a 7.59 percent stake in its last 13-D schedule filed with the S.E.C. last February, according to 13-D Research Inc.
Proceeds from the sale were between $127 million and $157 million.
The share price of Isomedix fell 37.5 cents today, to $17.50, in over-the-counter trading.


New Way Of Slicing Stamps Off Rolls
Those who buy rolls of stamps 100 at a time may notice a difference.
Yesterday the United States Postal Service began test marketing stamps with slit perforations instead of the usual round holes.
It is the first change in this fundamental stamp design in more than 60 years.
Initially the slit perforations are being used on rolls of 100 29-cent flower stamps.
The 100-stamp rolls are the most popular with the public; larger rolls of 500, 3,000 and 10,000 stamps are used by businesses with machines that use the hole perforations to dispense and apply the stamps.


Allen Barnett, Author and Educator, 36
Allen Barnett, an author and AIDS educator, died on Wednesday at his home in New York City.
He was 36 years old.
He died of AIDS, said a spokesman for St. Martin's Press, his publisher.


Puerto Rico Stuns U.S., This Time on the Diamond
The United States is rapidly becoming a sporting territory of the island of Puerto Rico, at least here at the Pan American Games.
For the second time within 24 hours, an all-star team of United States college players was beaten by an inspired national team from Puerto Rico in a semifinal of a major sport, this time in baseball by a 7-1 score.


Central Park Would Have a Bryant Memorial, but for Politics
To the Editor:
William Cullen Bryant (1794-1878), as owner and editor of The New York Evening Post, was not only the earliest and most persistent advocate of Central Park (letter, July 27).
After its establishment it was his voice that most often eulogized the many distinguished figures whose statues were unveiled along its central Mall.
After Bryant printed on his newspaper press the winning design for the park in 1858, Frederick Law Olmsted's and Calvert Vaux's "Greensward Plan," he successfully supported his friend Olmsted's candidacy for the park's superintendency.


Your Money; Search for Yields Requires Caution
With short-term interest rates pushed down to the area of 5 percent, many people are scrambling to get a better return than they can now earn on money market funds, certificates of deposit, bank savings and Treasury bills.
The trouble, financial experts say, is that often in their quest for a better yield people are making inappropriate choices, unwittingly exposing their principal to risks.


Electronic Data Wins In Offer for SD-Scicon
The Electronic Data Systems Corporation said today that it had won its hostile bid for control of SD-Scicon P.L.C., a British computer services company.
E.D.S., the information technology unit of the General Motors Corporation, said it had either acquired or agreed to acquire a "sufficient total" of SD-Scicon's ordinary shares to take control.
The minimum required would be over 50 percent.


RESULTS PLUS
HORSE RACING Lech Wins Stakes by a Head


The Great Escape: Is It Worth It?


Paula Porcaro, Consultant, Wed
Paula Porcaro, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Porcaro of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., was married yesterday in Tarrytown, N.Y., to Darnay Robert Hoffman, the son of the late Toni Darnay Morrison and the late Bill Hoffman of New York.
The Rev.
Samuel Morgenstern, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at Abigail Kirsch at Tappan Hill.
The bride, 35 years old, is a health-care consultant in New York.
She graduated from Columbia University and received an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
Her father is the president of Frankie Boy Produce in the Bronx.


Salomon's 2 Top Officers to Resign Amid Scandal
John H. Gutfreund, the powerful chairman and chief executive of Salomon Brothers Inc. who molded the firm into the premier bond-trading house on Wall Street, announced yesterday that he would resign amid the widening scandal involving illegal bidding by the firm in the Treasury securities market.
The firm's president, Thomas W. Strauss, also announced that he would step down as a result of the scandal.
Mr.
Gutfreund, Mr.
Strauss and a third executive had been told four months ago that the firm had made illegal bids, but failed to report it to the Government until last week.


Turnaround Specialist Is Selected for Insurer
The State of New Jersey said yesterday that it would seek to appoint Victor H. Palmieri, a leading turnaround specialist, as the chief executive and the state's deputy rehabilitator of the troubled Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company.
The appointment of Mr.
Palmieri, who successfully salvaged another large insurer, the Baldwin United Corporation, must be approved by a New Jersey Superior Court judge.
Approval is expected as early as next week.


California Oil Price-Fixing Case Settled
California officials said today that four big oil companies had agreed to settle a long-running price-fixing case for more than $180 million.
Chevron, Mobil, Shell and Texaco each agreed to pay $45 million to settle the case, which centered on charges that they had conspired to set artificially low prices for oil they purchased from the state in the 1970's and 80's, the officials said.


Videotape in Prison: 3d Voice in 2-Sided Stories
The video camera has become an important tool in investigating clashes between inmates and guards in New York State prisons, and its use is expanding.
Introduced in prisons more than a decade ago, the cameras were initially mounted on walls.
But these days, correction officers doubling as camera operators are routinely taping where there are no wall-mounted cameras, during inmate transfers and any unusual movements within the prisons.


BRIEFS
*
Allwaste Inc., Houston, said that it had completed the acquisitions of three companies: Cleaning &amp; Specialists Inc., Long Beach, Calif.; M.J.
Schmidt Inc., Milwaukee, and Y.E.S.
Services Inc., Golden, Colo. *
Figgie International Inc., Willoughby, Ohio, a maker of fire protection products, said that it planned to acquire Mayco Pump Corp., Los Angeles.
Terms were not disclosed.


Loss Narrowed at TCI
Tele-Communications Inc. narrowed its loss for the second quarter, citing a drop in interest expenses and an increase in revenue over the 1990 period.
The cable television giant said on Thursday that for the quarter ended June 30 it lost $25 million, compared with a loss of $44 million a year earlier.
Revenues for the quarter were $922 million, up from $890 million.
TCI, based in Denver, is the nation's largest cable television operator, with 8.6 million basic cable service subscribers.


PRESIDENT TO SIGN JOBLESS MEASURE BUT BLOCK MONEY
President Bush said today that he would sign a bill providing extended benefits for three million people who have been out of work more than half a year but said he would block actual spending of the bill's $5.8 billion in benefits.
He said at a news conference in Kennebunkport, Me., that while he sympathized with the unemployed, he would not carry out the bill because "I won't bust the budget."


For Thai Monks in U.S., Simple and Revered Lives
In Thailand, a Buddhist monk is one of the country's best and brightest, a holy man whose virtue is needed to bring blessings on the people.
He is referred to by his followers as "venerable," and when he wanders the street, Thais offer him more and better gifts.
In the Bronx, the site of one of the 40 or so


Youth Guilty of Hate Crime In Beating of Gay Neighbor
An 18-year-old man has been found guilty of a hate crime for beating his neighbor, a homosexual, in a videotaped attack that a judge ruled was prompted by homophobic feelings.
The verdict was returned Tuesday by Judge Thomas Edwards of Juvenile Court against Joshua Huff, who was 17 when the assault occurred on June 11.
Mr.
Huff, who is to be sentenced Aug. 26, could be held until he is 25 under laws applying to juveniles.


Gordon Lewis, Expert On the Caribbean, 72
Gordon K. Lewis, a leading expert on Caribbean politics, died today. He was 72.
The University of Puerto Rico, which reported his death, said he died after a lengthy illness.


Yes, It's an Exhibition, But for Jets, It Counts
Bruce Coslet, coach of the Jets, said he has noticed improvement in his team in their two preseason games.
But he wants to walk away from the Jets' game with the Giants on Saturday night with something more: a victory.
"We're looking to win," Coslet said today.
"I think we need to start being more consistent and efficient. This is our third preseason game and we should be on that path. Going into the fourth one with the Redskins and on into the season against Tampa, we need to keep improving."


Grand Jury Starts
A contestant in the Miss Black America pageant who says she was raped by former heavyweight champion MIKE TYSON was the first witness to testify yesterday as a special grand jury began hearing evidence in the matter in Indianapolis.
Grand-jury hearings are closed and participants are prohibited from discussing them publicly.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.77
8.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.24
5.29
7.49
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.29
5.33
7.44
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.62
7.64
8.65
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.08
8.08
8.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.08
9.08
9.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.98
7.03
7.49
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers
**Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer
Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bernstein Is a Palpable Absence at a Festival in Japan
When the second Pacific Music Festival opened here in mid-July, it was in many ways haunted by the huge, missing presence of Leonard Bernstein.
In the summer of 1990, weakened by the lung disease that took his life a few months later, Mr.
Bernstein gamely struggled through the rehearsals and the outdoor concerts.
Save for his appearance at Tanglewood later in the summer, it was his last set of performances, and the students who surrounded him seemed to sense it.


Corrections
A picture caption in Weekend yesterday with the continuation of an article about walking around Manhattan misidentified the street on which a bicyclist was riding.
It was West Street near Bloomfield Street.


Ex-Guard Is Charged in East Side Rapes
Armed now with what they said was the right picture of the right man, the police announced yesterday that they had arrested a 22-year-old former security guard and charged him with two rapes in the Stuyvesant Park area of lower Manhattan.
They said he was a suspect in a third.
The man, Garry Jacques, was arrested at 2 A.M. yesterday outside his Coney Island apartment and charged with the attacks that are part of a pattern of rapes that took place on three early mornings in June.
Each began the same way, with the rapist entering the victim's apartment through a window.


Filly Is Fastest and Richest
One horse set a record for the mile, another pulled off an upset and still another appropriately joined the $2 million club on Million Dollar Babies Night at the Meadowlands tonight.
The upset victory by Sportsmaster, a 10-1 shot who paid $22.60 for $2, in the $889,000 Woodrow Wilson Pace for 2-year-olds highlighted the evening, but Miss Easy attracted as much attention.


Search Is Halted for 10 Men Lost on Barge in China Seas
Officials tonight suspended the search for 10 men still missing after an oil exploration barge sank in the South China Sea with nearly 200 aboard.
Four of those missing were trapped in a decompression chamber when the barge capsized in a typhoon on Thursday about 65 miles east of Hong Kong.
Officials said their air supply would run out on Friday morning.


More Tests for Holmes
LARRY HOLMES will have to undergo more medical tests before fighting MICHAEL GREER on Aug. 24 in Honolulu, and the bout could be scratched by Hawaii's boxing commission if Holmes doesn't pass, the head of the commission said.
The 41-year-old former heavyweight champion is under orders to undergo further testing, including a treadmill test and an electrocardiogram.
The state panel will scratch the bout if Holmes flunks the treadmill test, the head of the commission head, BENNY RODRIGUES, said. (AP)


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press yesterday about a judge's refusal to allow Detroit to establish three all- male public schools misidentified a plaintiff in the lawsuit in some copies.
It is the NOW Legal Defense Fund, which is not affiliated with the National Organization for Women.


Gunman Slain After Release Of 5 Hostages
Moments after releasing five hostages he had held at gunpoint, a man walked out of a Brooklyn apartment yesterday, opened fire and was killed by the police in a fusillade of more than 30 shots, the police said.
The hostages -- the man's girlfriend, her three children and a grandchild -- were unhurt.


For Hungary, The First Visit by a Pope


Some Ask if Husband in Love-Triangle Case Is Fit to Teach
For 17 years, Paul Solomon was one of the most popular teachers in the Greenville School, teaching sixth grade, coaching soccer, basketball and golf in the community's recreation program and taking his pupils on weeklong field trips.
But three weeks before school opens in the Edgemont section of this Westchester County town, there are those who are questioning whether Mr.
Solomon ought to be allowed back in the classroom.
The reason: his role in the case involving the shooting death of his wife of 19 years, Betty Jeanne Solomon.


'Matchmaker' Postponed
A revival of "The Matchmaker," a comedy by Thornton Wilder, has postponed its opening to Aug. 27 from Thursday because the lead actress, Dorothy Loudon, has a throat infection.
Ms.
Loudon is expected back in the show on Tuesday.
Preview performances will continue at the Roundabout Theater, 100 East 17th Street, with Ms.
Loudon's understudy, Mary Diveny.


K Mart Offering Raises $967 Million
The K Mart Corporation said it had raised $967 million by selling 23 million securities known as depository shares, which become common stock within three years.
Each depository share, which sold for $44 apiece, represented the equivalent of a quarter of a share of convertible preferred stock of the big retailer, the company said in a statement.


Job of Dictionaries Is to Rule, Not Report; Oxford Demurs
To the Editor:
Sol Steinmetz, executive editor of Random House Dictionaries, states in his remarks about the use of "hopefully" meaning "it is hoped" (letter, Aug. 3), "No current dictionary or usage guide considers this use of 'hopefully' ungrammatical."


Job of Dictionaries Is to Rule, Not Report
To the Editor:
I was surprised to see that Sol Steinmetz, executive editor of the Random House Dictionaries, says his dictionary tries to avoid such "authoritarian" attitudes as classifying as incorrect the use of the word "hopefully" to mean "it is hoped that" (letter, Aug. 3).
Instead, says Mr.
Steinmetz, "what we do is report old and new usages as we find them in our research."


Safety Change Ordered for Boeing 767's
Flaws in Boeing 767 jet engines could lead to an engine suddenly reversing the direction of its thrust while the plane is flying, the Federal Aviation Administration said today.
The agency ordered steps to avoid the problem.
Such a malfunction is believed to have happened just before the crash of an Austrian airline's 767 that killed 223 people in Thailand in May.
Although the aviation agency said it could not prove what caused the crash, it ordered airlines to disconnect the thrust reversers on similar jets to prevent any possibility of such an accident.


Dollar Up in Broad Advance; Mark Fails to Draw Buyers
The dollar staged another broad advance yesterday in foreign exchange trading that dealers traced largely to internal market conditions.
Dealers said the dollar's movement reflected relief that Thursday's widely expected interest rate rises by Germany's central bank failed to attract much buying of the mark.


U.S. Output Climbed 0.5% Last Month
Production at United States factories, mines and utilities rose for a fourth straight month in July, the Federal Reserve Board said today, buoyed by higher output of autos and construction goods.
The gain of five-tenths of 1 percent in industrial output last month followed revised increases of six-tenths of 1 percent in June and eight-tenths in May.
Production increased in April by five-tenths of 1 percent.


Wonder Seeds Now Yielding Profits
Ever since Henry Wallace founded Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc. in 1926, the company has prided itself on its scientific research.
Wallace went on to become Franklin D. Roosevelt's Secretary of Agriculture and then Vice President, and Pioneer went on to become the nation's largest seed company.
Today, the biotechnology revolution offers unprecedented opportunities for a company with Pioneer's outlook to create wonder crops, faster growing, more nutritious and sturdier than ever.
But Pioneer's bumpy ride through the 1980's illustrates that the pursuit of wonder products does not necessarily yield wonder profits.
Like many other technology-driven companies, Pioneer learned the hard way that up-to-date marketing can be as important as advanced research.


U.S. Seizes Skin-Smoothing Product
The Food and Drug Administration today seized more than $5 million worth of collagen, a jelly-like substance injected under wrinkles to smooth them temporarily, from its principal manufacturer.
Agency officials said they took the action because the Collagen Corporation had failed to warn consumers that the substance might trigger allergic reactions and diseases in some people.


Acre Journal; Where Arabs and Jews Live Together
This fishing port on the Mediterranean is one of the few places where Jews and Arabs continue to stroll easily in the same streets, eat in the same restaurants and visit one another's houses.
"Acre is an example for all Israel of how Arabs and Jews live together, even today," said Rais Khader, owner of Rais Fashions, a clothing store in the city, which was already ancient in 1191 when it became the Crusaders' capital.
"During the gulf war the Arabs of Acre expressed their loyalty to the state."


U.S. Policy on Infected Visitors Keeps AIDS Meeting Out of Country
The 1992 International Conference on AIDS will not be held as planned in Boston in May because of the Bush Administration's restrictions on letting people infected with the AIDS virus into the country, organizers of the conference said today.
They said that they would attempt to hold the conference in another country but that it would be difficult to find a city on such short notice that could accommodate a meeting expected to attract an estimated 12,000 scientists and others interested in the issue.
The conference, held annually since 1984, is the most important scientific forum for exchanging information about the latest developments in research and treatment.


Mazda Reportedly Planning To Make Luxury Car in U.S.
The Mazda Motor Corporation is expected to announce details next week of a new luxury-car division that will begin operating in the United States in 1994, people at the company said.
Mazda hopes to challenge the highly acclaimed Infiniti Q-45 and Lexus LS 400 luxury sedans with a similar class of high-performance vehicle.
A second, smaller vehicle would be designed to compete with BMW's 535 series.


California Rail Inspection Canceled Before Derailment and Spill
A Federal inspector says that because of complaints from the Southern Pacific Transportation Company, he canceled a safety inspection at one of the company's rail yards.
He was to have conducted the inspection just three weeks before a train from the yard derailed on July 14 and wiped out all aquatic life in a 45-mile stretch of the Sacramento River.
Testifying on Thursday before the State Assembly's Transportation Committee, the inspector, Tom Paton of the Federal Railroad Administration, emphasized that the inspection could not have prevented the accident.
Complaints About an Inspection
But the committee's chairman, Assemblyman Howard Katz of Los Angeles, said Mr.
Paton's testimony was shocking evidence that concerns for the financial condition of railroad companies were driving the safety decisions of Federal officials.


Pope Begins Hungary Visit With Tribute to Mindszenty
Pope John Paul II today began a five-day visit to Hungary by praying at the crypt of the militantly anti-Communist Jozsef Cardinal Mindszenty.
The Pope said Cardinal Mindszenty, who died in 1975, "left behind a shining testimony of devotion to Christ and the church, as well as of patriotism."


Pretoria, With Major U.N. Help, Agrees on Plan for Exiles' Return
The South African Government and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees announced agreement today on a plan that would allow political exiles to return home and grant the United Nations a pivotal role in arranging and paying for their repatriation.
The announcement, which provided for the establishment of a United Nations office inside the country, came after 16 months of often delicate negotiations on what involvement the world organization would have in helping to resettle up to 40,000 South Africans who left the country over the last 30 years in opposition to apartheid.


Patricia M. Ferrie, Physician, Weds
Dr.
Patricia Marie Ferrie and Dr.
Eric Anthony Widra, physicians in Philadelphia, were married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of the Holy Rosary in Edgewater, N.J.
The Rev.
Joseph C. Doyle officiated.
The bride, 28 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph T. Ferrie of Edgewater.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received an M.D. from the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.
She is a psychiatric resident at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia, where the bridegroom is a resident in obstetrics and gynecology.
Her father retired as the principal of Dumont (N.J.) High School.


Remains of Two Prussian Kings To Be Reinterred at Potsdam


Observer; Strange People Shapes
Mrs.
J.
T. writes that columns in this space have been "extremely grumpy" of late, asks if I have been taking steroids and cautions that these bodybuilding chemicals may have "alarming side effects."
I can't guess what makes this letter-writing harridan think I'm grumpy.
A grumpy person would tell her to mind her own business and shut up, which I am not going to do, because I'm not grumpy, and if she weren't a woman I'd kick her right in the shins for saying I am.


No More Split Ends as Mattingly Rejoins Yanks
The hair was still flowing near Don Mattingly's collar yesterday, but just about every other aspect of the latest adventure in Yankeeland had been cut, changed or edited.
The Yankees were scrambling to defuse what had grown quickly into an embarrassing and very public argument with their best player.
All over a few inches of loose hair.


Algeria's Democratic Gamble Shows Promise
To the Editor:
The political turmoil in Algeria that is plunging the country into decline, referred to in your July 26 front-page article, is not a cause of Algeria's economic crisis, but a product.


If McEnroe Can't Step Up, He'll Step Aside
Just in case his body language during a somnolent 6-4, 6-2 loss to Goran Ivanisevic didn't get the point across, John McEnroe today made his strongest statement yet regarding his plans to retire from tennis.
He said that barring unforseen developments, such as a return to former Grand Slam greatness, he would leave the Association of Tennis Professionals tour after 1992.


Mets Take The Plunge, To Fourth
The final result was an 8-2 loss to the Pirates.
There had been five errors, three in one inning.
The Mets, with their eighth straight defeat and 20th in their last 24 games, had slid to fourth place in the National League East and were a bare three games ahead of the fifth-place Phillies.
Manager Bud Harrelson, after speaking with reporters, appeared to sense the moment, and he got up from his chair and left his office.
Executive Vice President Al Harazin, who had been standing nearby, then slumped into the chair.
The crisis had gone well beyond the manager, and it was understood that management, shaken as it hadn't been in nearly a decade, had to respond.


George Washington Acted on His Anti-Slavery Convictions
To the Editor:
Your July 29 article about a long-forgotten member of the Virginia planter aristocracy, Robert Carter 3d, who arranged for the manumission of his slaves, erroneously suggests that George Washington did not feel similarly "compelled to extend freedom to the dark-skinned people" under his ownership.


Fill the Oil Reserve Now
When Iraq invaded Kuwait, threatening Western oil supplies, Congress had good reason to think about a sensible energy policy that would insulate the U.S. from future crises.
Such a policy would impose a stiff energy tax to promote conservation.
And it would require building up buffer stocks to levels that could smooth over temporary supply disruptions.
But since Saddam Hussein's defeat, Congress has dithered.
It has not raised energy taxes.
And it has backed away from filling the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
This is a reckless, shortsighted approach.


Lina Lee Brock, Professor, 46
Lina Lee Brock, a professor of anthropology at Sarah Lawrence College, died on Tuesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
She was 46 years old and lived in Brooklyn.
She died of pancreatic cancer, college officials said.


Citing Rift With Board, Key Tronic's Chief Quits
Alfred T. Zirkle said yesterday that he had resigned as the head of the Key Tronic Corporation, a maker of computer keyboards, because of disagreements with his board over the company's future direction.
Mr.
Zirkle, 45, said he planned to pursue work in the emerging notebook computer industry, but would not elaborate.


Patents; New Alloy Sharply Cuts Weight of Jet Engines
R.
Grant Rowe, a metallurgical engineer at the General Electric Company, has patented a light titanium alloy that cuts the weight of jet engines by about 100 pounds and improves efficiency.
The alloy consists of titanium, aluminum and niobium, a combination of elements that Mr.
Rowe said has attracted considerable interest among aviation engineers for many years.
The problem, he said, is that the alloys always seemed to pose trade-offs that made them hard to use.
Alloys containing about 13 percent niobium are brittle at room temperatures, while alloys containing higher concentrations lose their strength at high temperatures.


New Way Of Slicing Stamps Off Rolls
Those who buy rolls of stamps 100 at a time may notice a difference.
Yesterday the United States Postal Service began test marketing stamps with slit perforations instead of the usual round holes.
It is the first change in this fundamental stamp design in more than 60 years.
Initially the slit perforations are being used on rolls of 100 29-cent flower stamps.
The 100-stamp rolls are the most popular with the public; larger rolls of 500, 3,000 and 10,000 stamps are used by businesses with machines that use the hole perforations to dispense and apply the stamps.


At Wave Hill, Four Strolls Down the Garden Path
One of the pleasantest ways to spend a summer afternoon must be to wander through Wave Hill, the city-owned estate overlooking the Hudson in Riverdale, and photograph the lushly flowering gardens there.
It is thus particularly appropriate that Jean E. Feinberg, the former curator of Wave Hill, should have commissioned four well-known art photographers to do just that over a two-year period.
The resulting images are on display at the estate through Oct. 27.
A companion book, published by Abrams, includes essays by Ms.
Feinberg and Peter H. Sauer, Wave Hill's former executive director, along with an extensive selection of photographs from the project.
Garden photography is a persistent, if largely unrecognized, subgenre of the medium, a homier cousin to the more honored category of landscape photography.
Not surprisingly, the greatest examples of the interaction between the garden and the photograph come from France.
It was there in the first decades of the century that Eugene Atget, hailed by the Surrealists for his strange images of urban life, photographed in the gardens of Versailles, Saint-Cloud and elsewhere, producing what many consider his finest work.
Nevertheless, as Ms.
Feinberg notes in her catalogue introduction, most books about gardens include photographs simply as illustrations to the text, with little attention paid to their expressive potential.
For this project, Ms.
Feinberg writes, "I decided to elevate the photographs to center stage. They would become the principal means by which the garden was explained."


P. R. Reilly Weds Nicole M. Russell
Nicole Marie Russell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Russell of New York and East Hampton, L.I., was married yesterday to Peter Raymond Reilly, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Reilly of La Jolla, Calif.
The Rev.
Paul Smallwood Tipton performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Most Holy Trinity in East Hampton.
The bride, 24 years old, and her husband, 25, graduated from Georgetown University.
She is a public-relations consultant in Chicago.
Her father is the president of FC Funding, an investment concern in New York.


U.S. IS ENCOURAGED BY HANOI CABINET
A major Cabinet reorganization in Vietnam has improved the prospects for settling the Cambodian civil war and accelerating the thaw in relations with Washington, senior Administration officials say.
American officials expressed hope that the changes in the Cabinet would reduce tensions between Vietnam and China, particularly since the departing officials include the Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, who has long been hostile to Beijing.


Jesse Jackson Supporters March in Connecticut


Miss Buckingham to Wed in September
Mr. and Mrs.
Rob Roy Buckingham of Old Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mallory Alexandra Buckingham to Thomas James Gadzik, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Alexander Gadzik of Storrs, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Buckingham, 26 years old, is a graduate of the University of Connecticut and is enrolled in a master's program in speech pathology at Southern Connecticut State University.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of development and strategic planning of The New York Times News Information Services.


Schubertiade at the Y To Resume in January
The Schubertiade, a decadelong presentation of the complete works of Schubert, will be resumed in January at the 92d Street Y. The series, which began in 1987 and ran for three seasons, was postponed in 1990 because of financial constraints at the Y.
With next year's series, titled "Perspectives on Schubert: From Weimar to Hollywood," the music will be grouped thematically instead of chronologically, as it has been so far.


Pitchers With Clout
To the Sports Editor:
When the Yankees ran out of relief pitchers in the 14-5 rout by the White Sox on Aug. 6 and sent in shortstop Alvaro Espinoza to face the last two batters, they catapulted him into the pitchers' section of the baseball encyclopedias, where he will find himself in some interesting company.


CAMPUS LIFE: Hampton; Young Musicians Find Inspiration In Professionals
Ladell Abrams may be an aspiring jazz musician, but he sure hasn't felt like singing the blues lately.
That is because last week, Mr.
Abrams, an 18-year-old Ypsilanti, Mich., drummer, had an opportunity other young musicians can only dream about.
For four days, he listened to, learned from and jammed with members of the famed Count Basie Orchestra.


New York's Coming Apart by the Baseball Seams; Yankees Scurrying To Remain Afloat
Don Mattingly refuses to get a haircut and the Yankees swoop down upon him like the secret police.
They want action.
They want Mattingly to meet a pair of scissors.
They want those brown locks cut so the team looks good.
Never mind Mattingly's hair -- which was finally clipped yesterday afternoon -- the Yankees have looked bad for the last month, and it has had nothing to do with grooming habits.


No Headline
After trying and failing to incorporate unbaked pizza crusts in quick meals, I gave up because it takes so long to preheat the oven and then bake the crust.
But recently I decided to give it one more try.
The unbaked crust went into the oven immediately after the oven was turned on and baked for 10 minutes as the oven heated.
The dough baked enough so that the pizza just took a few minutes after the filling was added.


A Film Pursues the Redemptive Power of Rock-and-Roll
"Can you hear the music?"
The voice on the trans-Atlantic call is coming from Dublin and belongs to Robert Arkins, a 21-year-old musician who is hard at work in a recording studio.
Mr.
Arkins is currently starring in "The Commitments," Alan Parker's new film about a fictional Irish soul band, but on this night he's interested in a different project.
Mr.
Arkins leads his own band, Housebroken, and is on the verge of a record deal; he's at the studio recording demos.
As Housebroken blares in the background, Mr.
Arkins holds the telephone closer to a speaker for his caller's benefit.


The Dollar Is Up Sharply
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
137.30
136.55
146.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7645
1.7280
1.5590
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1447
1.1468
1.1354
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6575
1.6945
1.9408
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$357.70
$358.50
$414.00
Republic National BankCurrency: Friday NY Close


Why Not Recycle Used Batteries?
I was very encouraged when I read "Hochbrueckner Hitches His Fortunes in Washington to Recycling"  [ July 14 ] .
I believe it is extremely important that the country as a whole takes recycling seriously.
I was particularly interested in the inclusion of batteries as one of the items to be recycled.
I had not heard of it before, whereas in Europe it is common practice.
I go frequently to Spain, a country which many Americans consider backward and primitive.
In Madrid, and all over Spain, every shop that sells batteries has a receptacle to accept the old ones.
Soon the post offices will have the same facility in all towns.
I was told by a well-informed American who lives in Madrid, that one small battery, such as the ones used in clocks, can pollute the water for a person for her whole lifetime.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 18
Neither Ted Wiliams nor Joe DiMaggio played today. Both teams were rained out.


The World; How Tiananmen Square Helped Rally Support for Tibet
IN an odd way, the only people who have done about as much as the Dalai Lama in the last few years to galvanize support for Tibetans are Deng Xiaoping and the other octogenarians who rule China.
Not intentionally, of course.
But the leadership's crackdown on demonstrators in Tiananmen Square in June 4, 1989, and the repressive measures taken since then, while raising the issue of human rights in China generally, have also given a thrust to concern over abuses in Tibet.
And it has helped to land Tibet, a sparsely populated plateau region north of the Himalayas, firmly on the international agenda.


Bronx Man Dies After Struggle With Police
A man described as emotionally disturbed died in police custody early yesterday after a struggle with two officers in the Bronx, the Police Department reported.
The officers were investigating a report of a man with a gun in the hallway of an apartment building at 1175 Morris Avenue, a department spokesman, Detective Louis Llanes, said.


Fashion; Paris Couture
PARIS IS THE PINNACLE OF FASHION AND COUTURE is its apex.
These days there are those who would topple the tiptop, claiming that haute couture -- the business of made-to-order clothes -- is a colossally expensive, expendable luxury.
Expensive it is.
Each important couture house's twice-a-year presentation reportedly costs well over $1 million.
The losses are substantial, as there are nowhere near the number of private customers today to make couture break even.
But expendable?
Is a tiny, albeit costly, operation that generates worldwide publicity while upholding France's reputation as
the
purveyor of prestigious goods a candidate for extinction?
And is a process that can produce styles as stimulating to fashion in general as those shown here irrelevant?
Coming out of the ultimate fashion laboratory, the fall collections established the importance of silhouettes that give prominence to the bosom and waist.
They endorsed above-the-knee hemlines.
They made the lingerie look ultrafashionable while suggesting even more provocative variations on transparency.
And in a season of so much bright color, they clinched the chic of all-black.


Cynthia A. Urick Engaged to Wed
Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony C. Urick of Bernardsville, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Cynthia Anne Urick, to Eric Robert Dinallo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gregory S. Dinallo of Santa Monica, Calif.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Urick, 24 years old, was until recently an office services assistant at the Denver law firm of Moye, Giles, O'Keefe, Vermeire &amp; Gorrell.
She graduated from Skidmore College and is to begin studies for a master's degree in public administration at New York University in January.
Her father is a vice president at Citibank in New York.
Her mother, Louise Ann Urick, is a marketing manager for Consolidated Purchasing Services, a hotel supply company in Bernardsville.


December Bridal For Jamie Klein
December wedding plans for Jamie Joy Klein and Dr.
Robert Chaprack Kapel have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Suzanne Klein of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Irwin Klein of New York.
Mr.
Kapel is the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Saul Kapel of Scarsdale.
The future bride, 27 years old, is an assistant District Attorney in Brooklyn.
She graduated from the University of Rochester and received a law degree from Boston University.
Her father is the president of Harfay Management, a real-estate company in New York.
Her mother is an actress.


Caroline Sharp Plans to Marry
The engagement of Caroline Mary Sharp to James Theodore Curtis Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis of Lowell, Mass., has been announced by her father, Peter Jay Sharp of New York.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sharp, also a daughter of the late Allison Byrom, is a screenwriter in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Princeton University and received a master of fine arts degree from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Peter Sharp &amp; Company, a real-estate concern in New York.


Fred Gumbart Weds Lisa Zimmerman
Lisa Ann Zimmerman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jules Zimmerman of Port Washington, L.I., was married yesterday to Fred Dean Gumbart, the son of Rosemary Gumbart of Macomb, Ill., and the late James C. Gumbart.
Acting Justice William J. Corbett of Floral Park Village Court conducted the ceremony at Lees Pond Preserve in Manhasset, L.I.
Mrs.
Gumbart, 34 years old, is a museum technician for the National Park Service and is working on the historical collection at the Western Archeological and Conservation Center in Tucson, Ariz.
She graduated from the University of Arizona, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in oriental studies there.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Hickock Associates, a New York financial and management consulting firm.
He was the chief financial officer of Avon Products in New York.


Japan Deports Chinese but Others Are Hopeful
Japan has deported another group of Chinese seeking to stay here, including a Chinese woman who sought political asylum.
But lawyers for Chinese dissidents here say they are still hopeful that students who may face political persecution in China will be allowed to stay in Japan.
But the lawyers said they were somewhat shaken by Japan's abrupt decision on Wednesday to deport the 62 Chinese, sending them from the southern city of Nagasaki to Shanghai on a chartered Chinese plane.
They called on the Government to provide a fuller explanation of its actions.


In the Nation; Investing In America
When will President Bush stop telling us all's well with the economy, when anyone with bills to pay knows better?
When, if ever, will he get on with the real task before him -- putting Americans back to work and restoring their prosperity?
The recession's over, the White House insists.
Baloney.
Jobs are disappearing, layoffs are up, consumption is down, unemployment is nearly 7 percent, retail sales are lagging, real estate is a disaster area, banks are failing, credit is tight, wages are stagnant, and among 16- to 19-year-olds only half -- the lowest level in two decades -- hold or are even looking for jobs.


Where the Saints Go Marching Still
To aficionados of traditional jazz the world over, Preservation Hall in New Orleans is where musicians keep the flame aglow.
A music venue since 1961, the aging building on St.
Peter Street in the French Quarter contains a small, dimly lighted room, serving no alcohol, with wooden benches a few feet from where the musicians play.
PRESERVATION HALL: Music From the Heart (Norton, $29.95) is a social history of the musical institution that served as catalyst for the New Orleans revival of the last two decades and a chronicle of how the traditional idiom has endured more than three decades of lean times.
"Preservation Hall was invented and run by transplanted northerners," writes William Carter, a California writer and photographer who also plays jazz clarinet.
The venue was originally an art gallery.
After several years of informal gatherings at which jazz devotees passed the hat for musicians, the hall supplanted the gallery.
Preservation Hall and the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival were major forces in the city's cultural awakening.
It is no accident that as New Orleans emerged from its segregation shackles, a succession of remarkable musicians -- the Neville Brothers, Dr.
John, the Marsalis family, Harry Connick Jr. and Marlon Jordan, among others -- achieved national recognition, thereby broadening what Mr.
Carter calls "an untouchably pure form handed down from a golden age."


Freed Briton Salutes Hostages as He Sets Off
John McCarthy, the British hostage freed in Beirut last week, paid an emotional tribute today to Westerners still captive in Lebanon as he left the Royal Air Force base where he has been recuperating since his release.
Mr.
McCarthy, who flew off with his father and brother to an undisclosed location, spoke warmly of the courage, strength and friendship of two American hostages, Terry A. Anderson and Thomas M. Sutherland, and a British captive, the Anglican church envoy Terry Waite.
Mr.
McCarthy shared his captivity with those three.


Miss Guild Wed To Michael Byrne
Catharine Elizabeth Guild, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Guild of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Reynold Byrne, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reynold Byrne of Summit.
The Rev.
Robert Maloy, assisted by the Rev.
William Strain, an Episcopal minister, officiated at St.
Rose of Lima Roman Catholic Church in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Byrne, 24 years old and a Smith College graduate, is an analyst in Boston for Towers, Perrin, Forster &amp; Crosby, a management consulting firm in New York.
Her father is a senior vice president in New York for Advest, a securities firm in Hartford.
The bridegroom, 25, is to join the Boston law firm of Melick &amp; Porter in September.
He graduated magna cum laude from Amherst College and received a law degree from the University of Michigan.
His father, who is retired, was a vice president of the Bank of New York.
Catharine Byrne (Justin Baiter)


Deck Was Stacked in Favor of Simms
Observations on quarterbacks, coaches and others after five weeks of the Giants' training camp:
Coach Ray Handley promised a fair competition between Phil Simms and Jeff Hostetler for the job as starting quarterback.
And while the competition has been fair, it can have only one outcome: Simms will be the winner, barring injury.


Miss Acheson to Wed David England
Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick B. V. M. Acheson of Waterford, Va., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Alexandra Sarah Camilla Acheson to David Brooks England, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harry R. England of Santa Fe, N.M.
Miss Acheson, 29 years old, graduated from Duke University.
She was until recently the controller at Fastech Integration, a computer software company in Waltham, Mass.
Her father, who is retired, was a loan officer at the World Bank in Washington.
She is the granddaughter of the fifth Earl of Gosford and Mildred, Countess of Gosford.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Meet Col.
Klimenti Amalrik of the K.G.B.
He is the central figure in Philip Cornford's CATALYST (Bantam, $19.50), and he is well worth knowing.
Today we are a long way from Ian Fleming's Smersh and those Russian spies who were creatures from hell.
Klimenti is a well-trained agent and a man of decisive action, to be sure, but he is also a sensitive human being, a feeling father, a man alive to the political currents of his country, a philosopher who has learned to accept stoically the faults of the system.
"Catalyst" is an ambitious and riveting novel, partly about espionage but mostly about ordinary Russians of the Gorbachev generation.
The Australian-born Mr.
Cornford, who was a newspaper reporter for 25 years and served as a war correspondent in Afghanistan, has written a book that tries to explain the Russian character as well as the workings of the intelligence services.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 18, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.95.) The ordeals of a female cop assigned to track down a Florida con man.
2
3
THE FIRST MAN IN ROME, by Colleen McCullough. (Avon, $6.95.) The rivalry of two men in the Roman Republic in 110 B.C.
3
5
LADY BOSS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $5.95.) A woman schemes to get control of a movie studio.
4
13
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
5
8
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) A get-together in a Scottish town.
6
5
THE PRIZE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.50.) In 1066, a Saxon woman marries a Norman warrior.
7
8
THE VOICE OF THE NIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.95.) A shy boy and his evil best friend.
8
30
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) Chinese-American women and their mothers.
9
2
SPY SINKER, by Len Deighton. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.95.) A female spy's adventures.
10
44
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
11
2
THE ENCHANTED LAND, by Jude Deveraux. (Avon, $4.95.) The love of a Kentucky plantation owner's daughter for a Texas rancher.
12
4
TEXAS!
CHASE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.99.) The romance of a widower and an old friend who was involved in his wife's death.
13
20
RED DRAGON, by Thomas Harris. (Dell, $5.95.) An F.B.I. agent hunts a serial killer.
14
7
DYING YOUNG, by Marti Leimbach. (Ivy, $5.95.) While devotedly caring for a man dying of leukemia, a woman has an affair with a stranger.
15
8
BREATH OF SCANDAL, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $4.99.) The nightmare a woman suffered in a Southern town and how she gets even.
16 *
3
THE ASSASSINI, by Thomas Gifford. (Bantam, $5.99.) A man pursues the killer of his sister, a nun.
17 *
1
THIS SIDE OF HEAVEN, by Karen Robards. (Dell, $4.99.) Romantic adventures await the daughter of an English gambler in puritanical 17th-century Connecticut.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
13
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak and how the sexes can understand each other better.
2
8
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents and from them learns the ways of mountain men and the Indians.
3
5
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman who went there with his wife and their dogs.
4
1
MICHAEL LANDON, by Aileen Joyce. (Zebra, $4.50.) The sweet and sour life of the late television writer, producer, director and actor.
5
91
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
6 *
406
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
7
6
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of more than 150 questions and answers about American history.
8 *
46
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
9
22
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
10 *
12
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers are distinguished and rewarding.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
55
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
3
THE FAT-BURNING WORKOUT, by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.95.) A program designed to trim the body and tone muscles.
3
35
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
4
1
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
5 *
12
RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1991 edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Motel Guests And Security
THE issue of personal safety in budget-rate motels has been thrust to the forefront.
Last month, The Wall Street Journal reported on a $10 million settlement made by Motel 6 on a woman who was attacked, robbed and raped in 1988 by two ex-convicts at one of the chain's motels in Fort Worth.
A week later, the victim, using the pseudonym "Mary," appeared on the Larry King Live show on CNN along with a former Fort Worth police chief and a security consultant from New York.


GET WITH THE PROGRAM
Use of the phrase "get with the program" predates 1968 California politics by at least four years.
Undergoing Army basic training at Fort Leonard Wood, Mo., in the summer of 1964, we grunts heard that admonition from drill instructors daily, from reveille to taps.
JOHN F. HOGAN
Chicago


Beware the Inventive Lover
CLOSING ARGUMENTS
By Frederick Busch. 288 pp. New York: Ticknor &amp; Fields.


A Fable of Guilt and Innocence From 'le Big Boss'
At first glance, the inspiration for Claude Berri's new movie, "Uranus," appears to be France's perennial reluctance to acknowledge just how many of its citizens collaborated with their Nazi occupiers during World War II.
But in his first film since the highly acclaimed "Jean de Florette" and "Manon of the Spring" in 1986, the 56-year-old director is banking on audiences finding a universal fable.
"If I'd wanted to make a film about France and the French in the apres-guerre, I would not have made this film," he said.
"For me, the film is about human nature, about people's weaknesses, their hypocrisy, their lack of courage. In 'Uranus,' people are not black and white, good and evil. There are no heroes, but there are also no war criminals."


The Nation; Mulling the Idea of Affirmative Action for Poor Whites
AS the nation struggles to come to grips with issues of race and how to rectify past and present racial discrimination, a thought-provoking notion is beginning to be voiced: shift the emphasis of affirmative action programs from race to class.
It is an idea being espoused by conservatives such as Antonin Scalia, the Supreme Court Justice, and William Julius Wilson, the liberal sociologist from the University of Chicago, and Stuart E. Eizenstat, who was Jimmy Carter's domestic policy adviser.
The rationale is that class-based affirmative action would still overwhelmingly benefit blacks, who are disproportionately represented in the ranks of the poor.
But at the same time it would eliminate the appearance of so-called reverse discrimination.


Sports of The Times; The New Yankee Clippers Aren't Very Sharp
ALL over town, wherever you went -- to the coffee shop, to the bank, to Seymour, the guy brandishing the clippers at the third chair, and even, if you happened to pop in, to the Mayor's staff meeting at City Hall -- the question being asked was, "Will he or won't he?" And also, "Why should he?"
This was on Friday after the bombshell the day before when Yankee management forced its star player, Don Mattingly, to remain on the bench during a game instead of manning his post at first base because it had asked him to trim his locks -- no, demanded it -- and he had refused.


Replacing Fascia Boards
FASCIAS are the trim boards at the tops of exterior walls.
Their purpose is to cover the ends of rafters at the eaves of a roof and the sides of rafters at the rakes, the roof's sloping edges.
Water damage to fascias at the eaves is rather common.
Repairs generally consist of replacing the damaged boards, a job that is not too difficult for a person with moderate carpentry skills, but an assistant is needed to help handle large pieces.


Legal Tangle


Jenny Dixon Wed To John R. Boone
Jane Hoadley Dixon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis C. Dixon of Stonington, Conn., was married there yesterday to John Rowan Boone, a son of Mrs.
Rowan Boone of Princeton, N.J., and the late Mr.
Boone.
The Rev.
John Donnelly performed the ceremony at the Calvary Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Boone, who is 40 years old and is known as Jenny, is the executive director of the Lower Manhattan Cultural Council.
She graduated from the University of Colorado and received a master's degree in business policy from Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president in the Westport, Conn., office of Alexander &amp; Alexander, an insurance company based in New York.


Miss Abbott Wed To J. N. Riccardi
Victoria McLane Abbott, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon Abbott Jr. of Manchester-by-the-Sea, Mass., was married there yesterday to John Nicholas Riccardi, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
John D. Riccardi of Roslyn, L.I.
The Rev.
John G. Hughes 2d performed the ceremony at the First Parish Congregational Church.
The bride, 30 years old, was until recently an assistant producer at WSBK-TV in Boston.
She graduated from Harvard University.
She is a great-great granddaughter of President James A. Garfield.
Her father, who is retired, was the director of the Trustees of Reservations, a private conservation organization in Massachusetts.
Her mother, Katharine Abbott, is a writer.


The Nation; Prescription for Harm: Ordinary Bodies With Heroic Imaginations
THE Gershwin song got it wrong: summertime, and the living is dangerous.
It's a time when people who never back out of a driveway without fastening their seatbelts and looking in both directions go off and do things that seem guaranteed to land them in emergency rooms.
It's a time when confirmed couch potatoes forget that they have only been watching swimming, tennis and golf, not warming up.
You can just hear the knee joints cracking, the rotator cuffs tearing and the ankles spraining.
And if that is not enough to scare off out-of-practice athletes -- not to mention out-of-practice nonathletes -- there are the riskier sports.
Bungee jumping, for people who like to throw themselves off high places and dangle at the end of a long elastic cord, may have something over skydiving in the sheer terror department.
As for Rollerblades, a California skater was killed by a bus recently, prompting legislators to consider traffic laws governing who can skate where and when.
And every white-water rafter knows the fear of landing head-first on a rock, losing consciousness and drowning.


Chess
If players had suggested years ago that an important tournament be run on the knockout format, they would have been ridiculed.
They would have been told that they were transforming a combat of skill into a lottery.
Yet the just-finished United States Championship in Los Angeles was indeed an elimination event -- two losses or a loss and a draw knocked a player out -- as was the previous one.
Lately, some players have taken the view that the knockout format shortens a tournament and thus makes less of a demand on the time and attention of the fans.
Others have pointed out that it heightens the tension because draws do not count; one cannot draw cautiously with the toughest opponents and hope to outscore them by thrashing the weaker ones, a common strategy in round-robin competitions.
Still others argue that there is less wear and tear on the players because there are fewer games to play.
Moreover, if knocked out early, one can pack up and take off for another tournament.


It's Italian, but Not Awash in Red Sauce
SUMMER came early this year, and East End restaurants also were blossoming well before Memorial Day.
One late bloomer was 1 Ocean Road in Bridgehampton, which made its debut closer to Independence Day than Decoration Day.
Things got off to a rocky start.
The restaurant was packed on opening night when a fire broke out, driving the hordes of diners into the street.
Yet, no evidence of that initial disaster remains at this high, wide, sparkling-white newcomer.


Taking a Bug's-Eye View of the World
THERE is nothing like getting an insect's view of flowers and plants.
Although many backyard gardeners may not even think about such a scheme, it is a rewarding exercise outdoors and well within the realm of possibility.
How?
Very simply with a hand lens, or pocket magnifier as it is sometimes called.
The lens concentrates the focus on the details of a flower in an amazing way and opens up a new view of the world around us.
The lens can be held close to a flower or leaf without picking it, or for a closer look, the flower or leaf can be picked and brought indoors, where it can be handled closely and held to the light.
The lens's magnification makes it possible to see the intricate designs of what have heretofore been thought of as rather ordinary plants, flowers and leaves.


Israel, Most of All, Needs a Just Settlement
To the Editor:
Your Middle East analysis (Week in Review, July 28) helps to sustain a dangerous delusion of grandeur among some Israelis and their supporters.
Israel's victory is complete, you say, with Iraq as well as the Palestinians vanquished and the Soviet Union no longer able to provide military aid to Syria.
Arabs, therefore, will be responsible for any further Middle East conflict, because it is they who refuse to let Israel enjoy the fruits of victory.


Frankly Mozart


Mattingly in Fighting Trim
The most awaited haircut in recent memory took place yesterday afternoon in a clubhouse bathroom at Yankee Stadium when Don Mattingly was finally snipped.
Mattingly had about an inch of hair removed by bullpen catcher Carl Taylor so "it wouldn't fly around" when he plays.
On Thursday, the first baseman was benched for not getting a haircut.


Corrections
A report on July 21 about the engagement of Danielle Leonhard- Spark to David Philip Bier misstated the expected wedding date.
They plan to marry in November.


Theater Copland Aided Readies Musical Tribute
THE tribute to Aaron Copland that will unfold Saturday at the Paramount Center for the Arts in Peekskill will underscore the late composer's interest in younger musicians and his support for local arts organizations.
"Aaron Copland loved the Paramount Center, an organization devoted to bringing the beautiful gift of the arts to the people of the community," said David Amram, the composer, conductor and multi-instrumentalist who will preside at the 8 P.M. tribute.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
IDEOLOGY  An Introduction. By Terry Eagleton. Verso, Cloth, $59.95; Paper, $17.95.


Hillary Willman and Saul Waxman Are Wed
Hillary Jane Willman, a vice president at Chemical Bank, and Saul Jay Waxman, the president of Broker's Mortgage, both in New York, were married in New York last evening.
Rabbi James Michaels officiated at the Hudson River Club.
Mrs.
Waxman, 35 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Sokolsky of Syosset, L.I.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did her husband's.


Paul Ayoub Wed To Jane M. Cronin
Jane Marie Cronin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Cronin of Kennebunk, Me., was married yesterday in Dedham, Mass., to Paul Joseph Ayoub, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph S. Ayoub of Lauderdale-by-the-Sea, Fla.
The Rev.
Nabil Hana, a Syrian Orthodox priest, officiated at St.
John of Damascus Church.
The bride, 38 years old, is a vice president and manager at the Bank of Boston in Boston.
She graduated from the Newton (Mass.) College of the Sacred Heart and is a law student at Suffolk University.
Her father, who is retired, was a director at Remington Arms in Bridgeport, Conn.
Her mother, Annette P. Cronin, retired as a specialist in international resources planning and analysis for General Electric in Fairfield, Conn.


Makeup Man


Replacing Fascia Boards
FASCIAS are the trim boards at the tops of exterior walls.
Their purpose is to cover the ends of rafters at the eaves of a roof and the sides of rafters at the rakes, the roof's sloping edges.
Water damage to fascias at the eaves is rather common.
Repairs generally consist of replacing the damaged boards, a job that is not too difficult for a person with moderate carpentry skills, but an assistant is needed to help handle large pieces.


Christine Rogers Is Married
Christine Lynne Rogers, the daughter of Mrs.
Martin Greenberg of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday in New York to Gary Thomas Edwards, the son of Mrs.
Salvatore Rota of Harrison, N.Y.
Msgr.
Edward M. Connors performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Cathedral.
The bride, 24 years old and a graduate of the Fashion Institute of Technology, is a sales executive with Bebo Beverly Hills, denim manufacturers in New York.
The bridegroom, 31, graduated from Westchester Business Institute and is a senior marketing representative for Reader's Digest in Pleasantville, N.Y.


Reporter's Notebook; As Golf Duo, First Family Becomes Average Family
There are those who maintain, and a good many divorce lawyers count themselves in this group, that men and women should not attempt to play sports together.
The playing fields are one of the fault lines in the battle of the sexes, and conjugal bliss has oft been shattered in a single set of mixed doubles or a single round of golf.


Sunday Dining; True Caribbean Delights: Plantains to Jerk Chicken
The cool, festive and fruit-embellished fare of the Caribbean has had a surge of popularity in New York City over the past few years.
In many ways it fits the light and spicy dining style of the 90's -- that is, if you stay away from the addictive fried plantains.
Here are three places that span the various styles of the Caribbean region.
Caribe
117 Perry Street, near Greenwich Street, (212) 255-9191 -- This funky, moderately priced tropical restaurant in the West Village looks more like a flower shop than a restaurant.
A jungle of palms thrives in both dining rooms, one with flamingo-pink walls and wicker furniture.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front- page article last Sunday about China's announcement that it would sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty referred incorrectly in some editions to the recent anniversary of the American atomic bombings of Japan.
It was the 46th anniversary.


Wedding Planned For Ms. Maxwell
Mr. and Mrs.
Hamish Maxwell of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter, Robin Jane Hyslop Maxwell, to Dr.
James Robert Wilentz, a son of Justice Robert N. Wilentz of Deal, N.J., and the late Jacqueline Malino Wilentz.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Maxwell, 32 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is the chairman and the chief executive of the Philip Morris Companies in New York.


Unable to Get Off Ballot, Candidate Runs 'to Win'
NEAL BAILENSON decided he did not want to move or die, so he is running for re-election to the Yorktown Town Board, after all.
Mr.
Bailenson, a Republican, announced July 23 that he would not seek a fourth four-year term on the board.
But because he missed the deadline under state law to file papers removing his name from the November ballot, he has decided to "run to win," he said last week.


Style Makers; Starla Smith, Word Portraitist
There's a vintage song that goes, "How ya gonna keep 'em down on the farm, after they've seen Paree?" Substitute New York for Paris, and it might well be Starla Smith's theme song.
Ms.
Smith describes herself as a farm girl from Iowa who came to New York City on vacation almost 10 years ago and never went back.
"I just quit my job over the telephone," she said.
Since then she's been engaged in a number of activities, but perhaps the most offbeat is her word portraits.


Milan, Ohio
To the Editor: Milan (pronounced MYE-lon) Ohio has another attraction besides the annual Melon Festival ("A Bounty of Food Festivals," Travel, June 23).
It was the birthplace of Thomas Alva Edison in 1847 and he spent the first seven years of his life there.
The modest frame house is open to visitors.
My husband and I turned off I-80 to visit the house and were pleasantly surprised to find the Melon Festival in full swing.
Musk melon ice cream is delicious!
JUNE OLIANSKY Brooklyn


Barbara Lowenthal Is Wed
Barbara Rebecca Lowenthal, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steven Lowenthal of Harrison, N.Y., and Paul Andrew Rosenthal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Rosenthal of Muttontown, N.Y., were married last evening at the home of the bride's parents.
Rabbi Norton Shargel performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Rosenthal, 24 years old, graduated from William Smith College and received a law degree from New York Law School.
The bridegroom, 26, graduated from Cornell University and is a systems project leader with the Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group in New York.


'A Few Good Men' on Westport Stage
IF ever a play was meant to be a movie, it is "A Few Good Men," at the Westport Country Playhouse.
Even before a stage production was in the works, in fact, the screen rights to Aaron Sorkin's court-martial drama were sold.
That must be because Mr.
Sorkin's writing is full of quick changes, moving back and forth in time (before and after the 1986 murder of a misfit marine) and place (a naval base in Cuba, a courtroom, a jail, offices and Andrews Air Force Base outside Washington).


Good News in Jazz, With a Big Caveat
As a model of how an institution should offer its wares to its city, Lincoln Center's new jazz program could hardly be better.
With the schedule announced this month, the ambitious yearlong program will include not only concerts but also films, educational series and lectures.
Just as important, the entire octopuslike affair will be spread out across the city.
It is hard to overestimate its importance in the next few years.
Even nationally, the brute force of a million-dollar first-year budget and a string of 18 concerts, all emanating from an American institution dedicated to the preservation of classical music, has to act as a legitimizing influence.


Lunar Probe
In Ohio it is a felony to transmit valuable trade secrets and a misdemeanor to disclose "any confidential matter or information" without a company's consent.
Executives at Procter &amp; Gamble in Cincinnati say they definitely did not countenance what a spokeswoman called "a disturbing pattern of leaks" to The Wall Street Journal that have occurred since the beginning of the year.
Two recent articles cited unidentified sources who said that a senior executive was under pressure to resign, and that the company might sell some unprofitable divisions.
The company called the police, who called the Hamilton County prosecutor's office, which sought and received a subpoena ordering Cincinnati Bell to electronically sift the records of all customers in southwestern Ohio and list those who had called the home or office of the Journal's reporter in Pittsburgh, Alecia Swasy, from March 1 to June 15.
It is not yet known whether any Procter &amp; Gamble employees were snared in the net.
Meanwhile, complaints from civil liberties experts about possible constitutional violations threatened to create a bigger public relations problem than all those rumors that the company's trademark is a satanic symbol.


Quotation of the Day
"A traditional school can help a student only after he fails, in summer school. That's like allowing a swimmer to drown before rescuing him." -- Charles McCasland, a principal in Plano, Tex.  [ 22:1. ]


In a Downturn, It's Back to Home Building
After nearly three decades of rigorous activity in commercial development across the country, the Wolstein Group is responding to the industry slowdown by returning to its home base in Cleveland and putting its future in residential projects.
With more than 125 shopping centers in 36 states as well as several industrial and hotel properties under their belts, principals of the private development firm believe that it is in home building that the flagging real estate industry will rebound in the 1990's.


Miss Davis Weds Jon C. Everard
Amanda Rutledge Davis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Asa B. Davis 3d of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Jon Christopher Everard, a son of Rosamary Everard of Osprey, Fla., and the late J. David Everard.
The Rev.
Terence L. Elsberry performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
The bride, an administrator in the furniture department at Sotheby's in New York, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She was a member of the 1985 New York Junior Assembly.
Her father is the chief financial officer of the Long Island Savings Bank in Melville, L.I.


Style Makers; Michael Cummings, Quilt Maker
Michael Cummings was browsing in a store one day when his eye was caught by a poster of three jazz musicians.
Mr.
Cummings, an artist who lives in the Hamilton Heights section of Manhattan, bought the poster and decided to recreate the picture in a quilt, his favorite medium.
With scissors and a sewing machine, he made images of the musicians and dressed them in African clothing, using scraps of fabric, buttons and beads.
He added birds, lizards, tropical plants and stars.
A year later, he had completed 12 quilts, all with different interpretations of the jazz players.


It's a Tough Job, but Somebody's Got to Want It
When Andre Bishop, artistic director of Playwrights Horizons, was named the new head of Lincoln Center Theater in March, he seemed the logical choice: the leader of one of Off Broadway's most successful theaters was simply moving to a larger complex Off Broadway.
Mr.
Bishop's appointment, after a two-month search, is the most visible in a number of job shifts now occurring in the nation's regional theaters.
In Lincoln Center's case, they got their man.
But within the last year 14 not-for-profit theaters have put up "help wanted" signs for their top artistic jobs -- and in some cases, the postman has rung only once, if at all.


Boating; Yachts vs. the Navy in San Diego
The yacht-racing teams preparing for the 1992 America's Cup races in San Diego are finding that sailboats and naval ships make strange bedfellows.
A strong military presence in San Diego Bay has made it necessary for various yachting groups to clear their plans with Federal officials.
The Government is making concessions to accommodate the cup series, but not everyone is satisfied.


Tennis Coach Improves Strokes and Lives
WHILE Dave Fowler is pleased with the competitive achievements of his latest trio of young tennis proteges, he is especially proud of one quality they all share.
"The important thing here is that they've all won sportsmanship awards," the 47-year-old coach said recently,between his summer children's clinics at the Trumbull Racquet Club.
Mr.
Fowler, who has taught tennis in Connecticut for 24 years, is known for improving youngsters' personalities as well as their tennis games.


Teddy Bears Under a Tent
Some 1,200 guests paid $200 apiece to dine and dance on the emerald-green lawns of Southampton Hospital on Long Island.
The fund-raiser for the hospital is the largest summer benefit in the Hamptons, and it always draws a crowd.
The festivities on Aug. 10 took place under an enormous tent, and the tables were decorated with cloths, napkins and teddy bears, all decked out in Mario Buatta's bedsheet plaid.
The bears were later sold for $40 each.
Barbecued chicken and beef were prepared on the lawn.
A large corps of volunteers assisted the chairwomen, Jean Remmel, Julie Kammerer and Charlotte Ford Downe.


Avoiding the Clean-White-Box Syndrome
Yet two more signs of Europe's re-emergence in recent years as a powerhouse in contemporary art have come this summer in the form of new museums.
The creation of the Irish Museum of Modern Art in Dublin, under the charge of one of Europe's most charismatic and innovative directors, is an especially remarkable event, coming as it does from a country that has not made much of a mark on the history of the visual arts since the Book of Kells.
And in Frankfurt, which seems to adorn itself with a new museum about as often as bankers buy suits, the Museum of Modern Art has opened its doors among the glum skyscrapers and office buildings of this German financial capital.


THE NETWORK TAKEOVERS
Tom Murphy and Dan Burke of Cap Cities/ABC sound like great guys to work for -- so "sensitive to the human factor" and yet so "ruthless in terminating employees."
It is revealing that the choice between Dolly Parton and Barbara Walters was Murphy's "toughest decision." Where do the firings rank?
With the elimination of breakfast snacks in the green room of "Good Morning America" or the decision to give Roone Arledge another $1 million a year?


True Confessions?
The police in Biloxi, Miss., are fairly certain that Donald Leroy Evans is a serial murderer, but now they must find out if he is also a liar.
After he was arrested two weeks ago on charges of kidnapping and murdering a 10-year-old girl, Mr.
Evans began confessing to dozens of killings across the country over the last decade.
By last week, the total was up to 60, although only two other murders had been confirmed.
"You're not going to see us doing a Henry Lucas thing," said Police Chief George Payne, referring to the man who in 1983 confessed to 600 murders but was later found to have killed only his mother.
If Mr.
Evans's claims are true, he has killed more people than any other known serial killer in American history.
His court-appointed lawyer, Fred Lusk, seemed as unsure as everybody else.
"Donald Evans may be a con artist and if he is, he has conned the world into coming to Biloxi," said Mr.
Lusk.
"But right now the score is 3-to-0 Donald."


In the Slump, a Push to Save Open Space
FOLLOWING the example of county governments elsewhere, Dutchess County has announced plans for a land-acquisition program to take advantage of favorable prices in the soft real-estate market.
The Department of Planning has proposed a fund that would provide $3.4 million a year for seven years to acquire more public land for recreation and open space and to buy farmers' development rights in the county, which is 70 miles north of New York City.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Muttontown
THOUGH thousands of sheep used to graze in Muttontown -- giving the place its name -- there are only two these days, Chloe and Belle, who live in a front-yard paddock.
But the community remains nontheless basically bucolic.
"It's private, reserved and countrylike," said Ralph J. Marino, the New York State Senate majority leader, who moved there in 1969.


Making a Difference; Greyhound's New Top Dog
It is not shyness that accounts for the low profile of the new chief executive of Greyhound Lines Inc., according to the new chief executive himself.
"We need to focus on teamwork and on what the organization has to accomplish," Frank J. Schmieder says of his troubled company, which is trying to work its way back to viability after being forced by labor problems and a decline in the travel market into Chapter 11 a year ago.


Young Visitor From Queens Meets Amish
In Pennsylvania Dutch country, where Amish farmers toil in the fields and barns that dot the landscape, a boy from Queens has discovered the pure country life.
"I see out back all the grasses, the sunlight, the shop," 12-year-old Erin T. Rice said of the view from his bedroom window on the dairy farm of Jonathan and Lydia Lantz here in Lancaster County, about 50 miles west of Philadelphia.


A. Damien Martin, 57, A Gay Rights Advocate
Dr.
A.
Damien Martin, one of the founders of Harvey Milk High School and a social-service agency to assist young homosexuals and their families, died on Thursday at his home.
He was 57 years old and lived in New York.
He died of complications of AIDS, said Frances Kunreuther, executive director of the Hetrick-Martin Institute.


On Minor League Stop, Justice Thrills Fans
A record crowd of 6,231 -- almost twice the capacity of 3,500 -- crammed into Heaton Stadium in Augusta, Ga., on Friday night to see the 1990 National League rookie of the year hit.
And DAVID JUSTICE obliged, crushing a two-run homer into a tree over the right-field fence.
Justice, the Atlanta Braves right fielder who has been on the disabled list since June 27 with a back injury, was opening a four-game rehabilitation stint with the Macon Braves of Class A South Atlantic League.


Ellen Eskenazi to Wed A. E. Shuster
Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Eskenazi of Roslyn, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Ellen Sue Eskenazi, to Andrew Eric Shuster, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold M. Shuster of Royal Palm Beach, Fla.
A wedding next July is planned.
The future bride, 25 years old, is a catering manager at the New York Marriott Financial Center Hotel in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father is a sports reporter for The New York Times.
Her mother, Rosalind Eskenazi, teaches gifted children in Community School District 29 in Queens.
The bridegroom-to-be, 28, graduated from Cornell and is studying for an M.B.A. at New York University.
His father, who is retired, is a dentist.


Itchy Feet and Pencils: A Symposium
Russell Banks thinks "travel writing is a search by the homeless for a route home." He maintains that the reason writers travel, and write about their travels, is invariably to make a point about what they've left behind.
Jan Morris doesn't believe it; she says that in her case the travel writer may be a person in search of "the opposite of one's self." Mr.
Banks (the author of "Continental Drift") and Ms.
Morris ("Venice," "Pax Britannica") were panelists at a Key West Literary Seminar earlier this year devoted to the "Literature of Travel: A Sense of Place." Other participants were Robert Stone ("A Flag for Sunrise," "Dog Soldiers") and William Styron ("Sophie's Choice," "Darkness Visible").
Excerpts from their panel discussion of "The Writer as Traveler" follow.


The Wrong Man In Wrong Photo Feels Wronged
James L. Hairston Jr. fell into bed at 8 A.M. on Thursday after driving an exhausting 12-hour shift in his cab the night before.
He was awakened two hours later by a sharp authoritative knock at the door of his Brooklyn home.
It was the police.
"Put your clothes on; you're coming with us," Mr.
Hairston said a husky detective with ice-blue eyes told him.


5 Soviet Cadets Add Accent To a U.S. Service Academy
Dressed in pressed khakis and shiny black shoes, the five young men look like any other first-year students at the United States Merchant Marine Academy.
But when they speak, their Russian accents make it clear that they are different -- and that the cold war is definitely over.
In a move that once would have been unthinkable, the academy has accepted five cadets from the Soviet Union, the first students from an Eastern bloc nation to be admitted to any of the five Federal service academies.


Assaulting Doctors and Making Death Threats Aren't Pro-Life; Defenders of Rights
To the Editor:
Re "Little Rock, 1957. Wichita, 1991." by Peter Irons (Op-Ed, Aug. 10): Instead of crafty allusions, Mr.
Irons ought to come out and courageously call the demonstrators in Wichita what he clearly judges them to be, bigots.
He should also lambaste President Bush as an accessory to what he perceives to be their crimes.
But, alas, this would be too forward.
Would the Nazis have simply announced that all Jews be gassed and burned?
No.
Nazi propaganda placed Jewish faces side by side with those of rats and other vermin.
The viewers were left to draw their own conclusions. (Or were they?)


How Bad Are Mets? Even the Front Office Can't Take It Anymore
The Mets, badly humiliated on the field as they have been all too often this season, were pronounced badly shaken as an organization after Friday night's 8-2 debacle against the Pirates at Three Rivers Stadium.
"It's the low point since opening day of 1984," said Al Harazin, the Mets' executive vice president, whose club, with its eighth straight loss and 20th loss in its last 24 games, dropped to 57-58 for the season.


Mercedes by the Numbers (and Letters)
YOU want to be careful when you wheel your barrow-load of bucks into the Mercedes dealer.
Careful and up on your alphabet.
Keeping those accessories straight gets tougher all the time.
There is ABS, of course, which stands for antilock braking system, and then there is SRS, the supplemental restraint system that also answers to the monicker, air bag.
Both of those were commendable firsts as standard equipment for Mercedes-Benz, but now the company seems to be straining just a bit.


Beauty; World Hues
HOWEVER FLAWED THE toe-and-bean counting tactics of the 1990 census might appear, the numbers paint a decidedly more varied picture of America than most cosmetics companies -- their corporate image synthesized in the face of a lily-white model -- have been projecting for so many years.
While one in four Americans described themselves as nonwhite, the shift away from a predominantly white population has been even more dramatic in the big cities: just 43.2 percent of New Yorkers, for example, ticked off white; the majority checked Hispanic (24.4 percent), black (25.2 percent) or Asian (6.7 percent).
Terrific fodder, this, for the multicultural debate that's raging in academia.
And in the world of cosmetics, the statistics provide a nice endorsement for Prescriptives, a company that has updated its image in a decidedly multicultural way.


Nancy Ann Jeffrey Weds Daniel Cohen
Nancy Ann Jeffrey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard Jeffrey of Oyster Bay, L.I., was married in New York last night to Daniel Arthur Cohen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Perry Cohen of New York.
Rabbi David H. Lincoln performed the ceremony at the Park Avenue Synagogue.
Ms.
Jeffrey, who is 26 years old and is keeping her name, is a reporter for The Detroit Free Press.
She graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University and also received a bachelor's degree from Oxford University.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Mullooly, Jeffrey, Rooney &amp; Flynn in Glen Cove, L.I.


Frescoes, Tote Bags and T-Cells
Sunday, June 16
The first thing I see when I get off the train in Florence is the enormous congress banner welcoming delegates to the Seventh International Conference on AIDS.
Then I come upon a demonstration, antivivisectionists chanting: "Ricercatori! Quanti accompagnati, da quanti animali, torturati!" (Researchers! How many are accompanied by tortured animals!).


Haven't We Been Cured of Missile Mania?
To the Editor:
Senator Sam Nunn, in "Needed: An ABM Defense" (Op-Ed, July 31), has returned to advocating deployment of a 100-antiballistic-missile system at Grand Forks, N.D.
He does not say that such a system would not protect us from nuclear-armed ballistic missiles launched from ships at sea, from atomic bombs delivered by airplanes, from nuclear-armed cruise missiles or from weapons secreted on ships entering our harbors.
Nor will it protect East and West Coast cities.


U.S. Seeks Pact On German Fares
The Department of Transportation says that it hopes its decision to extend Lufthansa's authority to fly between Frankfurt and Charlotte, N.C., will lead to an agreement by the United States and Germany to permit discounting on flights between the two countries.
Lufthansa was originally given permission in June 1990 to serve the Frankfurt-Charlotte route.
In extending permission to next Feb. 18, the department said it had allowed the airline to fly into Charlotte on the assumption that the two countries could introduce lower fares.
But it said the German Government has continued to disaprove discount fares offered by United States carriers to passengers whose flights originate in Germany.
The department added that Lufthansa's Charlotte route will not be extended beyond next February unless an agreement on pricing is reached.
USAir has said it would like to serve the Charlotte-Frankfurt market if Lufthansa's request for renewal is denied.


Corn: America's Summer Preoccupation
THE average Frenchman may see corn as something to be fed to the cows, but for Americans is it one of the great pleasures of summer.
Grilled, boiled, folded into pancake batter, made into puddings, chowder or salads, it can be prepared in an endless variety of ways.
One of the best methods to cook corn, apart from grilling or boiling it, is off the cob.
Saute it for no longer than three minutes in butter and serve it with plenty of black pepper and salt.
It also makes a splendid salad, mixed with peppers, tomatoes and red onion.
Corn should be cooked as soon as possible after it has been picked because its sugar content quickly turns to starch (it is said that ideally one should not pick it until after the water is on to boil).


Streetscapes: The Bank of the United States in the Bronx; The First Domino In the Depression
EACH succeeding story of a bank failure conjures up the same image: first a sudden stock-market collapse, then a nationwide bank crisis -- perhaps the start of another Great Depression.
The first big bank collapse after the Crash of 1929 began at a little limestone branch built in 1921 at the southeast corner of Freeman Street and Southern Boulevard in the Morrisania section of the Bronx.
Now little more than a shell, it is a ruined monument in the history of American finance.


The Death Is Not the Life
ANNE SEXTON
A Biography.
By Diane Wood Middlebrook.
Illustrated. 488 pp.
Boston: A Peter Davison Book/ Houghton Mifflin Company.


Corn: America's Summer Preoccupation
THE average Frenchman may see corn as something to be fed to the cows, but for Americans is it one of the great pleasures of summer.
Grilled, boiled, folded into pancake batter, made into puddings, chowder or salads, it can be prepared in an endless variety of ways.
One of the best methods to cook corn, apart from grilling or boiling it, is off the cob.
Saute it for no longer than three minutes in butter and serve it with plenty of black pepper and salt.
It also makes a splendid salad, mixed with peppers, tomatoes and red onion.
Corn should be cooked as soon as possible after it has been picked because its sugar content quickly turns to starch (it is said that ideally one should not pick it until after the water is on to boil).


Professor's Race Remarks Prompt Resolution by N.A.A.C.P.
Hazel N. Dukes, the president of the New York State chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, yesterday characterized the comments made by Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. in a speech last month as "race baiting," but said that the controversy surrounding the remarks had been blown out of proportion.
The directors of the state chapter yesterday discussed the remarks by Dr.
Jeffries at a meeting and passed a resolution reaffirming their opposition to racism in all forms, but did not directly comment on the professor's remarks at the Black Arts Festival in Albany on July 20.


A Celebration of Prints and, Nearby, a Sampling of Folk Art
IT so happens that the arrival of the show "102 Prints" coincides with the revival of the cartoon "101 Dalmatians." Still, this proves only that it is a small world, for the exhibition, on view at the Public Library here, is a celebration of the 102 years that have elapsed since the library started its collection of graphic art.
Though it actually numbers about 115 items, the display is but a tiny excerpt from a total of 18,000 works.


17 Hours Across Rural Cuba: A Living Revolution
Over the last two decades, Cuba's largest cities, Havana on the western shoulder of the island and Santiago de Cuba near its eastern end, have become grand skeletons -- places of crumbling roads and buildings, dwindling supplies and people increasingly uneasy with the Communist Government of Fidel Castro.
But away from the cities, along winding mountain roads cutting through endless fields of sugar cane, live many who remember the grinding poverty of the countryside during the 1940's and 50's under the rightist dictator, Fulgencio Batista.
Unsupervised Tour
A 17-hour drive last week from Havana to Santiago, free of the Government escorts whose job it used to be to assure that foreign journalists received only positive images of Cuba and its Government, produces a sense that support for Mr.
Castro and his revolution 32 years ago remains strong in the Cuban countryside.


James T. Leonard, 80, A Non-Lawyer Judge
James T. Leonard, the last non-lawyer to sit as a New Jersey municipal judge, died on Thursday in Rahway Hospital in Rahway, N.J.
He was 80 years old and lived in Garwood, N.J.
Mr. Leonard died of cardiac arrest, his wife, Anne, said.


Israel, Most of All, Needs a Just Settlement; What Arabs Must Do
To the Editor:
If Israel, the Arab states and Palestinian representatives agree to begin negotiations, it will be the all-important first step to achieving peace in the area.
Immediately following the ceremonial opening, the United States has a commitment from the Arabs that they will proceed with face-to-face negotiations with Israel.
The United States will then assume the role of honest broker and will not attempt to inflict its viewpoints regarding the issues that will be debated and, it is hoped, resolved by the parties directly involved.


Cunning in Furs


The Cultivated Gardener; Careful Helping Hand for Native Species
There's a field near my house that's full of Queen Anne's lace, black-eyed Susans, goldenrod, milkweed and the orange jewels of butterfly weed.
A few weeks ago, chicory gave it a touch of deep blue sky.
It's inhabited by hundreds of butterflies and bees and dragonflies.
There's a tumult of life here that seems missing from more cultivated spots.
So I'm keeping my eye on the Queen Anne's lace (Daucus carota), waiting for the flowers to fade and turn brown.
Then I'll collect some seeds and plant them in a sunny spot outside my garden.


The World; For Many Albanians, Freedom Means a Shot At Leaving Forever
FOR Albanians, this could be seen in some respects as a banner year: A popular uprising brought free elections in March after more than four decades of brutal rule by a Communist regime.
The fledgling democracy was hailed by the United States and the rest of the international community.
But in everyday life it is a somber time for the more than 6 million Albanians, who face either wholesale privation or wholesale repression, depending on where they reside on the Balkan peninsula.


Tax on A-Plant Riles New Hampshire's Neighbors
Among the six New England states, relations have traditionally been cordial and cooperative, except when it comes to the subject of New Hampshire and taxes.
In the early 1970's, New Hampshire, the only state that has never had a general sales or income tax, imposed an income tax on out-of-state commuters.
In 1982, it proposed charging neighboring states higher rates for hydro-electric power generated on the Connecticut River within its borders.


Talking: Contracts; Attention To Details Is Critical
IN drawing up a home-sale contract, it has become increasingly important for buyers and sellers to pay close attention to both content and language -- even though the attorney or sales agent preparing the papers may be extremely competent.
Key clauses to focus upon include any statement referring to the mortgage commitment's being obtained by the buyer, penalties that could result from an inability to comply with terms and arrangements about removable items such as furnishings and fittings.
Virtually everything is negotiable.


Life in a Summer Rental, or a 'Plunge Into Hedonism'
ALTHOUGH the downstairs decor is wall-to-wall beds, sleep is not a priority for the 28 people sharing Obsession, a two-story group-rental house in Ocean Bay Park.
When buying 48-hour intervals of Fire Island fun, the more hours conscious the more fun per dollar.
"Sleep time is usually between 5:30 A.M. and 9 A.M.," said Meg Gari Kirschner, who is managing Obsession this summer.
The hours vary slightly, she said, depending on what time the last fun seeker returns home and the sounds emanating from 14 people sleeping in close proximity.


In Tucson, It's Not the Heat, It's the Thermometers
After a year of study, the National Weather Service has confirmed what people in Tucson, Ariz., had long suspected: the city's official thermometer runs too hot, by as much as two degrees on some days.
But the Weather Service has also established what only the most skeptical would have believed: all of the Government's new electronic thermometers in the Southwest also run too hot by about two degrees.


Coins
The United States Capitol Historical Society has issued a commemorative medal celebrating the 200th anniversary of the adoption of the Bill of Rights -- the first 10 amendments to the United States Constitution -- by the legislatures of the 13 original states.
The obverse of the medal shows a group of faces with Colonial-era hats and hairstyles surrounding the Minuteman statue of Concord, Mass., who carries a flintlock rifle.
Across the bottom runs Thomas Jefferson's famous warning, "Eternal vigilance is the price of Liberty."


A May Wedding For Molly Rouse
Emma Martin Rouse and Willard Goldsmith Rouse 3d, both of Phoenixville, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mary Paulding Rouse to Kennon Wheatley Hines, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Kennon Hines 5th of Atlanta.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Rouse, 23 years old and known as Molly, graduated from the Shipley School and the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a founding partner of Rouse and Associates, a Philadelphia real-estate development company.
Her late grandfather Willard Rouse Jr. founded the Rouse Company, which has redeveloped several urban sites around the country, including the South Street Seaport in New York in 1983.


Taking a Bug's-Eye View of the World
THERE is nothing like getting an insect's view of flowers and plants.
Although many backyard gardeners may not even think about such a scheme, it is a rewarding exercise outdoors and well within the realm of possibility.
How?
Very simply with a hand lens, or pocket magnifier as it is sometimes called.
The lens concentrates the focus on the details of a flower in an amazing way and opens up a new view of the world around us.
The lens can be held close to a flower or leaf without picking it, or for a closer look, the flower or leaf can be picked and brought indoors, where it can be handled closely and held to the light.
The lens's magnification makes it possible to see the intricate designs of what have heretofore been thought of as rather ordinary plants, flowers and leaves.


SURPLUS VALUE
Marialisa Calta's Food column "Surplus Value" (July 21) caused me to roar with laughter, as I read it up here in rural Vermont, where I spend my summers.
When my next-door neighbor brought me beans from her garden (which she was canning, in earnest), I showed her this delightful article about surplus zucchini (and beans and rhubarb).
"Yes, I know," she said.
"You don't dare leave your car unlocked when you go somewhere, because when you come back, you'll find zucchini in it." DEBORAH FALL
Washington


The Executive Life; You've Got to Stop And Plant the Roses . . .
Every weekend, rain or shine, Charles Borrok leaves his city apartment and races to his country house in Westchester.
Straightaway, he inspects his garden to see which blossoms have popped open.
"I'm highly committed to my garden," said Mr.
Borrok, president of the New York real estate firm of William A. White/Grubb &amp; Ellis.
"I work on it until December, and then I'm back by March."
Mr.
Borrok is among a growing group of executive gardeners who claim kneeling, weeding and digging is therapeutic for the muscles as well as the mind.
At summer cocktail parties, they rattle off the Latin names for plants and swap stories about handmade English tools.
In the office, they pore over mail-order garden catalogues as if they were annual reports and discuss compost piles as if they were junk bonds.


The City That Was And the City That Is Now
The real reason to see "McKim, Mead &amp; White's New York" is not for McKim, Mead &amp; White, but for New York.
This exhibition of drawings and photographs from the archives of New York's most celebrated architectural firm, which will be on view at the New-York Historical Society through Sept. 1, is a poignant celebration of urban magnificence.
It cannot but provoke thoughts about the city that was and the city that now is, and about what architecture has to do with the whole process of giving the city meaning.
There has been nothing like McKim, Mead &amp; White before or since.
Charles McKim, William Mead and Stanford White reigned over New York at the turn of the century.
Their firm was not only large and politically powerful, it was brilliant; off its drafting boards came a succession of mansions, public buildings, museums, schools, office buildings and commercial structures that bespoke a remarkable combination of grandeur, creativity and discipline.
They designed Pennsylvania Station, the original Madison Square Garden, the Villard mansions, the Pulitzer mansion, the Morgan Library, the University Club, the Century Club, the Metropolitan Club, the main post office, the Washington Square arch, the Brooklyn Museum, the campus and most of the buildings of Columbia University, and on and on and on.


Business Diary/August 11-16
COMPANIES The Price of Breaking the Street's Code of Ethics


Ms. Rossi Weds David E. Vann Jr.
Marie Rossi, a daughter of Mary Rossi of Chelmsford, Mass., was married yesterday to David Earle Vann Jr., a son of Margaret Calista of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., and Mr.
Vann of Lexington, Ky.
The Rev.
Tracy Robinson-Harris, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at Tavern on the Green in New York.
Ms.
Rossi, who is 30 years old and is keeping her name, is a marketing manager for Time Warner Inc. in New York.
A magna cum laude graduate of Wellesley College and a member of Phi Beta Kappa, she received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
Her mother is a private investor.


Replacing Fascia Boards
FASCIAS are the trim boards at the tops of exterior walls.
Their purpose is to cover the ends of rafters at the eaves of a roof and the sides of rafters at the rakes, the roof's sloping edges.
Water damage to fascias at the eaves is rather common.
Repairs generally consist of replacing the damaged boards, a job that is not too difficult for a person with moderate carpentry skills, but an assistant is needed to help handle large pieces.


90's Denim: Relaxed And Blue and More
Denim takes on the attitude of each generation: torn, scruffy blue jeans in the 1960's, a second skin in the 70's, a designer look in the 80's.
That decade ended with deliberate shredding on thighs and knees and a sack shape -- a reaction against leggings.
"The trends this fall include color, trims of leather and plastic, prints, a relaxed fit and a continuation of the baggy look," said Jean Driscoll, a spokeswoman for Jeanswear Communications, a newsletter for the denim industry.


Pan American Games; Abandoning Gold Standard, U.S. Settles for Bronze in Basketball
Still smarting from its loss to Puerto Rico two days ago, the United States men's basketball team salvaged its Pan American experience this afternoon, defeating Cuba, 93-74, and winning the bronze medal.
Puerto Rico, which in previous Pan Am Games was the runner-up four times and the third-place finisher twice, won its first gold medal, defeating Mexico, 77-65.


A la Carte: End of an Era as Nicola Zanghi Moves
A LONG ISLAND restaurant dynasty will come to an end late this fall when the Zanghi family sells Nicola's of Glen Cove and moves to Connecticut.
The chef and owner, Nicola Zanghi, his wife, Trisch, and sister Nina have been at the 50 Forest Avenue location in Glen Cove since 1974.
For most of that period, Nicola's was called Restaurant Zanghi.
Mr. and Mrs.
Zanghi will operate a restaurant double the size of the 68-seat Nicola's, in Westport, Conn.
It will occupy the first floor of National Hall, an 1875 landmark building on the Saugatuck River that is the anchor of a complex being restored by Arthur Tauck, president of Tauck Tours.


Notebook; Troubled Steeler Is Sitting Out While Waiting for League Ruling
Terry Long, the Steelers offensive lineman who told teammates that he had tested positive for steroids and then twice attempted suicide last month, remains in Pittsburgh, awaiting the outcome of an appeal he has filed with the National Football League on the results of his test.
Long hired a lawyer, George Saunders of Chicago, on the advice of the Players Association, to file the appeal shortly after his failed suicide attempts.
Saunders, who would say only that Long was his client, said he has represented other N.F.L. players in appeals of drug tests.
He declined to discuss the other appeals, but said that he had had some success.


Jets Encouraged by Cadigan's Recovery
One of the biggest concerns about Dave Cadigan's surgically repaired right knee heading into the Jets' 1991 season is whether Cadigan believes the knee is as good as it was before he injured it last season.
After testing it in two exhibition games before last night's meeting with the Giants, Cadigan, a first-round draft pick in 1988 and one of the Jets' best offensive linemen, was making a believer of himself.


Joan R. Barfield Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Gene T. Barfield of Bethel, Conn., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Joan Roberta Barfield and Robert Blair Grune, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George V. Grune of Westport, Conn.
Miss Barfield, 33 years old, is the executive vice president of Creative Travel, international tour operators in Westport.
Her father is a programmer analyst for International Business Machines in Milford, Conn.


A Stranger Within Their Gates
CHAPTER AND VERSE
A Skeptic Revisits Christianity. By Mike Bryan. 324 pp. New York: Random House. $22.


Corrections
An answer to an astronomy quiz in the Education Life section on Aug. 4 incorrectly identified the smallest planet in the solar system.
It is Pluto.


DANCE VIEW/Jack Anderson; Preserving Nijinska's Ballets: A Family Affair
One hundred years ago, on Jan. 8, 1891, Bronislava Nijinska was born in Minsk, Russia.
Earlier this summer, on July 2, her daughter, Irina Nijinska, died in Inglewood, Calif., at the age of 77.
Bronislava Nijinska created ballets; her daughter preserved them.
Like her brother, the charismatic dancer Vaslav Nijinsky, Bronislava Nijinska was an innovative choreographer.
She also inspired scores of people -- this writer, among them.
After her mother's death in 1972, Irina Nijinska devoted herself full-time to the restaging of Nijinska's ballets for companies around the world.
And now, with the death of Irina Nijinska, the future of some of her mother's works is uncertain.


Holly Sanderson Wed to C. S. Schade
Holly Elaine Sanderson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard L. Sanderson of Concord, N.H., was married there yesterday to Christian Stanton Schade, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold R. Schade of Babylon, L.I.
The Rev.
Frank C. Strasburger, assisted by the Rev.
Thomas Creaser, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the Episcopal ceremony in the Chapel of St.
Peter and St.
Paul at St.
Paul's School.
The bride, 22 years old, graduated from St.
Paul's and Princeton University.
Her father is an insurance and real-estate broker in Concord.


POSTINGS: Power to Collect Rent; Muscles For Boards
The hands of co-op and condominium boards that are forced to deal with financially troubled sponsors will be strengthened under a measure that Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York has signed into law.
It enables the boards to collect rent directly from the sponsors' tenants whenever the sponsors fall more than 30 days behind in their common charges, maintenance payments, taxes or other obligations.
The law, signed on July 23, is designed to address a widespread problem: Sponsors in recent noneviction conversions have retained many apartments occupied by rent-regulated tenants and have continued collecting rents even when falling behind in their own bills.


Festival Auction Criticized
The monthlong Cultural Festival of India ended in disagreement on Monday over what was for sale at the event's auction.
Smita Patel of Princeton was only one of a few buyers who were satisfied with the auction.
An earlier auction had been canceled, so Mrs.
Patel was forced to haggle for a second time over the price of a hand-painted canvas fence and ended up paying more than double the original price.
But she was still happy because she eventually ended up with the fence.


Even Kitsch Has a Place At the Smithsonian
Wearing white cotton gloves, a Smithsonian worker carefully removed from a locked storage case the National American History Museum's newest arrival: a pair of six-inch-high pink plastic reindeer.
The reindeer arrived unsolicited, like hundreds of other items -- some addressed only to "Smithsonian, Washington D.C. -- sent each year to what is known as the nation's attic.


A Special Relationship
DANGEROUS LIAISON
The Inside Story of the U.S.-Israeli Covert Relationship.
By Andrew Cockburn and Leslie Cockburn. 416 pp.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $25.


Shadow on a Market
The admission by Salomon Brothers that it had violated Treasury market rules and the resignation on Friday of its top two executives have focused new attention on this huge but little understood and lightly regulated market, and generated renewed calls for tighter regulation.
The resignations of the top two executives of Salomon Brothers Inc., John H. Gutfreund, the chairman and chief executive, and Thomas W. Strauss, the president, which the board is expected to accept today, followed the furor over their failure to disclose promptly the firm's irregular activities in buying Treasury securities.


More Than the Elderly Have Gray Hair
I was quite confused and distressed by the wording of a recent notice in "Long Island Journal" on Free Riding for the Elderly  [ Aug. 4 ] .
You state that persons with gray hair who live in Ocean Beach can get free transportation to local restaurants.
You then go on to talk about the program, the Senior Citizen Cart.
I am 46 years old and have been gray-haired for the last 15 years.
I identify myself as a gray-haired person, state this on my driver's license etc. and therefore was understandably confused by the connection of gray hair, being elderly and needing transportation to a restaurant.


Darling Trade Doubts
To the Sports Editor:
The Ron Darling trade should not have been made.
It reflected poor judgment and insight.
Wally Whitehurst will never be a great starting pitcher.
His main strength is four to five innings.
He should be the middle relief pitcher.
Ron Darling is a good pitcher.
Not great any more but a definite asset to any pitching staff.
Tim Burke at best is only fair.
To trade Darling for Burke was a bad move.
To keep Whitehurst as a starter will prove to be another mistake.
ALVIN L. LEVINE New York


He Knew How to Blow Things Up
THE NIGHT TRAVELLERS
By Elizabeth Spencer. 366 pp. New York: Viking. $21.95.


Touring With the Young and Restless
TAKING a vacation with a preschooler is something like having a baby: Soon after the event you forget about the pain and start planning another.
And as with having a baby, much advice has been written about traveling with the very young.
However, these travel tips usually turn out to be less than satisfactory.
I mean, traveling with small children is a real strain, and playing let's-all-count-the-yellow-license-plates on the highway is going to disguise this fact for about as long as Lamaze breathing makes you think labor pains are merely "discomfort." So throw away all your old helpful hints about what to do when vacationing with the very young.
Try my approach instead, which consists simply of remembering
what not to do
.
My first revisionist travel tip is a real money-saver. It's this.
When eating out, do not order anything for anyone who has not yet been admitted to elementary school.
While he or she may eat something from your dinner, your child will never touch anything ordered specifically for him -- no, not even one of those special kids' dinners with the cute animal names.
If you absolutely cannot resist the temptation to order one of these, the proper way to order is this: "My wife will have the baked filet of sole amandine plus the child's number seven -- the Dingo Dog. And I'll have number nine -- the Sea Otter -- plus the duck a l'orange. Ketchup too, please. Oh, and just give the children empty plates; they'll eat from ours."


Review/Music; McFerrin Conducts
Pianists and violinists have been doubling as conductors for ages, and lately opera singers have started beating a path to the podium, too.
But jazz musicians -- well, let's check the record books.
Yes, it looks as if Bobby McFerrin is definitely the first circular-breathing jazz singer to conduct the Beethoven Seventh Symphony.
At a glance, Mr.
McFerrin's performance with the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra at the Garden State Arts Center here tonight must have struck some as a gimmicky idea for a pops concert.
Billed as his New York-area conducting debut, the program included a group of short popular classics and some of Mr.
McFerrin's own vocal improvisations, along with the Beethoven.


Carolyn Wemple Wed to Scott Steffey
Carolyn Christina Wemple, the daughter of Mrs.
Gordon Kinder of Naples, Fla., and Point O'Woods, L.I., and the late George Wemple, was married yesterday at the Church at Point O'Woods to Scott Warren Steffey, a son of Frances Culviner of Washington and Point O'Woods and Warren Steffey of Mesa, Ariz.
Bishop John Shelby Spong of Newark performed the Episcopal ceremony.
Mrs.
Steffey, 24 years old, graduated from Hamilton College.
She was until recently a financial analyst at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York.
She is to join J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York this fall.
Her father was a senior vice president of the European American Bank in New York.
Her stepfather is a retired lawyer.
Her mother, Suzanne Kinder, is a professor of history at Barnard College.


Miss Hutchinson, Researcher, to Wed David F. Sand, an Investment Banker
The engagement of Mary Jocelyn Hutchinson to David Franklin Sand, a son of Judge and Mrs.
Leonard B. Sand of New York, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Paul K. Hutchinson of Tampa, Fla.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Hutchinson, who is 26 years old and is known as Jocelyn, graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
She is a researcher at World Monitor Television in Boston.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of the Sun Trust Banks in Tampa.
Her mother, Jacqueline Sirot Hutchinson, is a real-estate broker with the Smith &amp; Associates Investment Company in Tampa.


Times Bogeys Score
To the Sports Editor:
Having been unable to view the playoff between Jack Nicklaus and Chi Chi Rodriguez in the United States Senior Open, I read with interest the Playoff Card that appeared in The Times (July 30).
To my surprise, a hole-by-hole reading of the card had Chi Chi losing to Jack by only one stroke, notwithstanding the four-shot victory shown by the total score on the card.
The scorecard for Chi Chi Rodriguez showed 33 rather than 34 for the front nine, and 33 rather than 35 for the back nine.
Did The Times miss a tap-in for par?
STEPHEN V. MANNING New Haven, Conn.


CAMPUS LIFE: Antioch; Famed TEacher's Home: Landmark or Eyesore?
Women's his tory may soon confront bulldozers and the wrecker's ball if a decision by Antioch College to demolish the home of Rebecca Mann Pennell, the first female professor in the United States, is carried out.
A coalition of students and faculty members is challenging the decision.
In a letter distributed last week in faculty mailboxes and to the college administration, a group of faculty members called the decision "a violation of Antioch's due process" and argued that "the order must be rescinded."


Laura Carmody to Marry William Robert Cumming
Laura Jean Carmody and William Robert Cumming plan to marry in October.
Miss Carmody is a daughter of Mrs.
F.
Michael Pucci and Robert Carmody, both of New York.
She is 28 years old and an assistant vice president at the Sumitomo Bank in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
The prospective bridegroom, 27, is a son of Betsey Cumming of Edgartown, Mass., and William Cumming of Boston.
He is a financial analyst at Citicorp in Long Island City, Queens.
He graduated from Babson College.


Even Kitsch Has a Place At the Smithsonian
Wearing white cotton gloves, a Smithsonian worker carefully removed from a locked storage case the National American History Museum's newest arrival: a pair of six-inch-high pink plastic reindeer.
The reindeer arrived unsolicited, like hundreds of other items -- some addressed only to "Smithsonian, Washington D.C. -- sent each year to what is known as the nation's attic.


By Any Name, Roseanne Is Roseanne Is Roseanne
Ladies and gentlemen, meet the first, er, lady of Prime-Time Television, Roseanne Barr.
Wait a minute.
Make that Roseanne Arnold.
Whether as Barr or Arnold, Roseanne clearly loves to keep friends, fans and enemies off balance.
She is not easy.
She has cast aside many of the people who were crucial to her initial success, including her manager and agent.
A prototypical outsider -- she grew up in Utah as a Jew who attended Mormon services -- she thumbs her nose at the Hollywood establishment and, indeed, all establishments.
But even in that, she is not predictable; Roseanne promised her second husband, Tom Arnold, that she would take his name if he converted to Judaism, and has now asked to be referred to as Mrs.
Arnold.


Malaria Reports Available by Fax
The Centers for Disease Control phone line for information about malaria has added a facsimile option.
When you dial the traveler's information line, (404) 332-4555, from a push-button phone, you get a message offering the choice of hearing the data by voice on the phone or receiving it by fax.
The faxed malaria message comes with a small world map as well as general information on transmission and prevention, with specifics for pregnant women and children and with advice on the area of the world you select: Africa, Southeast Asia, South America, Central America and the Caribbean, Mexico, the Indian Subcontinent or Oceania.
The free fax service operates 24 hours a day.


Norway
To The Editor: Your article on the Lofoten Islands of northern Norway ("A Wall of Islands in the Midnight Sun," Travel, July 21) evoked memories of a trip I made to that fair place in the summer of 1973 -- part of a 2,000-mile bicycle journey from Oslo to the North Cape.
I thought of one compelling image from the Lofotens.
I had turned west off the main highway I was traveling onto a small dirt road that led toward the sea.
The road soon went through a long, seemingly endless tunnel before beginning a steep ascent up a rugged pass.
When I got to the top of the pass, I felt like the Ronald Coleman character in "Lost Horizon" as he first beheld Shangri-La.


Free Air Miles To Be Linked To Shopping
By early next year, consumers will be able to earn free air travel by purchasing products from businesses participating in a program called Air Miles.
A similar plan has been operating in Britain since 1988 and includes such businesses as Shell Oil, I.B.M., Toshiba, National Westminster Bank, Visa and Mastercard.
Sponsors for the North American Air Miles program will be announced in November, according to Loyalty Management Group, a marketing firm that is operating the program in North America.
It says they will include fast-food restaurants, credit cards, oil companies, sellers of packaged goods, grocery chains and retail and department stores.
Participating airlines so far are American, United and Air Canada.
The marketing group says two more major carriers are expected to join the plan.


October Wedding For Dina Razzetti
Mr. and Mrs.
Richard A. Razzetti of Rye, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dina Antoinette Razzetti, to Ronald Michael Clemmer Jr., a son of Ellen Bernstein of Oxford, Md., and Mr.
Clemmer of Paeonian Springs, Va.
An October wedding is planned.
The couple, both 24 years old, graduated from the University of Richmond.
Miss Razzetti is a sales supervisor at Fox Television in Washington.
Her father is a senior vice president of Kidder, Peabody in New York.


Israel Says All Sides in Talks Want Prisoner Swap
Israel's chief representative in the Middle East hostage negotiations said today that a comprehensive exchange of prisoners was possible because all sides want it, but he cautioned that it would take time.
And he repeated that nothing would happen until Israel gets solid information about the fate of seven servicemen who have been missing in Lebanon for as long as nine years.


A Third-World Rule on Video: Copy It and Sell It
The Arab Contractor's Video Club, on the banks of the Nile, offers the kinds of hot movie deals you can't get in the States: for 50 cents a night, they'll rent video copies of "Silence of the Lambs," a film that hasn't even been released for home viewing by its producers.
Across town, at the Radwan al-Ogeil department store, the bargains are in computer software.
Games that sell for $50 in the U.S. go for about $9, copied from the original onto blank diskettes, and then neatly repackaged in plastic, complete with a photocopy of the instruction manual.


Paramus Journal; Dinosaurs Are Fun, But the Zoo Fee Is Not
AMONG the bleating goats and crowing roosters there is another sound at the Van Saun Park County Zoo this summer: the chilling roar of thunder lizards and their varied kin.
While these animated dinosaurs have delighted thousands of children clutching barrier ropes with ice-pop-stained fingers, many parents have voiced shock and dismay.
The exhibition is stunning, they say, and its price of admission was expected.
But not an entrance fee to the zoo, which for decades has been free to all who enter.


As Telephones Multiply, Dialing Will Take Longer
The nation is rapidly running out of telephone numbers.
As facsimile machines, cellular phones, pocket pagers, computer modems and business telephones proliferate, the supply of unassigned numbers is being exhausted in the area codes serving the largest American cities, like 212 for Manhattan and the Bronx and 213 for Los Angeles.


Mary E. Halpin, A Teacher, Weds
Mary Elizabeth Halpin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas F. Halpin Jr. of West Boylston, Mass., was married there yesterday to Christopher Hart Martin Carter, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
D.
Martin Carter of New York.
The Rev.
Paul F. Campbell performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Good Counsel Roman Catholic Church.
He was assisted by the Rev.
James L. Carter, a Presbyterian minister, who is an uncle of the bridegroom.
The bride, 26 years old, teaches history at the Pingree School in Hamilton, Mass.
She graduated from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
Her father is a professor of obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Massachusetts at Worcester.
Her mother, Patricia May Halpin, is an associate superintendent of schools for the Roman Catholic Diocese of Worcester.


Multilingual Subway Map
Although some five million travelers who do not speak English visit New York City each year, according to the New York Convention &amp; Visitors Bureau, the city has never had a multilingual map and guide to its subway system.
Now there is one in which the key to the map, an introduction to the subway and a glossary of terms are printed in English, French, Spanish, Italian, German and Japanese.
The map is actually three maps depicting weekday service, evening and weekend service and late-night service.
Colors of the trunk lines coordinate with signs in the subway.
The map and guide costs $3.95.
The designer, John Tauranac, who was chief designer of many maps for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, said that the book was available at Hagstrom Map and Travel Center, the Museum of Modern Art bookstore, New York Bound, Barnes &amp; Noble, Brentano's and the Rizzoli bookstore.


Corn: America's Summer Preoccupation
THE average Frenchman may see corn as something to be fed to the cows, but for Americans is it one of the great pleasures of summer.
Grilled, boiled, folded into pancake batter, made into puddings, chowder or salads, it can be prepared in an endless variety of ways.
One of the best methods to cook corn, apart from grilling or boiling it, is off the cob.
Saute it for no longer than three minutes in butter and serve it with plenty of black pepper and salt.
It also makes a splendid salad, mixed with peppers, tomatoes and red onion.
Corn should be cooked as soon as possible after it has been picked because its sugar content quickly turns to starch (it is said that ideally one should not pick it until after the water is on to boil).


Violence Escalates in Northern Ireland
Six weeks after the collapse of talks described as the best hope for bringing peace to Northern Ireland, the troubled province is trapped in a spiral of separate reprisal killings that has left eight people dead in the last nine days.
The most recent incident occurred this morning, when a British soldier was killed in a bomb explosion while on foot patrol in County Armagh, near the border with the Republic of Ireland.
The outlawed Irish Republican Army later took credit for the attack.


Andrew F. Trotter, an Editor, Is Wed To Miss Gardiner, a Lawyer, in Maine
Daphne Willard Gardiner, the daughter of Mrs.
George H. P. Dwight of New York and Daniel W. Gardiner of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Andrew Frank Trotter, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Benjamin I. Trotter of Midlothian, Va.
The Rev.
Jack Silvey Miller, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony in the garden at the summer house of the bride's mother and stepfather in Bar Harbor, Me.
Mrs.
Trotter, 28 years old, graduated from Georgetown University and received a law degree cum laude from American University.
She is to join the Washington office of the Chicago law firm of Winston &amp; Strawn next month.
Her father is a partner in W. H. Reaves, an investment management company in Jersey City.
Her mother, Eleanor Collier Dwight, teaches American and English literature at the New School for Social Research and at New York University.


Wreckage of Indian Airliner Is Found Far Off Flight Path
The wreckage of an Indian Airlines plane that crashed Friday in eastern India's tropical forest, killing 69 people, was found scattered 14 miles off its flight path, officials said today.
The police and airline officials said they had no explanation for the crash or why the plane had strayed off course on its approach to this remote city on a 65-minute flight from Calcutta.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Allendale 380,000
7 Stoney Ridge Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old colonial; fireplace, deck, family room; taxes $7,124.
Mahwah 266,000
41 Sparrowbush Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 17-year-old split level; deck, fireplace, vaulted ceilings; taxes $4,358.
Ramsey 182,500
94 Lakeview Terrace  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; porch, wet bar, remodeled kitchen; taxes $3,541.
Waldwick 186,000
49 Grand Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 29-year-old Cape Cod; h/w floors, 2-car garage, newly painted, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,372.
Wayne 295,000
31 Parkwood Drive  4-bedroom, 2.5-bath, 12-year-old colonial; brick fireplace, h/w floors, finished basement; taxes $3,353.
West Milford 139,500
38 Elm Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; deck w/fiberglass awning, full basement, skylights; taxes $3,300.
OTHER AREAS Millwood, N.Y. 389,000
Lot 5, Cornell Woods
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, deck, family room, den; taxes not yet assessed.
Haddam, Conn. 162,500
37 Weiss Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 15-year-old ranch; new kitchen w/breakfast bar, formal dining room, 1.3 acres; taxes $1,828.
Bellport, L.I. 430,000
61 South Howells Point Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, library, fireplace, 1 acre; taxes $8,100.


Sunday Outing; Castle and Farmhouse: Homes of Two Painters
Only three miles apart, the homes of two master painters of the Hudson River School, Frederic Edwin Church and Thomas Cole, sit on hills on opposite sides of the river here.
The residences, about 115 miles north of New York City, display a startling contrast in architecture, art and ambiance.
On the east bank, the Church house, called Olana, is a turreted Persian castle, elaborately decorated inside and out.
It is crowded with exquisite furniture and artifacts and sketches by Church and scores of paintings by other artists.


Laura Goldberg and Atul Jain Marry
Laura Jean Goldberg and Atul Jain were married yesterday at the Belvoir Terrace Fine Arts Center in Lenox, Mass.
Rabbi Irwin C. Lowenheim and Swami Atmananda, a Hindu priest, officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, is a violinist and a member of the Cassatt String Quartet, in residence at the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts in Katonah, N.Y., and at Bowdoin College in Brunswick, Me.
She graduated from the Juilliard School and teaches in the pre-college division at Juilliard.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Alan Goldberg of Milwaukee, an anesthesiologist, and of Nancy S. Goldberg of New York and Lenox.
Her mother is the director of Belvoir Terrace, a summer camp for girls, and the director of the children's program at Steps, a dance school in New York.


All About/In-Store Promotions; Influencing Shoppers During the Moment of Decision
Everybody is trying to cash in on the fast-growing trend toward in-store promotions.
Supermarkets are charging fees to place these sales displays in their aisles.
Display companies, many of them bought by advertising agencies in recent years, are charging food manufacturers to design and produce campaigns.
And venture capitalists are investing in new technologies to get in on the burst of interest in the activity.
Known as supermarket point-of-purchase advertising and promotion, the technique uses high and low technology, from video terminals to hand-out coupons, to communicate sales messages and influence buying habits.
Food manufacturers see these promotions, which often play on people's impulses, as a quick fix for sagging sales.
And with thousands of new products introduced each year -- 1,837 in July alone, according to Gorman's New Product News, an supermarket industry magazine -- marketers are fighting for ways to keep their products from getting lost.


The Vegetarian Road To World Peace
To the Editor:
Rynn Berry's fine letter (Aug. 6) about Isaac Bashevis Singer's vegetarianism reminded me of the comment Mr.
Singer made at a luncheon to a woman who noticed approvingly that he had refused the meat course and who said that her health had improved when she, too, gave up meat.
"I do it for the health of the chickens," Mr.
Singer said.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on Aug. 4 misattributed a study about the number of rental cars in the United States.
It was conducted by Auto Rental News, not Business Travel News.


Psychedelic Rock Enters the Progressive Phase
So volatile is the club scene that few artists have been able to make a career out of dance music, which is released mostly as singles.
When dance groups do make an album, it usually consists of a few singles and a heap of filler.
But in the aftermath of Britain's "acid house" revolution -- the psychedelic trance-dance music played on samplers, synthesizers and drum machines -- a new breed of dance group has emerged, one that looks to the album format as an opportunity to explore its ideas.
The last year has seen probing albums like 808 State's "Ex:el," Bassomatic's "Set the Controls for the Heart of the Bass" and the Shamen's "En-Tact."


INSIDE
Mysteries of Treasury Bonds
Salomon Brothers' admission that it had manipulated some Treasury auctions is calling attention to this huge but little understood and lightly regulated market.
Page 22.
On the Inside Looking Out
Bernie Sanders is used to being an outsider.
Now, as the only Independent in Congress, he's on the inside.
Often he's uncomfortable.
Page 18.


The Executive Computer; Philippe Kahn of Borland, in His Own Words
PHILIPPE KAHN was born in Paris 39 years ago.
He tended goats in the Pyrenees, set sailing records from San Francisco to Hawaii and plays several musical instruments.
He is also chief executive of Borland International Inc., which he founded in 1983 after moving to the United States.
Borland now has annual sales of $200 million from such business products as the Paradox relational data base and the Quattro Pro spreadsheet, as well as the Objectvision and C++ object-oriented software development tools.
It recently announced plans to acquire the Ashton-Tate Corporation, which makes the dBASE family of data bases.
Mr.
Kahn agreed to be interviewed through computer-based electronic mail (E-mail), a medium that is creating profound changes in the way executives communicate.
E-mail shatters time and distance barriers, allowing rapid-fire exchanges of information among managers.


NEW YORK IS SEEING HINTS OF RECOVERY
Economists who are paid to watch every twitch and hiccup of the New York City economy are starting to see signs of life.
Not dramatic signs -- certainly not enough to justify buying a magnum of Dom Perignon -- but stirrings across a broad-enough spectrum to indicate that the economy's four-year free fall may be ending.
The rate of job losses in the metropolitan area is finally slowing.
Wall Street is having its first good run of business in three years.
The market for midtown Manhattan office space is showing the first signs of firming up.
And stores and hotels are reporting a slight increase in business.


Italy Breaks Pledge and Deports Albanian Emigres
After granting sanctuary to hundreds of Albanian refugees, the Italian authorities reversed their pledge today, rounded up the fugitives in dawn raids on hostels and camps and sent them back to their crisis-ridden Balkan homeland across the Adriatic Sea.
The Albanians were the last of more than 10,000 who forced their way into Bari harbor in southern Italy aboard a commandeered freighter nine days ago.
Most were deported earlier this week after the authorities placed them under inhospitable conditions at dockside and in a stadium.


Assaulting Doctors and Making Death Threats Aren't Pro-Life
To the Editor:
I am horrified at the tactics of the so-called pro-lifers in Wichita, Kan. ("U.S. Judge in Abortion Case Is Target of Death Threats," news article, Aug. 8).
It's ironic that such a group would call itself pro-life and yet blockade clinics, assault doctors and patients, and make death threats to judges who don't rule in their favor.
The same people who so willingly unfurl a flag and cross their hearts in patriotism would subvert the rights of those with whom they disagree.


A Court-Martial Drama at Westport Playhouse
IF ever a play was meant to be a movie, it is "A Few Good Men," currently at the Westport Country Playhouse.
Even before a stage production was in the works, in fact, the screen rights to Aaron Sorkin's court martial drama were sold.
That must be because Mr.
Sorkin's writing is full of quick changes, moving back and forth in time (before and after the 1986 murder of a misfit marine) and place (a naval base in Cuba, a courtroom, a jail, offices and Andrews Air Force Base near Washington).


Sean Capstick and Robin Paul Marry
Robin Elizabeth Paul, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren G. Paul of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York to Sean Robert Capstick, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Capstick of Chobham, Surrey, England.
The Rev.
Stanley Moseley performed the ceremony.
The bride and bridegroom are 25 years old and are graduates of Northwestern University.
She is a sales associate at Metropolis magazine in New York.
Her father is the advertising manager for Latin America at the I.B.M.
World Trade Corporation in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
Her mother, Roberta Paul, is a senior communications specialist at the I.B.M.
United States division in White Plains.


Horse Racing; File It Under Upset: Travers to Corporate Report
Three months after they tangled in the Kentucky Derby, the country's prize 3-year-old colts staged their return match in the $1 million Travers Stakes today, and the top three contenders were outrun dramatically by an outsider, Corporate Report.
It was a tour de force for Corporate Report, who ran ninth in the Derby, second in the Preakness and fourth in the Belmont Stakes.
On this muggy afternoon before 48,170 spectators at old Saratoga Race Course, he led almost wire to wire, fought off a rousing challenge from Hansel in the homestretch and beat him in a photo finish by the margin of a neck.


Building Support for Coastal Waters
CHRISTOPHER PERCY is president of the Sounds Conservancy, a group he helped start in 1984 that is dedicated to improving conditions in the six bodies of water in southern New England: Long Island, Fishers Island, Block Island, Rhode Island, Vineyard and Nantucket Sounds.
For the last six years Mr.
Percy and his group have been among the most ardent advocates of a study of how to restore the 740-acre Quiambaug Cove in Stonington.
Once the cove was productive; now it is a dead body of water with the bottom covered with two to six feet of black, acidic, rotting organic muck, a condition Mr.
Percy and others say is the result of the construction of causeways to support the railroad and Route 1 along the Connecticut coast.


Separation Anxiety: How a Sewage Treatment Plant Works


Pope Tells Croats He Supports Them
Pope John Paul II told Croatian pilgrims today that he supported their "legitimate aspirations" and said he would like to visit their republic soon.
The Pope's statement, delivered at an open-air service in the Hungarian town of Pecs, near the border with Yugoslavia, was his strongest yet on the Yugoslav crisis.
But it stopped short of an explicit endorsement of Croatia's independence drive, suggesting that Croatians should achieve their goals through international mediation.


Why the Movies Are Ignoring AIDS
When it comes to making movies about disease, Hollywood usually isn't queasy.
Illness often gets a leading role in prominent films -- Julia Roberts's diabetes in "Steel Magnolias," Robert De Niro's encephalitis lethargica in "Awakenings" or Campbell Scott's leukemia in the recent "Dying Young." Why then, given the movies' tolerance of serious ailments, has there been no major feature film about AIDS?
AIDS offers everything a scriptwriter could wish for: drama, medical intrigue, sex, death, heroism, pathos, social conflict and immediacy.
Yet to date only television has approached the topic.
Just one feature film about AIDS, last year's critically acclaimed "Longtime Companion," has made it into theaters.


Ryan Set for Next Start
Texas Rangers pitcher NOLAN RYAN is expected to come off the disabled list tomorrow and take the mound against the Orioles at Arlington Stadium for his first appearance this month.
Ryan, who has not pitched since July 28 because of a strained muscle in his right shoulder, had a good throwing session Thursday at Arlington, Tex.


Jazz Jamboree To Benefit Westport Food Closet
IT may not yet be time for the last rose of summer, but it certainly is roundup time for most of our summer festivals.
The Levitt Pavilion, which has been offering dozens of free concerts in Westport since late June, tops off its 18th season tonight at 8 with a jazz jamboree by the T. J. Tomblin Big Band.
Listeners are requested to bring along a can of food for donation to the Westport Woman's Club Food Closet.
The rain location is the Bedford Middle School.
For more details, call 226-7600.
The Trinity College Chamber Music Series already ended last week in Hartford, but there remains one last chance to partake of the free bell ringings on the Quad: at 7 P.M. on Wednesday John Gouwens, carillonneur of the Culver Military Academy in Indiana plays the final program of the 42d annual Plumb Memorial Carillon Concerts (297-2001).


Paper Gains Won't Help Come April 15
To the Editor:
I used to be a shareholder of the Contrafund ("A Youthful Superstar Named Vinik," Mutual Funds, Aug. 4), but was forced to sell because of the capital gains generated by "churning," which you refer to more politely as a fund's "turnover ratio."


Cloth Coats Come Back, With Dash
The cloth coat has made a comeback.
For years, there were raincoats and there were furs, and the good old Republican cloth coat was pushed to the back of the closet.
But now, as winters in many parts of the country are growing milder and anti-fur activists prowl the streets, the time is right for fabric coats.
To make the transition appealing, designers and manufacturers have spiffed up the styling.
Women are no longer limited to a choice between a single-breasted straight coat and a double-breasted straight coat.
They can have a swingy trapeze coat with a scarf neckline, a zip-front chemise style, a trench coat, a pea coat or a quilted topper.
They can go for the luxury of cashmere or the spunk of crunchy tweed, opt for a bold pattern or stick to a solid color.
The range is vast.


Balled and Chained to General Motors
RIVETHEAD Tales From the Assembly Line.
By Ben Hamper.
Foreword by Michael Moore. 234 pp.
New York: Warner Books. $19.95.


GET WITH THE PROGRAM
William Safire gives various interpretations of the phrase "get with the program" in his On Language column "Poetic Allusion Watch, Expanded" (July 21).
However, he fails to distinguish the source of this statement, which is the 12-step program of Alcoholics Anonymous, founded in 1935.
For his records, "to get with the program" means to work the principles (12 steps) of the A.A. program.
JOAN WHITE
Pearl River, N.Y.


Broadway Produce
It wasn't exactly your amber waves of grain, but there it was, a sizable plot of corn -- dozens and dozens of six-foot-high plants in neat rows -- smack dab in the middle of Broadway in upper Manhattan.
For a while it seemed that nobody in the neighborhood around the stretch of median with its strip of corn had any idea who planted it.
Last week, Daniel Perez emerged and confessed, having noted, no doubt, the admiring tone of news reports about the mystery crop and the lack of City Hall bluster about cracking down on unlicensed farmers.
Mr.
Perez, a 51-year-old immigrant from the Dominican Republic, said he had cleared the litter from the land in May and planted his corn mainly because it brought back memories of the Dominican farms of his youth.
Along with the corn he also has tomatoes and garlic growing.
"I planted with the idea that this is my own little contribution, my own little Cibao," he said, referring to the farming region of his native land.


B. L. Bushell Wed To Miss Margolis
Nancy Gail Margolis, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Margolis of New York, was married last evening to Bruce Leonard Bushell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gordon Bushell of Old Westbury, L.I., and Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Eugene Lipsey, assisted by Cantor Isaiah Gramma, performed the ceremony in the Pegasus Suite at the Rainbow in New York.
The bride, 25 years old, teaches nursery school at the 92d Street Y in New York.
A graduate of Boston University, she received a master's degree in education from New York University.
Her father is a lawyer in New York and president of Interlex, a Soviet-American business development company.


Bringing Back Hope to a Yonkers Street
THE merriment on the sidewalk one recent weekend afternoon belied the problems that normally afflict Elliott Avenue, a block of rundown row houses on this city's crowded west side.
Men and women were dancing in the street to the beat of rock music coming from car radios.
Refreshments had been placed on a folding card table.
And on the stoops in front of the brick buildings, children playfully chased each other, veering around the posts of graceful wrought-iron railings.
Other residents, not joining in, nevertheless pushed aside their curtains and watched, smiling from windows.


Country Fun in Brooklyn


CAMPUS LIFE: Connecticut College; Undergraduates Spend Summer In Lab Research
The labs at Connecticut College were busy this summer, but the scientists operating the microscopes, lasers and computers did not hold Ph.D.'s.
In fact, most of them have not yet earned their bachelor's degrees.
With their costs covered by stipends and grants from public and private sources, 29 undergraduates at the coeducational liberal arts college spent 10 weeks conducting scientific research firsthand.
Working individually or in teams with faculty mentors, the student scientists continued experiments originated by Connecticut College professors.


Tidying Up After the Mess At Salomon
It was a classic case of a scandal growing far beyond what almost anyone on Wall Street had expected.
And now heads are rolling at Salomon Brothers.
One reason the impact was initially underestimated was that it was not easy to explain what the firm did and why it bothered anyone.
It is an oversimplification to say that Salomon has admitted lending the Government too much money and failing to confess promptly that it did so.
But that captures the essential facts.


Cardinal's-Eye View of the Pirates And Mets From Torre's High Perch
The teams that will play a three-game series at Shea Stadium this week could be easily confused.
It's the woeful Mets who were supposed to be the division contender and the surprising St.
Louis Cardinals who were supposed to be lucky to get out of last place.
While the Mets have unmasked themselves as first-degree frauds, the Cardinals, under Manager Joe Torre, have joined the Atlanta Braves as the National League's biggest surprises.
Coincidentally, the Cardinals and the Braves, both in second place in their respective divisions, are trying to become the first teams ever to rise from last to first in one season.


The State of the New York Blood Supply
To the Editor:
"A Multibillion-Dollar Business in a Nonprofit World" (July 7) was an excellent and informative article on blood banks as businesses.
But a photograph showed a donor at the New York Blood Center.
There are some wrong inferences the reader is apt to draw.


New York: City of Commerce
To the Editor:
Paul Goldberger's essay "A Shot of Cultural Adrenaline at Lincoln Center"  [ July 28 ]  very reluctantly accepts "Faustian pacts with the world of private real-estate development": "We like to pretend that our cultural institutions are clean and pure, not sullied by their connections to commerce." The "pact" was the financing of new facilities for Lincoln Center through a new condominium development on its property.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The southern gable of my house was covered with brown aluminum fascia panels some years ago.
During the summer daylight hours, this aluminum fascia expands between the nailing points so that there is a gap of more than an inch between the aluminum and the old wood fascia board.
As soon as the sun goes down, the aluminum returns to its original flat position.
This has been going on for six years, but there is no evidence of damage to this fascia, and the nails are as tight as when first installed.
Should I apply some caulking and add more nails to prevent this from happening?
A.
Aluminum fascia panels will always expand in the hot sun, but the trouble here is that the nailing technique was apparently not in line with proper practice for this type of installation.
Nails for aluminum siding or fascia should never be driven tight or firm.
They usually go through slots in the aluminum, rather than holes, and are not driven up tight so that the aluminum can "move" or expand lengthwise without buckling.
The original nails should be taken out and then properly installed.


Amy Mendillo Is Engaged
Dr. and Mrs.
John J. Mendillo of Naples, Fla., have announced October wedding plans for their daughter Amy Coxe Mendillo and Donal Carl Fox Mastrangelo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Angelo A. Mastrangelo of New Vernon, N.J.
Miss Mendillo, 30 years old, graduated from Vassar College.
She is a food editor at Gourmet Magazine.
Mr.
Mastrangelo, 29, graduated from Hamilton College.
He is an account manager for Xerox in New York.


A Dear Comrade in Art
ENTRANCES &amp; EXITS
A Life in and Out of the Theatre.
By Norris Houghton.
Illustrated. 377 pp.
New York: Limelight Editions. $29.95.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
July
June
July 90
Rents
174.6
2.4
6.9
Homeowner's costs
172.6
1.1
4.3
Fuel and utilities
106.4
-0.7
5.0
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester,
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex,
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.48
9.64
10.33
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.21
7.26
8.39
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.37
9.49
10.14
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.15
7.20
8.10
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.44
9.57
10.22
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.03
7.09
8.27
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.63
9.78
10.55
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.61
7.66
8.56
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.88
6.18
7.70
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.12
9.12
9.85
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


As Competition By Lawyers Grows, Ads Raise Concern
AS the number of lawyers licensed to practice in New Jersey continues to grow, competition among them for clients has steadily intensified, legal experts say.
As a result, they say, increasing numbers of lawyers are turning to advertising to attract new business -- a practice that some say is unprofessional, others say is unavoidable and still others say is unexpectedly effective.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
WEST POINT CONCERT
The United States Military Academy Band at West Point will give a concert Friday at 7:30 P.M. on the grounds of the John Jay Homestead, on Route 22 in Katonah.
The performance is an engagement that has been repeated annually for several years and is free.
Pre-concert picnicking is permitted.
The rain location is the John Jay High School auditorium on Route 121 in Cross River.
The band's origins date to the 55 fifers and drummers from Col.
Samuel Webb's Regiment of the First Connecticut Brigade in 1778, when they crossed the Hudson River and established a military post on the site of West Point.
The military academy was founded in 1802, and the band responded to an increasing demand for martial music.
Within 10 years it had advanced from fifes and drums to oboes, flutes, clarinets, French horns, bugles, trumpets and bassoons.


Adjustment Slow but Sure For Rookie From New York
In the recent life of 19-year-old Manny Ramirez, it was a typical Friday night.
His ringing run-scoring double to left helped propel the Appalachian League Burlington Indians to a 3-0 victory over the Huntington, W. Va., Cubs and push Ramirez's batting average to .333, third in the league.
Afterward, he showered, signed a few autographs, grabbed a quick dinner (five hot dogs at the stadium concession stand) and took a cab (he doesn't have a car, or a license) to his new hangout -- the pay phone outside the Circle K convenience store near the apartment he shares with two teammates.
It was time to call Washington Heights, and his apartment has no telephone.


Teen-Ager Slain on a Corner
A Brooklyn teen-ager was shot to death about 3:30 A.M. yesterday as he and some friends walked along a street, the police said.
The youth, Luis Accardi, 18 years old, of 596 Morgan Avenue in the Greenpoint section, was at Meeker and Manhattan Avenues in Greenpoint when a car filled with men pulled up and a man got out and fired six shots, the police said.
They did not know of a motive.


Technology; Six Systems in Search of Approval As HDTV Moves to the Testing Lab
The race to develop high-definition television in the United States has reached a crucial juncture, as six rival technologies are undergoing testing in a red-brick building in this suburb of Washington.
Five of the six systems claim to be "true" high-definition television, which the Government has defined as a system that provides wide-screen pictures with twice the resolution, or sharpness, of ordinary television and sound as clear as that on compact disks.
The sixth uses a more modest approach, employing current broadcast standards to transmit improved pictures.


Randall S. Smith Wed to Ms. Cho
Christine Seung-Hae Cho, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Kah Kyung Cho of Williamsville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Randall Stuart Smith, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Smith of Glen Ellyn, Ill.
The Rev.
Young Han Kim performed the ceremony at the Korean Presbyterian Church in Buffalo.
Ms.
Cho, who is 28 and is keeping her name, is the manager of the foreign exchange department at General Motors in New York.
She graduated from Brown University and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Chicago.
Her father is a professor of philosophy at the State University at Buffalo.


Byronic Brando
To the Editor:
In her review of Richard Schickel's "Brando: A Life in Our Times" (July 21), Camille Paglia invokes the names of "Byron, Keats, Caravaggio, Michelangelo" as fit company for a critical examination of Marlon Brando, who is a movie actor.
She goes on to tell us that she is a child of the 1960's and that Marlon is the name of the son of the rock guitarist Keith Richards, whom she identifies, with stunning irrelevance, as "my idol."


Caramoor Opens Doors to Young Patients
AMONG the many visitors to the Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts here this summer were 50 patients from Four Winds Hospital, a private psychiatric center just up the road from Caramoor and its 117 acres of gardens and woodlands.
In the first such interchange between the institutions, Caramoor staff members showed slides and gave workshops at the hospital, then the young patients attended dance and theater performances, saw a falconry demonstration and toured the museum and garden at the music and arts center.


Traffic Alert
Cooper Square Street Fair: Third Avenue will be closed today between 4th and 14th Streets from 11 A.M to 6 PM.
India Day Parade: Madison Avenue will be closed today between 38th and 57th Streets from noon through late afternoon.


No Headline
Neal Benezra, a curator of 20th-century painting and sculpture at the Art Institute of Chicago, has been appointed chief curator of the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington.
He will succeed Ned Rifkin, who was recently appointed the director of the High Museum of Art in Atlanta.
At the Hirshhorn, Mr.
Benezra will head a staff of five curators and will supervise the exhibitions program and recommend acquisitions for the permanent collection.


Cruise to Visit 9 African Nations
A 24-day cruise to nine countries on the western coast of Africa is scheduled aboard the Caledonian Star, leaving Dakar, Senegal, on Nov. 7.
The voyage aboard the 134-passenger ship is one of the most extensive cruises ever offered along this coast, the first to visit seven West African countries and the first involving a ship marketed in the United States to sail to South Africa since the lifting of sanctions against South Africa.
The voyage ends in Cape Town.
From Dakar the ship sails to Banjul, Gambia; Freetown, Sierra Leone; Abidjan, Ivory Coast; Takoradi and Tema, Ghana; Lome, Togo; Principe and Sao Tome, Gabon; Walvis Bay, Namibia, and Alexander Bay, South Africa.
The Caledonian Star is equipped with Zodiac landing craft that allow landfalls in areas otherwise inaccessible to even this shallow-draft vessel.
The ship has a lecture lounge seating 130, a pool and library.
Fares for the cruise begin at $4,900 a person in double occupancy, not including air fare from the United States.
More information is available from Salen Lindblad Cruising, 333 Ludlow Street, Stamford, Conn. 06912-0076; telephone, (203) 967-2900.


'Stalin's Prosecutor'
To the Editor:
Arnold Beichman's review of "Stalin's Prosecutor" by Arkady Vaksberg (July 7) is illustrated by a photograph of the book's "hero," -- Andrei Vyshinsky.
Unfortunately, the caption under the photograph contains a mistake.
Vyshinsky sits not in the center, as the caption claims, but at the right.


POSTINGS: Free Ferry to Manhattan; A Riverfront Ramada
Owners of the new Ramada Suite Hotel in Weehawken, N.J., fail to see why the Hudson River should prevent them from filling their rooms with Manhattan-bound travelers.
The hotel, which opened Aug. 4, is providing free ferry rides between the Lincoln Harbor complex, where it is situated, and Manhattan.


New Yorkers, etc.
The wee hours of the morning are usually for sleeping and when they're not, it's most often not a matter of choice.
There are all kinds of people who have to get to work at what others would consider an ungodly hour and there are still more who have to hoist themselves out of bed to attend to the needs of children.
And there are, of course, the exercise fanatics, considered by some to be not quite normal who, any time from 4 to 6 A.M. start jogging or lifting weights or doing aerobics or other healthy things too horrible to contemplate.


Secret of Grilling Walter's Hot Dogs
The otherwise excellent article on Walter's hot-dog stand  [ "The View From: Mamaroneck," June 22 ]  omitted an important and unique step in hot dog preparation as practiced in this pastiche pagoda.
Each frankfurter is slit lengthwise on the grill and brushed with butter before grilling.
This bestows a singular flavor and texture.
Two of them on one bun is a particular favorite of mine.


Making a Difference; Whistle Finder
John R. Phillips, a public-interest lawyer here, was doing some legal research in 1983 when he came across a 120-year-old Federal statute that permitted private citizens to sue for fraud on behalf of the Government and keep a portion of any money recovered.
Seeing the makings of a tool that would be useful for whistle-blowing employees, Mr.
Phillips contacted members of Congress, helped draft amendments to modernize the statute and was rewarded when President Reagan signed the revised False Claims Act into law in 1986.
Since then the act has become a potent if controversial weapon in cases of fraud against Government agencies.
By forbidding companies from firing whistleblowers and offering employees who come forward with information about wrongdoing up to 30 percent of any money the Government recoups, the act has sparked more than 300 lawsuits, many of them against military suppliers.
Mr.
Phillips's small firm brought 17 of the suits and has others in the works.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week that ended Aug. 3 MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill 1.025 million
51 East 92d Street  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 5-story, brownstone; dining room, library, 9 fireplaces, roof terrace, roof garden, 17- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $10,337 (Broker: Leslie J. Garfield &amp; Co.- Corcoran Group)  Chelsea 345,000
161 West 15th Street  1,490-sq.-ft. open loft-co-op; 12-ft. high-vaulted ceilings, exposed-brick walls, 8-ft. windows, west exposure; maintenance $660, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Delson-Ginsberg Real Estate)  Fort Washington 82,000
880 West 181st Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; windowed, eat-in kitchen, high-ceilings, two exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $360, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Stein-Perry Real Estate)  Greenwich Village 875,000
340 West 12th Street  2-family, 4-story townhouse; 5 bedrooms, 3 baths in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 2 baths in other; dining room, eat-in kitchen in each duplex unit; attic, 2-story sculpture studio in rear annex; 24- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $4,635 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Upper East Side 2 million
791 Park Avenue (74th St.)  4-bedroom, 4-bath, 3,100-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining room, maid's room, library, new windows 3 exposures; maintenance $3,151, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Susan W. Bird-Fox Residential Group)  BRONX  Baychester 160,000
4510 Hill Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; eat-in kitchen, basement, 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Tyrax Realty-Highland Realty)  Riverdale 64,000
3206 Fairfield Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 900-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dinette, w/w carpet, corner unit, 3 exposures; maintenance $562, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  BROOKLYN  Park Slope 395,000
450 8th Avenue  2-family, attached brownstone; 4 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in primary triplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 17- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Marilyn A. Donahue)  Prospect Park South 325,000
215 Marlborough Road  5-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, French Gothic Revival- style house; dining room, fireplace, 2 sun porches, 2-car garage, landmark district; taxes $2,350 (Broker: Mary Kay Gallagher- Brooklyn Properties of 7th Avenue)  Windsor Terrace 216,000
43 Sherman Street  2-family, attached, brick house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, double-parlor, rear deck to garden in primary duplex unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $700 (Broker: Warren Lewis Real Estate)  QUEENS  College Point 165,000
3-14 127th Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 21- by 60-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  Forest Hills 235,000
72-21 Loubet Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; dining room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,050 (Broker: Dix Realty)  STATEN ISLAND Great Kills 225,000
159 Getz Avenue  2-family, semi-attached, frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 1 bedroom in other; 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 1-car garage, 44- by 135-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Colwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)  Midland Beach 153,000
1233 Father Capodanno Blvd.  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. condo in a 6-year-old building; dining room, eat-in kitchen, private driveway; common charge $116, 100% tax-abated (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


Catherine Triant Engaged to Wed George Buxton
Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Dimitri Triant of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Catherine Antonia Triant, to George Norman Buxton, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jorge Buxton of Buenos Aires and New York.
A June 1992 wedding is planned.
Miss Triant graduated from Barnard College and was a member of the New York Junior Assembly in 1982.
She is a sales representative for Clarence House, a decorative fabrics showroom in New York.
Mr.
Buxton graduated from Yale University and holds a law degree from Boston College and an M.B.A. degree from New York University.
He is a vice president in New York of the Banco Union of Venezuela.


Bush Got It Right in the Soviet Union
Critics claim that President Bush's comments before the Supreme Soviet of the Ukraine placed him "with" Mikhail Gorbachev and "against" independence movements in the Soviet republics.
But his Aug. 1 Kiev speech and July 30 address at the Moscow State Institute for International Relations made no such commitment.
The two speeches set forth the principles of American policy toward a Soviet Union that no longer looms as the totalitarian colossus of cold war days, but whose future shape runs the gamut of possibilities, from good to bad to very ugly.
In the face of hope for peaceful and democratic change, the President conveyed encouragement and support.
Faced with the staggering complexity of Soviet realities, he demonstrated flexibility and an appreciation for nuance.
And confronted by the real potential for economic misery, ethnic strife, repression and bloodshed, he delivered serious and responsible words of caution.


Injury Could Cost Hansel Horse of Year
With only an eighth of a mile left in the Travers Stakes today, jockey Jerry Bailey had Hansel exactly where he and his fans wanted him -- ready to explode to a convincing victory that would give him a commanding lead in the race for Horse of the Year honors.
But apparently, at the moment of truth, something gave way in the bay's left front foot, raising severe questions about whether the winner of two legs of this year's Triple Crown will even be able to represent himself as a now wide open 3-year-old picture is decided.


Mutual Funds; Lousy Odds for Timing the Market
Most mutual fund experts urge individuals to invest for the long term and not to try to time the market.
One reason is that successful market timing depends on being invested during those infrequent short periods when spectacular performance gains are posted.
For example, if you remove only the four best quarters in the 20 years that ended on June 30, the compounded annual return for stock funds drops from 11.1 percent to 8.3 percent, nearly three full percentage points a year lower, says Lipper Analytical Services Inc. in Summit, N.J.
Not only do investors miss the four quarters' total combined return of 81.1 percent, they also miss compounding those gains over time.


Corrections
An article in the Arts and Leisure section last Sunday about the completion-bond business described the making of the film "Terminator" incorrectly.
It was finished without a takeover by a completion-bond company.
The article also referred incorrectly to the crews on "Doc Hollywood." They were union crews.


Political Talk
Price for Public Office
Dennis deLeon, the City's Human Rights Commissioner, has found that public office carries with it some personal compromises.


From Blossom


Strawberry 3-Run Homer in 13th Keeps Dodgers 1 1/2 Clear of Braves
FRIDAY NIGHT Darryl Strawberry hit a three-run homer in the 13th inning, his seventh home run against Houston this year, to lead Los Angeles to a 4-1 victory over the Astros on Friday night.
Strawberry had tied the game with a sacrifice fly in the eighth.
Los Angeles prevailed despite losing Orel Hershiser in the first inning.
Kevin Gross (7-9), the sixth Dodger pitcher, allowed one hit over two innings for the victory.


Managing; What Makes a Given Industry Tick?
American universities do a pretty thorough job of grounding students in marketing, financial and engineering skills.
But do they add much to the understanding of what makes different industries tick?
Ralph E. Gomory, president of the New York-based Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, a nonprofit institution founded in 1934 to promote research into science, industrial competitiveness and other national issues, doesn't think so.
What's more, he believes that lumping industries together intellectually fosters the idea that a cure-all can be found for all their problems -- a scenario Mr.
Gomory finds as likely as the emergence of a pill that cures both cancer and heart disease.


Elinor Kotzen Is Engaged
November wedding plans for Elinor Louise Kotzen and Jeffrey David Spokes, a son of G. Neil Spokes of Marshall, Va., and the late Elizabeth Edelman Spokes, have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin S. Kotzen of Larchmont, N.Y., the parents of the bride-to-be.
Miss Kotzen, 28 years old, graduated from William Smith College and is studying for a master's degree in arts management at American University.
The future bridegroom, 27, is a broadcast consultant at radio station WMJR in Manassas, Va.
He graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.


Wall Street; Salomon -- The Market Hasn't Liked It for Months
Last week's dramatic events at Salomon Brothers -- an unfolding scandal over the firm's role in Treasury auctions -- had a savage effect on the brokerage company's stock.
The shares fell more than 20 percent during the week before recovering a bit to close at $27.875 on Friday, after the firm announced its top executives were prepared to step down as early as today.
But the recent nosedive obscures the fact that the firm's shares had lagged behind those of its leading rivals since January, despite a strong stock market rally that prompted a rise in most brokerage stocks.
One reason was the turbulent oil market, which affected the firm's Philipp Brothers unit.
But weak trading profits and unpredictable earnings also gave rise to unflattering comments from leading analysts.


Geoffrey J. Evarts Wed to Jill Duthie
Jill E. Duthie, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald S. Duthie of Hazlet, N.J., was married yesterday to Geoffrey J. Evarts, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Prescott Evarts Jr. of West Long Branch, N.J.
The Rev.
Robert Skinner performed the ceremony at the Faith Reformed Church in Hazlet.
The couple, both 25 years old, graduated from Rutgers University.
Mrs.
Evarts received an M.B.A. degree from Monmouth College and is a portfolio manager assistant at Prudential Insurance in Newark.
Her father is a regional manager of the Marriott Corporation in Murray Hill, N.J.
Her mother, Helen D. Duthie, is a registered nurse at the King James Care Center in Navesink, N.J.


Correction Officer Dies After Shooting
An off-duty correction offi cer died yesterday from gunshot wounds he suffered when he and another officer were held up by two youths on bikes in Brooklyn, the city's Correction Department said.
Rolando Neischer, 31 years old, of the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, was the second off-duty correction officer fatally shot this week in an armed robbery, a department spokesman, Vito Turso, said.


Going Out of the Ball Game, in 178 Different Parks
It didn't start in Moosic.
At ball parks all over the United States, Bill Craib and Sue Easler are being asked to throw out the first pitch, sign autographs and say a few words to reporters.
The former bartender and waitress are getting the star treatment because they are apparently the first people who have tried to visit all 178 major and minor league stadiums in one season.


In the Region: Westchester and Connecticut; Recent Sales
Eastchester, N.Y. 380,000
1 Hilltop Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 35-year-old ranch; fireplace, country kitchen, family room, den; taxes $11,000.
Larchmont, N.Y. 285,000
35 Shadow Lane  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 65-year-old Norman Tudor; cathedral ceiling, fireplace, new eat-in kitchen, dressing area, patio; taxes $5,289.
Millwood, N.Y. 389,000
Lot 5, Cornell Woods
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, deck, family room, den; taxes not yet assessed.
Darien, Conn. 700,000
27 Ox Ridge Lane  4-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 200-year-old Cape Cod; 2-car garage, period touches, 3.3 acres; taxes $6,424.
Haddam, Conn. 162,500
37 Weiss Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 15-year-old ranch; new kitchen w/breakfast bar, formal dining room, 1.3 acres; taxes $1,828.
Stamford, Conn. 860,000
Haviland Road  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, new colonial; marble master bath and entry, c/a, au pair suite, 1 acre; taxes not yet available.
OTHER AREAS Commack, L.I. 144,500
43 Spinner Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 28- year-old ranch; den, finished basement, patio; taxes $3,400.
New Hyde Park, L.I. 205,000
1414 Park Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, 1-car detached garage; taxes $2,800.
Mahwah, N.J. 266,000
41 Sparrowbush Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 17-year-old split level; deck, fireplace, vaulted ceilings; taxes $4,358.


Mother's Story of Child Abuse at Nursery
IN the fall of 1984, before anyone knew the terrible things that were happening to her, the 4-year-old girl changed from an insouciant, vibrant child into a moody and sullen one.
She cried often and fought bitterly with her siblings; once she knocked her sister unconscious in a battle over a toy.
The 4-year-old began suggesting that the family move from their South Orange neighborhood.
And she kept asking when she would no longer have to take naps at the Wee Care Day Nursery, the preschool she attended in Maplewood.


Doctor Acquitted of Rape Faces Civil Suit
THE Yonkers woman whose doctor was acquitted earlier this month of raping her is suing the doctor for damages under a section of the law that her lawyer says requires proof only that sexual intercourse occurred.
The 27-year-old woman, a Yonkers resident and the mother of three, was being examined by Dr.
Morteza Mohit, an Iranian-born gynecologist in his Getty Square clinic in August 1990 to determine if she was pregnant.
It was her first visit to Dr.
Mohit, who had replaced a doctor she had used before in the same clinic.


From Shakespeare to Hollywood
Kenneth Branagh doesn't look particularly like a leading man, but he is inclined to cast himself as one both on- and off-stage, on- and off-screen.
The Belfast-born Mr.
Branagh, a Shakespearean actor and director with a precociously long resume, is small and pleasant-faced, without the implacable bearing of a star.
On the street you'd mistake him, just 30 years old and dressed in blue jeans and an open-collared shirt, for an earnest, tidy-looking graduate student, perhaps, or a young suburban husband just home from work and out of his office clothes.
In conversation he's friendly, quick-witted, good at banter.
And yet there's something going on behind his forehead, an idea of himself as a central figure that pretty much bursts out all over the place with the slightest encouragement.
This is a man, after all, who wrote his autobiography at the age of 28.
Mr.
Branagh's instinctive gall was very much noted in critical reaction to his 1989 film adaptation of "Henry V" -- the first screen treatment of Shakespeare's play since Laurence Olivier's classic in 1944.
It was Mr.
Branagh's first effort as a film director, and that he played the title role also, as Olivier did, struck many critics as wildly audacious.
In the end, though, he won most of them over -- and received Academy Award nominations for acting and directing as well.
As Vincent Canby wrote in The Times, he "transformed what initially seemed to be a lunatic dare into a genuine triumph."


Quiet Roslyn Is Undergoing Slow Changes
WHEN Dr.
Bob Byalick, a psychologist, hung a sign with his address outside his office to help his patients more easily find the building on Old Northern Boulevard, he was told by the Village Historic Board that Roslyn codes banned the sign and that it would have to be removed.
"I respect what the village is trying to do," Dr.
Byalick said.
"But in 1991, trying to give directions to my office by saying that the building is across from a bank and next to a restaurant, is foolish."


Charles Turpin Weds Elizabeth W. Vernon
Elizabeth Williams Vernon and Charles Sawyer Turpin, both of Mountain Lakes, N.J., were married yesterday in Dorset, Vt.
Lucille Fay, a Justice of the Peace of the Town of Dorset, performed the ceremony, at the Barrows House inn.
Mrs.
Vernon-Turpin, 58 years old, graduated from Denison University.
She is the widow of John Vernon Jr., who was an executive of the Kuwait Petroleum Corporation in New York.


A New Place for Continental Flavors
AMADEUS, a new restaurant in Stamford, is already so good in its early preview stages that one looks forward to visiting it in months to come, after a few start-up wrinkles are ironed out.
You suspect you are in for a special experience by the warm welcome of the maitre d'hotel, the lilting music from the piano in the evenings, and the elegance of the dining room, with its upholstered banquettes and chairs, well-spaced and coiffed tables.
If your table is in front of a mirror that faces another mirror, the effect is that of a scene in "Last Year at Marienbad," where corridors expand into infinity.


Planned Parenthood Fears Cutbacks
It will be a few more weeks before Long Island feels the real impact of the Supreme Court decision that sanctioned the ban on abortion information and counseling within federally funded family planning programs  [ "5 Agencies Adapt to Abortion Ruling," July 7 ] .
As we await word from Washington on the specific follow-up to this decision, one thing is clear.
If these dangerous regulations survive the storm of opposition sweeping across the nation and through Congress, their effect will be swift and devastating.
Planned Parenthood of Nassau County stands to lose over $150,000 annually because of our refusal to comply with this "gag rule." It will be difficult if not impossible to replace these vital funds.
However, more is at stake here than money -- much more.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The southern gable of my house was covered with brown aluminum fascia panels some years ago.
During the summer daylight hours, this aluminum fascia expands between the nailing points so that there is a gap of more than an inch between the aluminum and the old wood fascia board.
As soon as the sun goes down, the aluminum returns to its original flat position.
This has been going on for six years, but there is no evidence of damage to this fascia, and the nails are as tight as when first installed.
Should I apply some caulking and add more nails to prevent this from happening?
A.
Aluminum fascia panels will always expand in the hot sun, but the trouble here is that the nailing technique was apparently not in line with proper practice for this type of installation.
Nails for aluminum siding or fascia should never be driven tight or firm.
They usually go through slots in the aluminum, rather than holes, and are not driven up tight so that the aluminum can "move" or expand lengthwise without buckling.
The original nails should be taken out and then properly installed.


Topics of The Times; The Sound of Service
One likely reason for the geniality of the great audience for Thursday's Paul Simon concert in Central Park was that the New York City Transit Authority made it easier to get there.
The authority thoughtfully posted maps in subway cars throughout the system and placed informational ads in newspapers to show the concert site, the best subway or bus stops for each line or route, and even gave the rain date.
The authority has become increasingly adept at dealing with New York "Events." It planned for the concert , extending hours of service on some lines and running express trains as locals in the Central Park area.
Although the authority estimated the concert would attract 200,000 people at most, it dealt effectively with the 750,000 that attended.


Political Outsider Coping With Life as an Insider
Bumping along the back roads of Vermont, freshman Representative Bernie Sanders just can't seem to relax.
He gestures expansively at the sunset, then resumes his worrying.
How many people, he wonders aloud, are going to give up this brilliant summer evening to hear him talk about national health care?
Not many, an aide speculates, preparing him for the worst.
But then the car pulls into the school parking lot in the tiny town of Chittenden, and there are hardly any spaces left.
In the gymnasium, more than 100 adults are shifting uncomfortably on kid-sized bleachers, waiting for the perennially late Congressman to show up.


CAMPUS LIFE: Syracuse; Tables Turned: Students Tutor Adults in Spanish
The teachers were teen-agers.
The students were adults: police officers, social workers, parole officers and prison workers.
The lessons were the most basic Spanish in a Syracuse University program intended to break down communication barriers.
Students get a total of 15 hours of individual instruction, said William Coplin, the chairman of the university's public-affairs department.
Dr.
Coplin and a class of students developed the idea during his course last fall on community problem solving.


There Are Ways to Protect Alien Spouses
To the Editor:
In "Shielding Estates from the Taxman" (Your Own Account, Aug. 4), Mary Rowland states that everything over $600,000 left to a spouse who is not an American citizen is taxed because resident and nonresident alien spouses are not entitled to the unlimited marital deduction.


Soviets Dump Fetisov
VYACHESLAV FETISOV is one of several Soviet hockey stars left off the national team for the Canada Cup tournament, apparently as punishment for refusing to sign long-term contracts with Soviet teams, Tass, the official Soviet news agency, said Friday.
The tournament starts on Aug. 31.
Fetisov, the captain of the national team for many years who now plays for the New Jersey Devils of the National Hockey League, was indignant over the decision by national coach VIKTOR TIKHONOV.


Q and A
Late Maintenance Charge  Question: I understand co-op maintenance fees received by the 15th of the month are legally considered paid on time.
Lately my building's management company has begun tacking on $100-a-month "late" fees, even though my payments are always received by the 15th, which I can prove with certified mail receipts.
Do I have any recourse? . . .
Barbara Henryson, Manhattan


Early and Late Works by 19 Artists at the Whitney in Stamford
WITH the draining away of art subsidies, museums are obliged to cut back on temporary exhibitions and concentrate more on what they own.
And while this may thin the ranks of art lovers and make the work of reviewers harder, it may not be such a bad thing.
A current example of the permanent-collection show is the one celebrating the 10th anniversary of the Whitney Museum's presence at the Champion Building in Stamford.
Appropriating a display staged last year at the museum's Equitable Center branch in Manhattan, Roni Feinstein, the Whitney's director in Stamford, has expanded it and added her own commentary.
The result is a selection of 19 artists, each represented by two works of different vintages, hence the title, "Early/Later."


You Can't Tell a Movie By Its Trailer
Many months ago a bizarre phenomenon occurred in movie theaters around the country.
Audiences were shown a preview of "Hudson Hawk," and it looked as if it might be good.
This can be explained easily enough in hindsight.
There was no hint of the film's knotted-up, impossibly tangled plot.
Sandra Bernhard wasn't glimpsed, though it turned out that she had a role so prominent and so abrasive it must have sent at least a few viewers cowering under their seats in horror.
Instead, the preview offered a pleasant buddy-movie caper with Bruce Willis and Danny Aiello, a film that was actually witty about its genre.
When the two men were about to jump off a high ledge, the Aiello character quoted Butch Cassidy's line to Sundance: "The fall will probably kill you." That line never made it into the final version of the film, which was released in May and became an overnight disaster.
Now it looks like that missing scene was the cleverest moment of the film.
When this trailer was first shown, "Hudson Hawk" had not been completed.
At the same time, a preview for another unfinished film was making the rounds.
The trailer for "The Naked Gun 2 1/2" is a wonderfully funny parody of "Ghost." Instead of Demi Moore and Patrick Swayze erotically molding a clay pot and falling into each other's arms miraculously clean, this is the scene as it should have been played.
Leslie Nielsen and Priscilla Presley sit at the pottery wheel, so absorbed in each other that they don't notice the clay flying off the wheel, splattering them from hairline to toenails while the Righteous Brothers sing in the background.
This movie, the trailer truthfully and solemnly announces, was made by the brother of the director of "Ghost."


Poland
To the Editor: While traveling in Poland on relief assignments, I had an opportunity to stay in private dwellings.
Mercury Travel Service of Detroit specializes in Polish travel.
They arranged an apartment for me in Warsaw, near the Forum Hotel, at $100 a week.
A clergyman arranged accommodations at the Catholic University in Lublin where a contribution was suggested.
Another apartment in the former servant's quarters on the third floor of an elegant mansion in Warsaw was made avaiable to me in 1989.
The garden was comfortable on a hot afternoon, and the owner's grandchildren were there to make my stay homelike.
Mercury Travel is at 17600 West Warren Avenue, Detroit, Mich. 48228; you can call (313) 271-7400 between 2:30 and 5:30 P.M.
Monday to Friday.
BENJAMIN C. STANCZYK Detroit


For Whom the Bridge Tolls
A proposal to charge tolls on all the bridges that cross the East and Harlem Rivers into Manhattan is again high on the city's agenda.
By some estimates, these tolls could raise $600 million a year -- which would be enough to provide first-rate maintenance of city bridges and other transportation facilities.
That's a huge treasure even by New York standards.
The idea has been kicking around for decades but has always fallen victim to two complaints: Toll booths would create nightmarish traffic jams and concentrate automobile pollution; and East River tolls would unfairly victimize commuters from Brooklyn and Queens.


Even Kitsch Has a Place At the Smithsonian
Wearing white cotton gloves, a Smithsonian worker carefully removed from a locked storage case the National American History Museum's newest arrival: a pair of six-inch-high pink plastic reindeer.
The reindeer arrived unsolicited, like hundreds of other items -- some addressed only to "Smithsonian, Washington D.C. -- sent each year to what is known as the nation's attic.


Noted With Pleasure
Facing Up to What We Admire
A quality evident in 18th-century England, and sorely lacking in modern society, W. Jackson Bate asserts, is a frank acknowledgment of the influence the past has on standards, values and the imagination.
This is from "The Burden of the Past and the English Poet" (Harvard University, paper).


Donald Keyser Is Wed To Anne Morris Beal
Anne Morris Beal, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence B. Morris Jr. of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Donald Angier Keyser, the son of Mrs.
William Adamson Jr. of Marion, Mass.
The Rev.
Ernest Cockrell, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the home of the groom's mother.
The bride, 33 years old, graduated from the University of Vermont.
Until recently she was a manager in New York for Union Bank of Switzerland Asset Management.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father, who is retired, was a partner in the New York law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tylor.


Focus: Cleveland; In a Downturn, It's Back to Home Building
AFTER nearly three decades of rigorous activity in commercial development across the country, the Wolstein Group is responding to the industry slowdown by returning to its home base in Cleveland and putting its future in residential projects.
With more than 125 shopping centers in 36 states as well as several industrial and hotel properties under their belts, principals of the private development firm believe that it is in home building that the flagging real estate industry will rebound in the 1990's.


Class Distinctions


Review/Music; McFerrin Conducts
Pianists and violinists have been doubling as conductors for ages, and lately opera singers have started beating a path to the podium, too.
But jazz musicians -- well, let's check the record books.
Yes, it looks as if Bobby McFerrin is definitely the first circular-breathing jazz singer to conduct the Beethoven Seventh Symphony.
At a glance, Mr.
McFerrin's performance with the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra at the Garden State Arts Center here tonight must have struck some as a gimmicky idea for a pops concert.
Billed as his New York-area conducting debut, the program included a group of short popular classics and some of Mr.
McFerrin's own vocal improvisations, along with the Beethoven.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Wednesday
Budget deficit, in billions
$-2.5
$-40
Thursday
Initial jobless claims, in thousands
408
400
Friday
Durable goods orders, percent change
-1.6
1.5
Monday: Gross national product for Britain  Tuesday: Federal Open Market Committee meets  Wednesday: Two- and five-year Treasury note auction  Thursday: Rates are announced on 30-year F.H.A. mortgages *
Federal bankruptcy court reviews the sale of some assets of the Federated and Allied department store chains Friday: Mid-August automobile sales  (Sosurce: I.D.E.A. Inc.)


2 Camp Volunteers Plead Guilty in Assault
Two Fresh Air Fund volunteers were arrested and pleaded guilty Thursday evening to charges that they assaulted three of about 40 children they were escorting on a bus returning from a camp in Pennsylvania, a spokesman for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey said.
The spokesman, John Hughes, said a Port Authority officer arrested the volunteers, Robin Mazurkiewicz, 28 years old, and her husband, Michael, 24, of Eldred, Pa., after three of the children complained of having been abused.


Another Center Offers Headache Treatment
On July 28 the Westchester Weekly carried an article titled "Hospital Offers a New Treatment for Stubborn Headaches." I would like to call attention to my own Headache Center in southern Westchester for your readers' information.
It is called the Elkind Headache Center and has been in operation for 13 years.
Patients have been hospitalized successfully for over 20 years at Mount Vernon Hospital and received the same treatment described in your article, which is certainly not new.
The agent DHE-45, manufactured by Sandoz Pharmaceuticals, has been used by me for hospitalized patients since 1970 for arresting migraine attacks.


What It Meant To Be an Artist
To the Editor:
Hilton Kramer's essay on Robert Motherwell  [ "Motherwell: Driven to Abstraction," July 28 ]  reminded me of the artist's testimony before my Congressional subcommittee on March 24, 1970.
I had telephoned Motherwell to invite him to testify at hearings on legislation I had introduced, the Environmental Quality Education Act, to encourage teaching about the environment in schools, colleges and universities.


Ms. Ricigliano to Marry Joseph A. DiPietro in Fall
October wedding plans for Mary-Lynne Ricigliano and Dr.
Joseph A. DiPietro, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph DiPietro of New Rochelle, N.Y., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent C. Ricigliano of North Caldwell, N.J.
Ms.
Ricigliano is an associate in the law firm of Lowenstein, Sandler, Kohl, Fisher &amp; Boylan in Roseland, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Maine and received a law degree cum laude from Seton Hall University.
The future bridegroom is a dermatologist in New Rochelle and Bronxville, N.Y.
He graduated from Boston College and received an M.D. from Loyola University.


The World; In a Cyclone's Swath Across Bangladesh, A Hard Life Revives
THE chars is the name for the flat islands in the delta where the Ganges meets the sea in Bangladesh.
In a richer country, no one would live on hummocks of silt that rise only a few feet above the waters.
In rainy years, the rivers flood; in unlucky ones, the ocean's waves ride cyclones inland for miles.
But in a country the size of Wisconsin with 118 million residents, the poor have no choice but to put up huts and try to make a living fishing the Bay of Bengal or planting rice in the mud.
On the night of April 29, an awesome cyclone struck.
Winds tore apart rickety homes, waves swept away whole families, and those they spared lost cows, boats, crops, sometimes everything.
By an official estimate that no one can vouch for the accuracy of, 139,000 died.
Slowly, people have been rebuilding.
The government is helping.
So, independently, are opposition parties seeking votes.
About 7,500 American military personnel worked for two weeks.
In these pictures, taken on assignment from the CARE and Oxfam relief agencies by photographers for Drik, a picture library for third world photographers, both the hopelessness and the hope can be seen.
The little girl at top was adopted by a distant uncle.
The crops are returning.
For better or worse, the chars are a homeland again.


Group Aims to Expand Park, Not U.S. Open
Tennis, politics and parklands have made strange if equitable bedfellows in Queens for the last 13 years.
But a proposed enlargement of the National Tennis Center, site of the United States Open next weekend, has threatened the relationship.
The situation has spawned antagonism between the United States Tennis Association and the community.
Speaking in tennis lingo, fault, not love, is fast becoming the password for the planned $150 million refurbishment.


Q and A
Shakespeare Festivals
Q.
I recently spent 10 days in Ashland, Ore., enjoying a Shakespeare festival there and I wonder if there are similar Shakespearean productions in New York State or our adjacent states. -- Angelina A. Rihn, Beacon, N.Y.
A. During the summer in the Northeast, it seems, the Bard is never too far away.


A Masked Gunman Kills 6 at a Mall in Australia
A man hacked a teen-age girl to death with a machete today, then opened fire with an automatic rifle in a crowded shopping mall, killing five more people before taking his own life as the police closed in.
At least eight people were wounded by gunfire in the 10-minute rampage in the mall in a suburb of Sydney.


Frank Linneen Weds Miss Wynne in New Jersey
Suzanne Timolat Wynne, a daughter of Mrs.
Winston Ely Wood of Little Silver, N.J., and Billy Jeff Wynne of Red Bank, N.J., was married yesterday to Frank Steven Linneen, a son of Marcia Linneen of Tarzana, Calif., and Jack Linneen of Oceanside, Calif.
The Rev.
Robert Giner performed the ceremony at St.
George's-by-the-River Episcopal Church in Rumson, N.J.
The couple, both 25 years old, graduated from Southern Methodist University.
Mrs.
Linneen is a department manager for Neiman Marcus in Houston.
Her father, who is retired, was a staff sergeant in the Marine Corps.
Her stepfather, who is retired, was a stockbroker with the Pershing Company in New York.


IRAN TAKING LEAD IN THE BARGAINING TO FREE HOSTAGES
Iran's Government, using secret intermediaries and shuttle diplomacy, has taken the lead in negotiating the terms and conditions for the release of the 10 remaining Western hostages held in Lebanon by pro-Iranian militants, high-level Western officials say.
The full mobilization of Iran's diplomatic corps in the negotiations now under way with the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, suggests that Iran's President, Hashemi Rafsanjani, may have overcome powerful opposition in the Teheran leadership to force a resolution of the hostage crisis, these officials say.


Alice Bloomer and Jonathan Woods Are Married
Alice Frances Hamilton Bloomer, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David E. Bloomer of Oley, Pa., was married yesterday in Douglasville, Pa., to Jonathan Tufts Woods, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward F. Woods of Cohasset, Mass.
The Rev.
Calvin Adams performed the ceremony at St.
Gabriel's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Woods, 26 years old, is a merchandise coordinator at Polo/Ralph Lauren in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her father and mother, Gertrude Bloomer, own the Survival Equipment Company in Oley.


Results Plus
EXHIBITION FOOTBALL  Packers Beat Bills  Mike Tomczak passed 28 yards to Allen Rice for a go-ahead touchdown with 6 minutes 15 seconds to play yesterday as the Green Bay Packers beat the Buffalo Bills, 35-24, in Madison, Wis. (AP) Raiders 13, Bears 10: Jeff Jaeger kicked a 40-yard field goal with 1:40 remaining to give the Raiders an exhibition victory over the Chicago Bears in Los Angeles.
Jaeger's kick hit the right upright and bounced through to give the Raiders their second victory in four exhibition games.  (AP) SOCCER  Soviets Defeat U.S., 2-1  The United States national team was beaten, 2-1, yesterday by the Soviet Olympic team in an exhibition game at Lenin Stadium in Moscow.
Soviet forward Yuri Nikiforov struck first, 11 minutes into the game, when he drilled a free kick that American goalkeeper Tony Meola didn't touch.
Six minutes into the second half, Soviet forward Boris Tedeyev gave his team its second goal with a 20-yard kick.
With only 12 minutes left, the Americans scored when forward Hugo Perez picked up a loose ball drilled it into the net. (AP) GOLF  Clampett Earns Points  Bobby Clampett finished the third round of the International tournament in Castle Rock, Colo., with 29 points.
Clampett, who missed the cut in 14 of 22 previous starts this season, had 11 third-round points, including a last-hole bogey.
Some other leading point totals were Keith Clearwater with 28, British Open champ Ian Baker-Finch with 26, and Lon Hinkle with 25.
In the tournament, points are awarded for a player's performance on each hole, 5 for an eagle, 2 for birdie, 0 for par, minus-1 for bogey and minus-3 for double bogey and higher.
Point totals were wiped out after 54 holes -- the 24 finalists start again from zero today. (AP) DIVING  Titles for Klein, Jeffrey  Krista Klein regained a national championship and Patrick Jeffrey earned his first in the 3-meter springboard yesterday at the United States championship in Bartlesville, Okla.
Klein beat defending champion Wendy Lucero by 37 points to win her first United States title in the 3-meter since the indoor championship in April 1990.
Jeffrey, a perennial finalist but never a national champion, also had a strong finish and scored no lower than an 8.0 on his last three dives. (AP)


Traveling Alone
To the Editor: I know there are many women in the same position I found myself -- loving to travel but suddenly losing my husband and being deprived of my traveling companion.
It took me two years, and a push from a friend, to finally agree to go with a tour group, which I knew I would have to do if I wanted to continue to travel.
How happy I am that the choice of tour operator was Backroads International, for it truly was a delightful experience.
We went to the Basque country in northern Spain and southern France.
Backroads International can be reached at 757 St.
Charles Avenue, Suite 203, New Orleans, La. 70130; (800) 227-7889.
MARIAN MICHEL North Bend, Ore.


Correction
Because of an editing error, a caption on the dance page last Sunday misidentified the choreographer who created "My Life During the Crusades." He is Doug Elkins, not Paul Elkins.


Safe Distance; Bush Has Much To Gain in U.N.'s Handling Hostages
EVERYONE knows it's the official American policy that Washington does not negotiate with hostage takers.
But everyone also knows that in the end, some kind of negotiation almost always takes place and a deal is struck in which both sides proclaim that they never blinked.
That is what seems to have been happening in the past two weeks, even though it is far from clear that the 10 Western hostages in the Middle East will be freed after years of captivity.
President Bush's problem has been to keep his distance from a process that he is otherwise encouraging -- a negotiation for the release of the hostages -- and to find a morally and politically acceptable formula for such a process.


Clifford Quits, but He's Not Alone
FIRST American Bankshares Inc. is the largest bank holding company in Washington, but its chairman, Clark M. Clifford, is perhaps a bigger institution.
But in a week that also saw the stain of scandal creeping farther over one of Wall Steet's most trusted bond trading houses, Mr.
Clifford and his law partner and protege, Robert A. Altman, resigned as officers of First American and may face criminal charges.
Like many another money man in recent months, Mr.
Clifford and Mr.
Altman were touched by the widening gyre of taint radiating from the Bank of Commerce and Credit International, the murky global concern that was seized last month after auditors uncovered a smorgasbord of criminal activity in its operations.
Among the B.C.C.I. assets that were seized was a controlling block of stock in First American, revealing a relationship that Mr.
Clifford had repeatedly denied and which Federal regulators had expressly forbidden.


On the Street; Stripes, Yes, But No Frills
By mid-August, when most summer clothes are beginning to wilt, women still look stylish in no-frills striped shirts worn with the collar open and the sleeves rolled up.
It's a hallmark American look that started at the turn of the century with the Gibson girl illustrations.
This summer the look is as crisp as it was nearly 100 years ago.
Red or navy stripes on a white background are most often worn with chalk-white trousers, skirts, or shorts, and at the waist, a brown or black belt.
Shoulder bags are made of braided leather or canvas; favored shoes are moccasins, sandals and flat-heeled pumps.
That's the latest look of this long-running love affair with men's shirt styles.


The Story of a Street Person
WHEN I WAS 4, MY BROTHER DECIDED TO teach me manners.
He claimed to know Emily Post personally, and he wanted to pass down to me the "L. J. Swados Interpretation" of her dos and don'ts.
Lincoln was 11, and I believed he was a scholar.
The lesson was strict, and he didn't laugh.
"The question is: Do you want to be a lady or a pig?" he said, glaring at me through his thick 50's-style glasses.
"Pigs can't find husbands with summer cottages on Lake Erie, where brothers can come visit and go water-skiing." I tried to buckle down.
First, I learned to sip my tomato soup soundlessly.
This was hard, since Lincoln didn't want me to move the spoon.
When I was nearly done, he told me to drink the remaining soup from the opposite end of the bowl.
This required that I lean over the bowl, tip it away from me and lap at the soup with my tongue.
My brother watched this maneuver carefully.
Soup dribbled onto the tablecloth or down my chin.
The ends of my long red hair dipped into the bowl.
"You're really vying to become a spinster, you know that?" he said sadly.
"No real man wants a woman who is incapable of drinking her soup upside down from a real china bowl. Mommy and Daddy will be so embarrassed. You'll have to marry an insurance salesman like Uncle Irving." He dabbed tenderly at the red splotches on my chin and collar.
I tried not to cry.
My crying infuriated him.


Car Gadgets
To the Editor: I took some time out from packing to comment on Henry Leifermann's article "The Car That Has Everything" (Travel, July 28).
We will be leaving soon on our annual trip west.
We have a car-as-purse because using it for eight weeks requires it.
We have a compass because a high percentage of mountain roads in the northern Rockies are unpaved and unmarked.
A trail isn't the only place you need a compass in Big Sky country.


The Nation; Forget the Last Picture Show; in Some Towns The Bank and the High School Are Closing Too
IT was Saturday night on Main Street, and nickel-a-hand gamblers played cards and sipped beers at Ethel's Cafe.
Teen-agers swayed to the music inside the Venango dance hall.
And at the town cinema, matinee idols flickered across the big screen.
"Those were wonderful times," mused Hazel Dodson, an 85-year-old widow, as she gazed out her living room window at a town of lifeless streets and weather-beaten houses, some of them empty.
"Now what's to become of us?"


'EXCUSE ME,' HE SAID
I also felt that Suzanne Berne's reaction to the flasher was more severe than it might have been (Letters, July 28, in response to Hers: " 'Excuse Me,' He Said," June 30).
Everyone is different, of course, and I understand that.
But I have a question: Was it the flasher's motive (visual rape, as one letter writer put it) or was it what Berne saw that so upset her?
The streets are lined with homeless men who fall asleep, often without realizing what is showing.
The sight of this makes me sad.
TONI YOUNG
Philadelphia


Byronic Brando
To the Editor:
How refreshing it is to see Camille Paglia banging away at the American cultural paunch again.
Finally, a writer who is more than a dray horse for some tiresome academic or political agenda, and who appreciates in Marlon Brando, Keith Richards and similar cultural figures what Don DeLillo has described as "the need to be inarticulate in the land of the self-erasing word."  JOHN LOMBARDI New York


World Markets; A Silly Gag by the S.E.C.
The British Government last week announced a novel approach to lure small investors into the stock market.
Its plan involves a system of "share shops" through which individuals could buy the stock of both Government-owned companies that are being sold to the public and regularly traded shares of existing companies.
The first stock offered through the shops will be shares of British Telecommunications P.L.C. when the Government sells its remaining 48 percent stake in the telephone company in November.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Container Climbers
Q.
I would like to plant something -- preferably with flowers -- that will climb a trellis and
grow in a container in my
home in Dutchess County.
I've been told that clematis won't survive winter in a pot.
Please advise. -- Ellen Markowitz, Red Hook, N.Y.


Play Ball


Standby Cruises
To the Editor: Earlier this year United Airlines Silver Wings Plus advertised a standby program for travel to Alaska via Holland America Line at special fares from $745 to $1,195.
Through my travel agent I requested a deluxe stateroom on the Rotterdam and gave three alternative dates
When the travel agent telephoned the Holland America standby desk she was told that
no
deluxe staterooms were being offered on this program and that I could take a lower-category stateroom or none at all.


Unspectacular Ivanisevic Beats Rostagno in Volvo
Goran Ivanisevic of Yugoslavia, who has struggled with concentration problems, took advantage of defending champion Derrick Rostagno's mental lapses today to advance to the finals of the Volvo International tournament.
Ivanisevic played steadily but unspectacularly, while Rostagno consistently failed to put away volley opportunities.


Marla Ker Wed To Damon Katz
Marla Nelson Ker, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Ker Jr., of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to Damon Alan Katz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Daniel Katz of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
T.
Guthrie Speers Jr., a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the summer home of the bride's parents in Brewster, Mass.
Mrs.
Katz, 24 years old, is a case manager with the Greater Waltham Association for Retarded Citizens in Waltham, Mass.
She graduated from Connecticut College, as did her husband.
Her father is the owner and president of the Guilford Company, a carpet company in Norwalk, Conn.


Corn: America's Summer Preoccupation
THE average Frenchman may see corn as something to be fed to the cows, but for Americans is it one of the great pleasures of summer.
Grilled, boiled, folded into pancake batter, made into puddings, chowder or salads, it can be prepared in an endless variety of ways.
One of the best methods to cook corn, apart from grilling or boiling it, is off the cob.
Saute it for no longer than three minutes in butter and serve it with plenty of black pepper and salt.
It also makes a splendid salad, mixed with peppers, tomatoes and red onion.
Corn should be cooked as soon as possible after it has been picked because its sugar content quickly turns to starch (it is said that ideally one should not pick it until after the water is on to boil).


Injury Sidelines Gartner
Right winger MIKE GARTNER of the Rangers and Team Canada announced Friday that a knee injury would keep him out of the Canada Cup tournament.
Gartner, an integral part of Canada's 1983 and 1987 Canada Cup tournament championship teams, suffered a second-degree tear of the medial collateral ligament in his right knee a week ago, but had skated daily on his own trying to convince himself he could still play in the six-country tournament.


New York's Coming Apart by the Baseball Seams; Mets and Dreams End Up on Skid Row
The temptation is to say that the Mets have come apart in the second half of the season.
The reality is that the Mets did in fact come together as the team they had been constructed to be during the off season:
An outfit of overrated pitching, underachieving offense, overwhelmed defense and underwhelming collective heart.


Getting Through Recession On Real Estate's Pricey Side
One thing is clear: Bob and Bruce Toll are business conservatives.
In most industries, that penchant might brand them as plodding conformists.
But among people who develop residential communities, it has made them consummate contrarians.
Other developers willingly buy overpriced land, figuring that it will rise even higher; in the 24 years since Robert I. Toll and Bruce E. Toll started Toll Brothers Inc. here, they have not bought anything they did not think they could flip immediately at a minimum 10 percent profit.
And while other developers ride a boom to its exhilarating peak in hopes of making enough money to last them through the inevitable and wrenching market plunge, Toll opts for incremental growth, foregoing the highs to avoid the lows.


Superfund Wasn't Meant to Be a Cure-All
To the Editor:
This responds to "In the Clutches of the Superfund Mess" (June 16), which alleges that Superfund is "falling behind" in its evaluation and placement of sites on the national priority list.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The list contains sites that the Environmental Protection Agency has determined to be among the worst, about 1,200.
There are 33,000 in Superfund's computer inventory of sites to be evaluated; 21,000 have already been determined
not
to require long-term remediation by the Federal Government.
The others are being further investigated.
The acceleration of the site-assessment program has been one of the program's successes.


Schenley Hajek Wed to J. C. Hall
Schenley Sinclaire Hajek, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph V. Hajek of Sharon, Conn., was married there yesterday to Jeffrey Clifton Hall, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leslie M. Hall Jr., of Farmville, Va.
The Rev.
Franklin Goldthwaite Sherrill, assisted by the Rev.
Gilbert S. Larsen, performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
The bride, 26 years old, graduated from Harvard University.
She is an assistant actuary at the Equitable Life Assurance Society in New York.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon at Sharon Hospital.


Loans for Studios
To The Editor:
I read with interest your article on July 21 headed "Banks Are Refusing Loans on Studios." In addition, the bankare refusing most co-op loans in buildings that are not substantially -- 65 to 75 percent -- sold.
And they are refusing underlying first mortgage loans to co-op boards and sponsors if the buildings are not well sold.


Topics of The Times; Symphonie Pastorale
A New Yorker who's stuck in Manhattan till summer's end found a wonderful way to leave town the other day.
All she had to do was walk through the I.B.M. building's bamboo garden, down a flight of stairs -- and land in France.
It was the rural France of the 19th century, as seen by the so-called "Barbizon" painters, and it will stay on view in the I.B.M.
Gallery of Science and Art until Sept. 28.
Meanwhile the show, which is titled "Corot to Monet: The Rise of Landscape Painting in France," is crowded by people who say things like "
Look
at those trees!" and, when gazing at a Millet, "I remember a print of this one in my grandparents' house." His gleaners and sowers are there in full force, along with his haunting "Autumn Landscape With a Flock of Turkeys."


Marianne Stein To Wed in March
Gerald M. Stein of Bedford, N.Y., has announced the engagement of his daughter Marianne Stein to Michael David Magnotta, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael A. Magnotta of Scarsdale, N.Y.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Stein, 23 years old, is a daughter also of the late Diane B. Stein.
She graduated from Boston University, as did her fiance.
Her father is the president of Iron Gate Products, a food distributor in the Bronx.
She is a granddaughter of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Jerome Berns.
Mr.
Berns was an owner and is a founding partner of the "21" Club in New York.


Mercenary Clan


Cromartie Trips Up Red Sox With First Homer Since '83
Warren Cromartie's first major league home run since 1983 rallied the Kansas City Royals to a ninth-inning 4-3 victory over the Red Sox today.
There was one on and one out in the ninth and Kansas City was trailing, 3-2, when Cromartie came to the plate as a pinch hitter for David Howard.
Cromartie, one month shy of his 38th birthday, then proceeded to send Jeff Reardon's pitch into the Royals' bullpen in right field for his first big league homer since Aug. 6, 1983, when he was with Montreal.
He began playing in Japan the next year and returned to the majors this season.


Susan Tregurtha Has a Wedding
Susan Lee Tregurtha, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Richard Tregurtha of Darien, Conn., was married yesterday to Newton Conklin Marshall 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Douglas Marshall of Huron, Ohio.
The Rev.
Edward Howley performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in Darien.
Mrs.
Marshall, 26 years old, graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Mormac Marine Group, a shipping company in Stamford, Conn., and a vice chairman of Interlake Steamship Company of Cleveland.
Her mother, Lee A. Tregurtha, is a botanical illustrator.


Life, by the Numbers
As a younger man, he had resisted the advance of numbers.
He lamented the decline of the old telephone exchanges (Murray Hill 6, Trafalgar 4), and worried as watches with hands and thermometers with fluid gave way to digital readouts.
But resistance became futile as the numbers in his life swelled to a flood.
More and more accounts carried codes that got longer and longer: the Con Ed bill, the mortgage, the car loan, the tuition payment plan, the credit cards.


Even Kitsch Has a Place At the Smithsonian
Wearing white cotton gloves, a Smithsonian worker carefully removed from a locked storage case the National American History Museum's newest arrival: a pair of six-inch-high pink plastic reindeer.
The reindeer arrived unsolicited, like hundreds of other items -- some addressed only to "Smithsonian, Washington D.C. -- sent each year to what is known as the nation's attic.


The Nation; In Matters of Life and Death, The Dying Take Control
AFTER a decade of debate among doctors, ethicists and lawyers, the power to decide how the terminally ill should die has been seized by the dying.
New laws have already given patients the right to reject aggressive medical care.
But recent developments, including the astonishing success of a do-it-yourself suicide manual and widespread fascination with a suicide machine invented by a Michigan doctor, proclaim that some patients want still more control at the end of life.
Doctors have become exceedingly proficient at prolonging life -- and prolonging dying -- with their technology: ventilators, pumps to assist the heart, antibiotics at $500 a dose.
Patients are increasingly concerned their voices will get lost amid the drone of the machines.
And so, they are planning death with the same practical approach that they planned their lives.
In some cases, they even have the aid of a doctor in suicide.


The Stone Fortresses of Loches
ONE visits the Loire Valley to find the Renaissance.
Azay-le-Rideau, Chambord, Chenonceaux bear witness to the passage of the new spirit in France.
Here, and in scores of other chateaus scattered throughout the valley, one rediscovers the harmony of line, exuberance of decoration, light, air and landscape that made the 16th century such a thrilling departure.
Among the exquisite monuments to Renaissance invention, however, are reminders of a darker, more disputed past: the fiercely remote stone fortresses that, for 600 years before, had dominated the countryside.
With their sheer ramparts, machicolations, crenelations, moats and drawbridges, they offered protection from the Normans, then the English and finally the French themselves.


A Woman's Vision of the War
To the Editor:
The differences between Sir Edwin Lutyens's monument to the dead of the Somme and Maya Lin's Vietnam Veterans Memorial far outweigh their similarities, visually and conceptually.
While Maya Lin drew on the Thiepval monument (specifically the long lists of names carved on its face) to defend her controversial work through art-historical context, her own work is, in light of the tradition of war memorials, anticanonical -- that is, antiheroic and antitriumphal.
And, yes, the Lutyens work
is
heroic; it
is
triumphal.
Lutyens's work speaks of giving up our loved ones to a cause; Maya Lin's monument speaks only of giving up our loved ones.


John P. Turner Is Wed To Deborah B. Driscoll
Deborah Bijur Driscoll, a daughter of Robert S. Driscoll 4th of Punta Gorda, Fla., and Barbara Bijur Driscoll of Bethesda, Md., was married in Washington yesterday to John Preston Turner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Turner of Hunt Valley, Md.
The Rev.
Margaret McNaughton performed the ceremony at St.
Alban's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Turner, 24 years old, and her husband, 26, graduated from Drew University.
She is a law student at George Washington University.
Her father is a retired Foreign Service officer.
Her mother is a liaison officer between the Defense and Treasury Departments.


Data Bank/August 18, 1991
Business Inventories
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
-0.3
-0.6
0.3
Merchandise Exports
In billions
$34.8
$35.2
$35.6
Merchandise Imports
In billions
$38.8
$40.1
$40.1
Sales at Retail Outlets
July
June
May
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.1
1.2
Consumer Price Index
Monthly percent change
0.2
0.2
0.3
Housing Starts
Thousands of units, annual rate
1,070
1,040
982
Industrial Production Index
Monthly percent change
0.5
0.6
0.8
Capacity Utilization
Output as a percentage of capacity
79.7
79.5
79.1


Wall Street; Videocart's Basket of Mysteries
For some urban dwellers, shopping has not changed much since the medieval period.
You get bread from the bakery, meat from a butcher, and vegetables from the produce stand on the corner.
Time is the problem; speed is the answer.
But there are apparently legions of 21st century shoppers for whom a trip to the supermarket is an exciting excursion to the cutting edge of retail science.
For them, there is Videocart Inc., whose computer-equipped shopping cart provides "point-of-purchase advertising" as the shopper moves through the store  [ page 4 ] .


Erin Johnson Is Married
Erin Michele Johnson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Johnson of San Ramon, Calif., was married there yesterday to David Greenwald, the son of Carol Greenwald of Larchmont, N.Y., and Paul Greenwald of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Larry Stehling officiated at St.
Joan of Arc Catholic Church.
The couple are both 23 years old.
Mrs.
Greenwald graduated from the University of San Diego and is an account coordinator with MTV Networks in New York.
The bridegroom graduated from the University of Virginia.
He is a currency trader with Midland Montagu in New York.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on July 28 misidentified the operator of the cruise ship Illiria.
It is operated by Travel Dynamics, a New York company that runs cruises for museums, alumni groups and other organizations, and not by Salen Lindblad Cruising.


In an Assault on Tradition, More Schools Last All Year
In a head-on attack on an American institution -- the long, lazy summer -- a small but fast-growing number of schools around the nation are slashing the summer vacation by weeks and moving their students to a year-round calendar of shorter but more frequent breaks.
And they are increasingly making the switch for purely educational reasons, maintaining that since it is easier for children to retain information over short breaks than over long ones the new schedule improves learning and frees teachers to teach more and review less.


Mutual Funds; Tax-Free Funds: Mirage of Security?
The collapse of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company in late July has set off ripples of uneasiness among sponsors of tax-exempt mutual funds.
The insurer had backed $41 million of bonds held by John Nuveen &amp; Company in its $2.4 billion Nuveen Tax-Exempt Money Market Fund.
Mutual Benefit's role had been to guarantee that bondholders could redeem their holdings.
After the collapse Nuveen quickly bought insurance from other concerns, guaranteeing that its shareholders remained protected.


Once More Onto the Beach
WAITING FOR THE WEEKEND
By Witold Rybczynski. 260 pp. New York: Viking. $18.95.


Taking a Bug's-Eye View of the World
THERE is nothing like getting an insect's view of flowers and plants.
Although many backyard gardeners may not even think about such a scheme, it is a rewarding exercise outdoors and well within the realm of possibility.
How?
Very simply with a hand lens, or pocket magnifier as it is sometimes called.
The lens concentrates the focus on the details of a flower in an amazing way and opens up a new view of the world around us.
The lens can be held close to a flower or leaf without picking it, or for a closer look, the flower or leaf can be picked and brought indoors, where it can be handled closely and held to the light.
The lens's magnification makes it possible to see the intricate designs of what have heretofore been thought of as rather ordinary plants, flowers and leaves.


David Cromley Wed to Stacey Wyman
Stacey Williams Wyman, a daughter of Mrs.
Richard L. Roberts of New Canaan, Conn., and William W. Wyman of New York, was married yesterday to David William Cromley, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William H. Cromley Jr. of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Stephen Treat performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church-United Church of Christ in New Canaan.
The bride and bridegroom, both 24 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
They are to begin law studies at the University of Virginia this month.
She was a legal assistant at the law firm of Hecker Brown Sherry &amp; Johnson in Philadelphia.
Her father is the managing partner in Oliver, Wyman &amp; Company, a management consulting firm in New York.


Graf's Status Uncertain
A doctor who examined STEFFI GRAF'S injured right shoulder says he cannot yet determine whether the two-time champion will be able to play in the United States Open, which starts Aug. 26.
"Assuming the healing process continues along as it has been, then it's not ruled out that Steffi Graf will play in the U.S. Open," said Dr.
HARTMUT KRAHL of Essen, Germany.


Residents Say Sewage Is Not the Only Smell
Over the last few years, residents in West Harlem and Washington Heights have grown uncomfortably accustomed to airborne annoyances.
Ever since the North River Sewage Treatment Plant opened on the Hudson River in Manhattan five years ago, foul-smelling fumes from the plant have permeated the area.
Now, residents say, smoke that smells like burning rubber rises from a chimney at an 11-year-old crematorium at the Trinity Church cemetery at 153d Street and Riverside Drive, the uptown counterpart of the church's more famous graveyard on Broadway at Wall Street.
The residents say the smoke sometimes burns their eyes or causes coughing.
As a result, they have vowed to shut the crematorium down.


Miss Kwok Wed To M. E. Manum
Amelia Wan Yen Kwok, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert H. M. Kwok of Glenn Dale, Md., was married yesterday to Mark Ernest Manum, a son of Leslie Sellers of Liberty Lake, Wash., and Rick Manum of Spokane, Wash.
The Rev.
Diane F. Clark performed the ceremony at All Saints Episcopal Church in Chevy Chase, Md.
Mrs.
Manum, 25 years old, graduated from Wellesley College and received a law degree from American University.
Her father is a pediatrician in Silver Spring and Bowie, Md.
Her mother, Annie K. C. Kwok, is an accountant at the Hebrew Home of Washington in Rockville, Md.


When Sound Is a Character
A mosquito whines.
WALLpaper peels off in strips with sudden, Velcro rasps.
From overhead comes a thud like an ax hitting something distressingly soft; from next door, a laugh, a sob, the rhythmic creak of people making love.
And in the corridor outside, wind moans down the hall like devils on a high-speed chase.
This is clearly the hotel room from hell, this once-elegant dive in Los Angeles where, in 1941, would-be screenwriter Barton Fink -- eponymous antihero of the latest film by Joel and Ethan Coen -- holes up to fight off writer's block.
Dingy and claustrophobic, the hotel ought to be, by any conventional dramatic standard, a very boring place.
Instead, it teems with little events that transpire inches from Barton Fink's ears or yards away, and guides viewers either deep inside the screen image or far beyond its borders.


Making a Difference; Calling Out for Customers
Local telephone companies have traditionally been woefully short of marketing pizazz.
As regulated utilities with a near monopoly on local phone service, they have generally been content to wait passively until customers called them.
Bruce S. Gordon, however, is out to change that.
As vice president of marketing and sales at the Bell Atlantic Corporation, he has embarked on a strategy to sell a slew of phone services the way Procter &amp; Gamble sells soaps and detergent.


Battling Barriers To Affordable Homes
THE Interfaith Housing Development Corporation of Bucks County, Pa., wanted to build five subsidized one-family houses on land donated by a local church so that a few low-income families could afford to own homes in one of the East Coast's most affluent areas.
Neighbors, however, had other ideas.


Austria
To the Editor: I would like to caution tourists driving to Salzburg, Austria, to watch where they park in the crowded central district.
I recently had the costly experience of having my car towed because I did not understand the international symbols and street area indicated on the restricted-parking signs.
The hotel's parking permit under the windshield offered no protection.
A polite, efficient policeman at a lot filled with tourists' cars charged me about $170.
To those headed by car to Salzburg, I suggest either an underground garage (around $20 a day) or a careful discussion with hotel staff about permissible street parking.
STEPHEN FLEET Boston


Captain's Choreography: The Tug and the Tanker
Capt.
A.
J.
McAllister nuzzled his tugboat against the tanker's rusty hull, his left hand fingering a round black control ring combining throttle and helm, his right on a microphone for the radio.
"Easy push," he said into the microphone to John Johansen, his colleague and "docking captain," who was standing high above the tug on the tanker's bridge.
Mr.
Johansen had left the tug, the Brooks K. McAllister, and boarded the tanker to help get her under way.


Making a Difference; An Appetite for Mergers
The BankAmerica Corporation's planned acquisition of the Security Pacific Corporation, announced last week, could become the biggest banking merger in history.
Frank N. Newman, BankAmerica's chief financial officer and vice chairman, has been preparing for it for a long time.
Mr.
Newman, 49, has been a key player in BankAmerica's expansion binge.
The San Francisco-based bank bought more than a dozen smaller banks and thrift institutions in Western states in the last year and a half, and also made an unsuccessful bid for the Bank of New England.
More purchases are expected.


In the Flesh
To the Editor:
I read with interest Angela Carter's review of "Peter Doyle" by John Vernon (July 14).
The novel's subject matter -- a quest for Napoleon's amputated penis -- is more accurate than Mr.
Vernon or Ms.
Carter apparently realized.


This Week: Think Fall
In ordering bulbs for fall planting, think early
and
late.
Species crocus and dwarf iris come up in February, and the water lily tulip (Tulipa Kaufmanniana), with its white petals and egg-yolk-yellow centers, blooms from March to April.
And don't forget the autumn-blooming crocus.
Order rhododendrons and azaleas for September planting.
Plant needle-leafed evergreens next month.
It isn't too late to plant leafy greens or Chinese vegetables.
Check the seed packet for how long it takes from germination to maturity, then count back from your area's frost date (about mid-October in the New York metropolitan area).


China Attacks Ex-U.S. Envoy for Stand on Taiwan
The official Chinese press has discovered a new villain, whom it accuses of "wagging a loose tongue" and plotting to split China.
The target of the abuse is James R. Lilley, the former American Ambassador to China, and the unusual criticisms appear to reflect a mounting Chinese concern about American support for Taiwan.
People's Daily, the official newspaper of the Communist Party Central Committee, carried a blistering attack on Mr.
Lilley on Thursday and admonished him and others like him not to "indulge in fantasy" or "do something stupid that would hurt Chinese-American relations."


Gardens Guide Issued in Britain
Britain's National Trust has produced a handbook to gardens to coincide with its designation of 1991 as its Gardens Year.
The 130 gardens described in the 174-page Gardens Handbook were chosen for inclusion by the following criteria: that they were either gardens in their own right or gardens attached to a house but of interest and importance to a garden lover.
The handbook is divided into nine sections covering England and Wales.
Each entry describes the soil and terrain, altitude, special features and location.


Madcap Arthur Meets the 90's
Public attitudes toward drinking have changed a lot over the last decade, but it would be a pity if we started holding Arthur Bach accountable for his actions.
You remember Arthur.
He's the millionaire playboy who weaved through New York high life, tweaking the snooty, making terrible jokes and generally carrying on like a 12-year-old in the 1981 movie "Arthur." Most of the time, he was thoroughly soused.
But, as Dudley Moore played him, he was the quintessence of the lovable drunk, so harmless in his inebriation that you didn't blame the liquor for his errant ways.
You blamed the stuffpots and the workaholics around him, who wanted him to mend his behavior and marry a dreary socialite with perfect manners and impeccable hair or lose his $750 million inheritance.


Mexico City
To the Editor: Just a warning about a popular tourist hangout in Mexico City, the restaurant La Opera near the Latin American Tower in the heart of the Centro Historico.
My husband and I tried to have a drink there recently around 4:45 P.M.
The waiter told us we could not sit down unless we ate food.
Well, 4:45 P.M. is a little late for lunch, and early for dinner, so we tried to order drinks with appetizers and desserts.
The waiter refused to serve us, saying the restaurant's policy was to serve only people who ate full meals, and that we could stand at the bar.


Monica T. O'Neill Married to Edward F. Shay 3d
Monica Therese O'Neill, a daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
James A. O'Neill of Syracuse, N.Y., and Edward Francis Shay 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Shay, Jr. of Weston, Mass., were married yesterday at his parents' summer home in South Yarmouth, Mass.
Thomas Dowd, a justice of the peace in South Yarmouth, performed the civil ceremony.
Mrs.
Shay, 28 years old, is a regional vice president of Boston Capital Services, a tax credit syndicator.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father was the president of Niagara Mohawk Power Corporation in Syracuse.


Anne Barry Wed to David Greenwood
Anne Morse Barry, a daughter of Mrs.
Theodore Barry of Exeter, N.H., and the late Mr.
Barry, was married yesterday in Jersey City to David Louis Greenwood, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
George H. Greenwood.
Mayor Gerald McCann performed the ceremony on the pier at Owen Grundy Park.
Ms.
Barry, who is 51 years old and is keeping her name, teaches writing at the New School for Social Research and is the author of several nonfiction books.
She graduated cum laude from Radcliffe College.
Her father was the business manager at Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter, N.H.


Man Held in Abuse Of Children's Friends
A Seaford, L.I., man has been arrested on charges of sexually abusing at least six boys who were friends of his own children, the police said yesterday.
The man, Roger Jelinek, 46 years old, was arrested in Westbury on Friday, said Detective Larry Merriweather of the Nassau County police.
The police said the abuse, including acts of sodomy, went on for more than two years.


Many Doctors Infected With AIDS Don't Follow New U.S. Guidelines
Faced with the adoption of restrictive guidelines for health care professionals infected with the AIDS virus, thousands of doctors and other workers are being forced into daily decisions about how to protect their patients and their careers.
Many who are infected have decided not to follow the new Federal guidelines.
They say it is unfair and scientifically unwarranted to ask them to risk their livelihoods when the danger of transmission to a patient is infinitesimal -- much smaller than the danger any doctor faces in treating someone with an unknown history.


Rare Revival of 'Dark of the Moon'
MENTION "Dark of the Moon," and the memories of many theatergoers are likely to hark back to college or high school productions of the hillbilly tale about the witch-boy who begs to be made human after having his way with the lusty mortal Barbara Allen atop Bald Mountain.
The hitch is that she must remain faithful to him for a full year.
Professional stagings of this oddity have hardly come round much after its moderate Broadway run in the 1940's.
Now the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival, under a new, energized management, has decked out a striking production, wholly theatrical, but halfhearted in its interpretation of a play that sounds but halfway written.


POSTINGS: Metering Forum; The Cost Of Water
Water- and sewer-fee increases and the eventual universal use of water meters are New York City's main tools for conserving water.
But the double-barreled strategy has left many homeowners, landlords and co-op and condominium boards struggling with swiftly rising water and sewage bills and as well as questions on how the city's water-metering program will affect their operating costs.


Sheryl Randi Bloom to Wed
October wedding plans for Sheryl Randi Bloom and Clifford Ira Shaw, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Abe Shaw of Plantation, Fla., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Robert A. Bloom of Scarsdale, N.Y.
The future bride, 32 years old, is a vice president at Macy's Northeast in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Albany.
The future bridegroom, 35, is a partner in Talco Associates, an executive recruiting company in New York.


Anti-Abortion Rally Results in 55 Arrests
Fifty-five peo ple were arrested yesterday during a protest on Long Island against abortion, the Suffolk County police said.
Those arrested were charged with trespass for refusing to leave the Women's Pavilion clinic at 21-37 Deer Park Avenue, the police said, adding that the demonstrators had to be carried away on stretchers because they passively resisted arrest.


Men's Style; Shape
WITH A CURVE HERE AND a dart there, a handful of pacesetting designers have changed the shape of things to come.
In their collections for fall, Giorgio Armani, Donna Karan and Isaac Mizrahi, among others, have replaced the standard armor of the board room with a softer suit that has smaller shoulders, a longer, leaner silhouette and, perhaps most significantly, the suggestion of a waist.
By defining the body through the waist and hips, argues Harold Koda of the Fashion Institute of Tecnhology, designers have avoided a "wimpish silhouette" and come up with something more virile.
Donna Karan has constructed a suit designed, she says, "to embrace" a man's body, making him look and feel more sensual.
Mizrahi has also made a long, contoured jacket with a small dent at the waist, in recognition, he says, "that men have an anatomy."


Hotel Worker Held in Catskills Killings
A 24-year-old kitchen worker at a hotel in the Catskills has been charged with the murders last month of an elderly Hasidic couple at a nearby bungalow, the state police said today.
The suspect, Anthony Valentino Burton, was arrested at the staff quarters of Kutsher's Hotel, outside Monticello, around 10 A.M.
Friday, just as he was about to begin his shift in the kitchen.


BEST SELLERS: August 18, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
8
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
2
2
23
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
9
3
MAXIMUM BOB, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $20.) A woman probation officer pursues the people trying to kill a redneck Florida judge. (LP)
4
8
4
PASTIME, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) The private eye Spenser learns much about his own past while helping a young man track down his mother, who has disappeared.
5
3
13
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
6
6
4
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
7 *
5
8
BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Random House, $21.) The disappearance of a couple off Bermuda raises a question: is a creature from the deep responsible?
8 *
4
15
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
9
7
8
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
10
14
4
SKY MASTERS, by Dale Brown. (Fine/Putnam, $21.95.) The United States Air Force comes to the aid of the Philippines in a war with China in 1994.
11
12
15
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) Inspired by his grandfather, a London vendor, a man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
12
11
2
TEXAS!
SAGE, by Sandra Brown. (Doubleday, $18.) A young woman who has always been able to wrap men around her finger meets her match on a visit to her hometown.
13
1
THE WILD ROSE, by Doris Mortman. (Bantam, $20.) The professional and romantic life of a woman pianist in Budapest and New York.
14 *
10
73
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
15
1
MAMISTA, by Len Deighton. (HarperCollins, $21.95.) Three Americans caught in a tangle of drug trafficking, espionage and guerrilla warfare in the jungles of South America.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
9
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America.
2
3
9
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
3 *
5
4
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
4
1
39
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
5
4
7
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
6
6
14
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
7
8
6
BOSS OF BOSSES, by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) The downfall of the mobster Paul Castellano.
8
7
7
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press, $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.
9
10
14
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How President Bush and his commanders have made military decisions.
10
1
AND THE BEAT GOES ON, by Sonny Bono. (Pocket, $19.95.) The veteran pop star and current Mayor of Palm Springs, Calif., recalls his roller-coaster career with and without Cher.
11 *
7
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
12
12
10
COUNSEL TO THE PRESIDENT, by Clark Clifford with Richard Holbrooke. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of the Democratic adviser.
13
9
11
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
14
15
6
UNDER THE INFLUENCE, by Peter Hernon and Terry Ganey. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized account of Anheuser-Busch.
15
14
3
PETER LAWFORD, by James Spada. (Bantam, $22.50.) The life of the British-born actor, Hollywood man about town and Kennedy in-law.
16 *
6
PAUL HARVEY'S FOR WHAT IT'S WORTH, edited by Paul Harvey Jr. (Bantam, $15.) Anecdotes told by the radio broadcaster.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for euthanasia in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
2
84
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a fellow named Waldo.
3
4
121
WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida entrepreneur's financial advice.
4
3
28
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
5
1
41
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
ENCOUNTERING MARY: From La Salette to Medjugorje, by Sandra L. Zimdars-Swartz. (Princeton University, $24.95.) A fascinating study of seven apparitions of the Virgin Mary reported since 1846 and of how such events, usually cryptic at first, are interpreted and accepted -- or not -- by ecclesiastical authority.
BEST NIGHTMARE ON EARTH: A Life in Haiti, by Herbert Gold. (Prentice Hall, $19.95.) More a memoir than a travel book, the novelist's account of his sojourns in Haiti since the 1950's amply justifies his membership in the "fraternity of Haiti fanatics."
BODY SNATCHER, by Juan Carlos Onetti. (Pantheon, $23.) A fabulist's delight, published in Spanish in 1964, by a Uruguayan novelist whose nominal protagonist pursues two ambitions: to achieve "a perfect woman and a perfect bordello."
DO OR DIE, by Leon Bing. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) A freelance journalist's poignant, frequently chilling record of conversations with hard-core gang members in south central Los Angeles.
BROKEN VESSELS, by Andre Dubus. (Godine, $19.95.) This first book of autobiographical (and often painful) essays by an outstanding fiction writer who lost the use of his legs in 1986 seeks to capture the contradictory demands of being an American man.
IN THE CENTER OF THE NATION, by Dan O'Brien. (Atlantic Monthly, $21.95.) Set in South Dakota, this eloquent novel revolves around issues both ecological and humane -- the unsettling of the land, the values of the loners who undertake a rancher's life.
THE JAMESES: A Family Narrative, by R. W. B. Lewis. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $35.) Mr.
Lewis handsomely presents Henry, William and all the others interacting with one another in a family that was virtually a brilliant American nation of its own.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The southern gable of my house was covered with brown aluminum fascia panels some years ago.
During the summer daylight hours, this aluminum fascia expands between the nailing points so that there is a gap of more than an inch between the aluminum and the old wood fascia board.
As soon as the sun goes down, the aluminum returns to its original flat position.
This has been going on for six years, but there is no evidence of damage to this fascia, and the nails are as tight as when first installed.
Should I apply some caulking and add more nails to prevent this from happening?
A.
Aluminum fascia panels will always expand in the hot sun, but the trouble here is that the nailing technique was apparently not in line with proper practice for this type of installation.
Nails for aluminum siding or fascia should never be driven tight or firm.
They usually go through slots in the aluminum, rather than holes, and are not driven up tight so that the aluminum can "move" or expand lengthwise without buckling.
The original nails should be taken out and then properly installed.


Replacing Fascia Boards
FASCIAS are the trim boards at the tops of exterior walls.
Their purpose is to cover the ends of rafters at the eaves of a roof and the sides of rafters at the rakes, the roof's sloping edges.
Water damage to fascias at the eaves is rather common.
Repairs generally consist of replacing the damaged boards, a job that is not too difficult for a person with moderate carpentry skills, but an assistant is needed to help handle large pieces.


Ramada Opens Hotel in Borneo
The Ramada Renaissance Hotel Sandakan, the first hotel in the Ramada group to operate in Malaysia, opened at Sandakan in the state of Sabah in the northern part of the island of Borneo on Aug. 1.
The 120-room hotel overlooks the Sulu Sea and is on the grounds of the original Governor's house built in 1911.
It has a health center, a free-form swimming pool with waterfall and tennis, squash and basketball courts.
Other facilities are a 400-seat ballroom and two boardrooms, one for 10 people, the other for 15.
The hotel is a half-hour flight from Kota Kinabalu, also in Sabah.
Nearby attractions include the Turtle Islands.


Lisa Jane Dresnick Is Married to Dr. Scott Waller
Lisa Jane Dresnick and Dr.
Scott Waller were married last evening at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I., by Rabbi Moshe Edelman and Cantor Tibor Kelen.
The bride, 26 years old, is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Dreznick of Howard Beach, Queens.
The bridegroom, 28, is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Waller of Hewlett Harbor, L.I.
The bride is an assistant District Attorney in the Bronx.
She graduated from the State University at Stony Brook, L.I., and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
The bridegroom is a research assistant at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York and an emergency room physician at Methodist Hospital in Brooklyn.
He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and New York Medical College.


Tech Notes; Have Purifier, Will Travel
Until now travelers in regions where water quality is suspect have had to choose between water filtering systems to remove Giardia cysts, which cause intestinal disorders, and iodine tablets to treat for bacteria and viruses.
Now a Minneapolis company has introduced a portable water purifier that both filters water and uses iodine resin to kill bacteria and viruses without the usual half-hour wait.
The company, Recovery Engineering, says that the system, which is called PUR Traveler, meets new Government standards for drinking-water systems claiming to eliminate disease-causing cysts, bacteria and viruses.


Despite Decades Of Spending, Sewage Plants Are Full Up
Given a choice, most people would rather not think about sewage.
But when a treatment plant dumps raw waste into the water or produces a stomach-turning stench, the choice is made for them.
Thousands of Harlem residents were reminded last week of how unpleasant things can get when the big new North River plant along the Hudson River swamped dozens of city blocks with foul vapors.
But for New York City's massive sewage treatment system, one plant's stench may just be a whiff of larger problems.


Here's to Nutritional Fare
To the Editor:
Nowhere in Jon Katz's article "The War on Children's Culture"  [ Aug. 4 ]  does he address the fact that all these TV programs and movies are products of adult imagination.
While it is true that dealing with the fait accompli requires tact and diplomacy, there is no reason to accept the production of poor material without a fight.
The typical answer of the purveyors of junk food, whether mental or gastronomic, is "we give 'em what they want." But they also know that to a large extent "they want what we give 'em."


On Language; Chinese Relations
ARABIC IS A RICH language.
There are words for losing one's children, for a carriage taking a virgin into battle, for a disease striking camels in the head.
But when I was sweltering in Cairo in the early 1980's, while studying Arabic, what struck me most was that there was only one word,
talg,
that refers, if somewhat hazily, to either ice or snow.
At the time I was yearning for a good
talg
-fall in Cairo, I learned that the Eskimo language has several dozen words for "snow." Which makes perfect sense: the diversity in a language reflects the interests and obsessions of the society speaking it.
As a continuing student of the Chinese language, I find that Chinese is especially rich in the specific areas one would expect, given the culture.


Shortchanging the Reader?
To the Editor:
I have always liked well-written novels in which nothing happens, so I was pleased to see Joyce Reiser Kornblatt's appreciative review of Anita Brookner's "Brief Lives" (July 21).
But when nothing happens, it is helpful to keep straight the one or two events that do manage to occur.
So when Ms.
Kornblatt tells us a main character goes to live with her son, instead of her brother, when all the main characters are significantly childless, it's misleading.
Also, I was sorry to see Ms.
Kornblatt give away the last line of the book, though in the conventional sense there is nothing to give away.
But revealing such a well-turned, drop-dead line, which is perfect in context, shortchanges the reader and is, in my opinion, exactly like saying "The butler did it."  ELIZABETH HARTFORD  Milton, Mass.


Taking a Bug's-Eye View of the World
THERE is nothing like getting an insect's view of flowers and plants.
Although many backyard gardeners may not even think about such a scheme, it is a rewarding exercise outdoors and well within the realm of possibility.
How?
Very simply with a hand lens, or pocket magnifier as it is sometimes called.
The lens concentrates the focus on the details of a flower in an amazing way and opens up a new view of the world around us.
The lens can be held close to a flower or leaf without picking it, or for a closer look, the flower or leaf can be picked and brought indoors, where it can be handled closely and held to the light.
The lens's magnification makes it possible to see the intricate designs of what have heretofore been thought of as rather ordinary plants, flowers and leaves.


Robin Lynne Kallor Marries
Robin Lynne Kallor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Kallor of Melville, L.I., was married there last evening to David Michael Adwar, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Adwar, of of Bellmore, L.I.
Rabbi Earl Kideckel officiated at the South Huntington Jewish Center.
The bride, 25 years old, is an administrator in the human resources department of Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts.
The bridegroom, 29, graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University.
He is the vice president of Miller Executive Recruiting in New York.


Our Cousin the Sea Squirt
THE VIRGIN AND THE MOUSETRAP
Essays in Search of the Soul of Science.
By Chet Raymo. 199 pp.
New York: Viking. 18.95.


CAMPUS LIFE: SUNY-Buffalo; Preparing to Teach Earthquake Safety To Eastern Pupils
Pupils in Asheville, N.C., participate in tornado drills every year.
Now earthquake drills and awareness programs may become a part of their curriculum as well.
To help officials in Asheville and other school districts in the eastern third of the country set up local earth-safety programs, the National Center for Earthquake Engineering Research at the State University of New York at Buffalo and the Federal Emergency Management Agency last week sponsored the first workshop in the Northeast on earthquake education.


SURPLUS VALUE
Unlike other people's zucchini plants, mine do not flourish.
Three years ago, discouraged by the paucity of vegetables in my garden, I decided to plant zucchini.
"
They'll
grow," I said to my husband, and I planted just three hills, having heard how prolific that particular squash is. From those three hills, we harvested three zucchini. Last year, I tried another location, adding large amounts of peat moss and cow manure. Result? Two zucchini. I might try again next year, if someone will tell me how to get 200 from one plant. ELIZABETH S. HALBROOKS
Wellesley, Mass.


The Crime of White Maleness
In the multicultural arenas of American universities there is much controversy over the meaning and value of the phrase "white male." I recently attended several conferences on gender, race and ethnicity.
At the first conference a speaker (who might be described in the vernacular of today's communal politics as a "non-Hispanic white female heterosexual feminist") declined to participate in a round-table discussion with the males in the room on the grounds that her only interest in men was as sexual objects.
At another conference a speaker denounced "West Side Story" because it had been produced by a "successful white male" who, in her view, had no authority to represent the Puerto Rican American experience.
When it was pointed out by a startled and wounded fan that "West Side Story" was a variation on "Romeo and Juliet," a play originally created by a "successful white male" who was neither Italian nor a citizen of Verona, the speaker denounced William Shakespeare as a racist.


Writer Trod in Faulkner's Path, but Tripped
"Track down obscure adjectives, use little punctuation, throw in a lot of country wisdom inappropriately and have a couple of bourbons ahead of time."
It was the game plan for the winning concoction in "faux Faulkner," a competition of that name to write like the Mississippi master, but badly.


POSTINGS: New Hands in Saratoga Springs; A Bit of Everything at Lakeside
The Vista housing development in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., seemed to have everything: 125 acres on Saratoga Lake, boat slips, swimming pools, tennis courts, impending foreclosure, possible bankruptcy and a lawsuit among the developers.
The last three things it could have done without, particularly since work was suspended during the struggle.
That left the first 73 attached houses, which were already occupied, in need of minor work; 26 other houses were unfinished and unsold.


Robin Sundy Wed To David Tingue
Robin Lee Sundy, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Sundy of Ridgefield, Conn., was married yesterday to David Morrison Tingue, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Tingue of Bedford Hills, N.Y.
The Rev.
Michael Zeman performed the ceremony at the Norfield Congregational Church in Weston, Conn..
The bride, 25 years old, is to start work in September as the assistant to the executive director of the Community Arts Partnership in Ithaca, N.Y.
She was until recently a development associate at the Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater in New York.
She graduated from Bucknell University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of News Guide Associates, media consultants in Westport, Conn.
Her mother, Arlene Sundy, is a social studies teacher at the Ponus Ridge Middle School in Norwalk, Conn.


Let Us Now Praise The Famous Swamps
WETLANDS MAY BE swamps, bogs, marshes, tidal estuaries or potholes carved out of the earth by glaciers.
They may sprawl over four million acres, like the Louisiana marshes and swamplands that constitute 40 percent of the nation's total coastal wetlands.
They may cover a fraction of an acre, or thousands of acres, like the prairie potholes that provide nesting sites for 80 percent of North America's ducks.
Wetlands are the cradle of life for wildlife and fish; almost all finfish and shellfish spend time spawning or feeding in tidal estuaries.
These swampy lands recycle nutrients and filter pollutants more efficiently than any state-of-the-art sewage treatment plant.
They recharge aquifers, absorb storm waves and floodwaters.
They are also places of peace and incomparable beauty.


Claire Collins Plans October Wedding
Mr. and Mrs.
Frank M. Collins of Ardmore, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Claire Ann Collins, to George Rudolph Talarico, a son of George F. Talarico of Nutley, N.J., and the late Juanita R. Talarico.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Collins, 28 years old, graduated from Pennsylvania State University, where she also received a master's degree in public administration.
She received a J.D. degree from the University of Bridgeport.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Collins, Johnson and Markey in Media, Pa.
Her mother, Katherine Collins, is an owner of the WGBI AM-FM radio station in Scranton, Pa.


Topics of The Times; Grenada, Spared
Bernard Coard and his confederates in Grenada are killers of the cruelest kind.
Driven by ideological fanaticism and a crude lust for power, they murdered their longtime political ally, Prime Minister Maurice Bishop, and at least 10 others in 1983.
Their crimes directly precipitated the U.S. invasion of the tiny eastern Caribbean island.
The sequel was mostly a happy one.
A little more than a year later, a U.S.-sponsored political transition led to the election of Grenada's most democratic government since independence.
But the 1983 events also left a powerful legacy of anger and shame among Grenada's people.
That nourished a strong popular sentiment for carrying out the death sentences imposed on Mr.
Coard and 13 co-defendants after their conviction in 1986.


Miss Gambaccini Weds James Hughes
Sue Ann Gambaccini, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis J. Gambaccini of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to James Joseph Hughes, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Hughes Jr., of Shrewsbury, N.J.
The Rev.
Peter K. O'Brien performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Presentation in Upper Saddle River, N.J.
The bride, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, is to clerk for Judge Geoffrey Gaulkin of the Appellate Division of New Jersey Superior Court in Jersey City beginning in September.
She graduated magna cum laude from Rutgers University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a law degree from the Rutgers-Newark Law School.
Her father is the deputy assistant executive director of planning at the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority in Philadelphia.
He retired in 1988 as an assistant executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CLOWNING AROUND
Clowns, people interested in becoming clowns and people who are just curious about clowns are welcome to attend all or some of the 17th Annual Northeast Clown Convention at the Trumbull Marriott Thursday through Sunday.


Commercial Property: Pan Am Building; '200 Park Avenue' Preferred
YOU might call it the Mitsui Building.
Or the Dreyfus Building.
Or the Rogers &amp; Wells Building.
Or, as the landlord seems to prefer, 200 Park Avenue.
Whatever the choice, if the name of the gargantuan skyscraper athwart Park Avenue were to reflect its tenancy, the name would no longer be Pan Am.


'Discrimination Is a Relative Thing'
I would like to comment on Richard Weizel's article, "Shore Towns Rule the Waves: Parking Fees Limit Beach Use" (July 28).
Discrimination is a relative thing. There is none at the Westport public beaches.
Anyone
can, without a fee from the town beaches: be dropped off at the beach, bicycle to it (many do from the rail station), take a bus (they run frequently) or a taxi, walk, shower or change clothes in the public dressing rooms.


A November Bridal for Anne Sweeney
The engagement of Anne Elizabeth Sweeney and Kevin Eugene Smith, the son of Margery Harris Smith of Falls Church, Va., and the late W. Eugene Smith, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Sweeney of Oakdale, L.I.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sweeney, 32 years old, is a book editor and publishing consultant in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Villanova University.
Her father, who is retired, was the manager of manufacturing and engineering at Tenneco Chemicals in Flemington, N.J.


Hotel Rooms Set for Modems
Red Lion Hotels and Inns, which manages 51 hotels in 10 Western states, has equipped nearly all its rooms with dual-port telephone lines, making it possible for travelers to operate a computer, a printer or a fax machine in their rooms.
The installation allows the use of modems for fax machines, printers and laptop and portable computers.
The dual-port lines have been installed in about 90 percent of Red Lion's 13,500 rooms.
Information about the computer readiness of any hotel in the group is available from its central reservation number, (800) 547-8010.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15
The lead in the hostage negotiations has been taken by the Iranian government, which is using secret intermediaries and shuttle diplomacy to bargain for the release of the 10 remaining Western hostages.
Page 1


Sports of The Times; Bad Eyes Watching U.S. Losses?
IT is very hard to sit here overlooking the Morro Castle, and try to make sense of the Pan American Games, knowing that truly important things are happening back in the good old U.S.-of-Stump.
Here in Cuba, all people have to worry about are a few minor shortages of bread and water and electricity, plus the stranger who just happens to be lighting a cigarette a few feet away, known generically as the Bad Eyes.


Suzanne Karen Rubin To Wed Philip Schein
Mr. and Mrs.
Morton Rubin of New York have announced November wedding plans for their daughter Suzanne Karen Rubin and Philip Allen Schein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry Schein of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
Miss Rubin, 24 years old, graduated from the Ramaz School in Manhattan and New York University.
She is an assistant to the director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.


Correction
A picture caption on Aug. 4 with an article about Manhattan rentals misidentified the building shown.
It is the Concerto, at 60th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, not the Lucerne.


'This Is All It Will Come To'
To the Editor:
Vincent Scully's interpretations of the Somme memorial at Thiepval and the Vietnam Veterans Memorial were worthy of a poet  [ "The Terrible Art of Designing a War Memorial," July 14 ] .


Camera
Talented sports photographers are in greater demand today than ever.
American newspapers publish sports pictures on their front pages; they sell papers.
And this year's Sports Photography Workshop -- the only such program in the world -- played to a full house in Los Angeles last month.
For seven days, 61 students photographed 3,000 athletes in 37 events during the Olympic Sports Festival, the semifinals for the 1992 games at Barcelona.
Nikon supplied about $350,000 worth of lenses -- more than 100 of them.
Eastman Kodak delivered 75 rolls of its new Kodachrome 200, specially developed for sports photography, for each student and instructor, and Sports Illustrated rescheduled its photographers so they could serve as instructors.


Bed and Breakfast
To the Editor: I read "A New Candor Emerging in B &amp; B Guidebooks" (Practical Traveler, July 21) with great interest, as I am the owner of one of the B &amp; B's rated by the American Bed and Breakfast Association.
I agree with the concept of rating B &amp; B's, for all of us benefit from weeding out those that are unacceptable.
However, having gone through the evaluation process, I do not feel that the current criteria are the answer, for they do not take into consideration the total experience and uniqueness of many B &amp; B's.
Based on current criteria, we will probably never receive a rating higher than our three crowns.
Why?
Because our B &amp; B is in a historic building, and to put private baths in each room we would have to destroy its historic integrity.
Perhaps the traveler would best be served if in addition to rating B &amp; B's there was an organization that rated the guidebooks.
BLANCHE BURPEE DOHAN The Inn at Fordhook Farm  Doylestown, Pa.


Art Who?
What has 1.5 million feet and left work early on Thursday?
Hint: it can complete the following phrase in a flash, "Me and Julio down by the . . ." It was, of course, the crowd of 750,000 that turned out for a free concert in Central Park by Paul Simon.
It was the first pop music concert in the park in eight years and was, by all accounts, a roaring success.
For more than two hours, Simon delighted his audience with songs from his latest cross-cultural venture -- he had 10 Brazilian drummers with him -- as well as tunes from the days when he sang with that bushy-haired guy.
Time Warner, which broadcast the concert to HBO cable subscribers around the country, picked up the tab for putting it all together and cleaning up afterward, and even people who had to sit a quarter-mile from the 158-foot-wide stage got to watch it all on a 15-by-30-foot television monitor.
When it was over people left peacefully.
The singer himself was "absolutely elated," said a spokeswoman.


THE NETWORK TAKEOVERS
Ken Auletta's suggestion that the ABC network owes its relative success to the camaraderie of the management style of top executives at Capital Cities Communications seems disingenuous ("The Network Takeovers: Why ABC Survived Best," July 28).
While ABC employees may appreciate the frequent "pats on the back" from their superiors, ABC's continued viability as a network must be attributed to the ability of its programming to deliver audiences that advertisers find attractive.
Auletta informs us that Laurence A. Tisch of CBS and Robert C. Wright of NBC prefer their executive suites and Quotron machines to mingling with employees in the "communal dining room." These anecdotes make for interesting water-cooler talk at network headquarters, but they have little relevance when it comes to assessing the competitive performance of the three networks.
BRIAN BROWDIE, JOEL L. MCKUIN
Washington


O'Rourke Retreats From Disputed Plan On Legal Aid
COUNTY EXECUTIVE Andrew P. O'Rourke announced last week that he had decided to delay action on his proposal that private lawyers assigned to represent indigent defendants be replaced by Legal Aid Society lawyers in three municipal court jurisdictions.
The proposal, which would have affected City Courts in Yonkers and Mount Vernon and the Village Court in Ossining, was expected to save $1 million a year in county funds.
But it had been strongly opposed by the county's legal community.


Answering The Mail
Q.
The southern gable of my house was covered with brown aluminum fascia panels some years ago.
During the summer daylight hours, this aluminum fascia expands between the nailing points so that there is a gap of more than an inch between the aluminum and the old wood fascia board.
As soon as the sun goes down, the aluminum returns to its original flat position.
This has been going on for six years, but there is no evidence of damage to this fascia, and the nails are as tight as when first installed.
Should I apply some caulking and add more nails to prevent this from happening?
A.
Aluminum fascia panels will always expand in the hot sun, but the trouble here is that the nailing technique was apparently not in line with proper practice for this type of installation.
Nails for aluminum siding or fascia should never be driven tight or firm.
They usually go through slots in the aluminum, rather than holes, and are not driven up tight so that the aluminum can "move" or expand lengthwise without buckling.
The original nails should be taken out and then properly installed.


Chateau Country
"THE Loire, cradle of French literature and cuisine. The Loire, where they spoke the purest French. He had come to know it relatively late in life. In his younger days he had avoided the area because of the picture it conjured up; all those coachloads of tourists with their cameras. The loss had been his."
The thoughts are those of Monsieur Pamplemousse, the French detective created by Michael Bond, author of the Paddington Bear books, in "Monsieur Pamplemousse and the Secret Mission." The sentiment, with a slight adjustment in age, also applies to me.


Crash Stirs Concern at Watkins Glen
The crash that killed stock-car racer J. D. McDuffie last Sunday at the Watkins Glen International road course has intensified discussion of what changes are needed there in turn five, a corner that has gained unwanted notoriety this summer.
During the fifth lap of the 90-lap Winston Cup race at the upstate New York track, McDuffie's Pontiac lost a wheel at the end of a straightaway where cars reached speeds over 170 miles an hour.
With the car tipping down and basically riding on only two wheels, McDuffie's brakes were almost useless.
And when his car slid off the track at the entrance to turn five, a long, 180-degree right-hand turn, it was riding on grass, which further reduced whatever stopping ability was left.


Review/Music; McFerrin Conducts
Pianists and violinists have been doubling as conductors for ages, and lately opera singers have started beating a path to the podium, too.
But jazz musicians -- well, let's check the record books.
Yes, it looks as if Bobby McFerrin is definitely the first circular-breathing jazz singer to conduct the Beethoven Seventh Symphony.
At a glance, Mr.
McFerrin's performance with the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra at the Garden State Arts Center here tonight must have struck some as a gimmicky idea for a pops concert.
Billed as his New York-area conducting debut, the program included a group of short popular classics and some of Mr.
McFerrin's own vocal improvisations, along with the Beethoven.


New &amp; Noteworthy
TWENTY-ONE SELECTED STORIES, by Ward Just. (Ivy, $5.95.) In one of these short stories by the former reporter Ward Just, a Boston lawyer, nearing 50, looks back at the summer of 1955, when he and a rebellious girl named Swan fell in love with the Edward Hoppers at the Art Institute of Chicago.
"Ward Just's stories go beyond colorful journalism," Herbert Mitgang said in The Times last year.
"They have something vital to say about our striving, sometimes disappointing style of life. He has emerged as one of the most astute writers of American fiction."
WALTER WINCHELL: A Novel, by Michael Herr. (Vintage, $9.) In a novel written in the form of a screenplay, Michael Herr tells the story of America's most powerful gossip columnist.
"What Mr. Herr must have realized was that the trite devices, jazzy rhythms and copious dialogue of an old-fashioned film script were perfect for Winchell's story," Judith Rascoe said here last year.
The book "evokes the same ghostly feelings we get while watching a 40's movie today -- of actors vigorously alive in an immortal present tense, yet more inaccessible than creatures in a fairy tale." Vintage has also reissued Mr.
Herr's DISPATCHES ($10).
In 1977 our reviewer, C. D. B. Bryan, called it "the best book to have been written about the Vietnam War."


Karen Betzig Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Betzig of Larchmont, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Karen Marie Betzig to Herbert William Marache 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marache Jr. of Greenwich, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Betzig, 31 years old, is an institutional sales assistant at Alex, Brown &amp; Sons, stockbrokers in New York.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Plattsburgh.
Mr.
Marache, 26, is a broker at Janney Montgomery Scott in New York.
He graduated from Boston University.


Deangela Clark Weds Lewis Webb Jr. in Brooklyn
Deangela Marie Clark, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Oliver J. Clark of Brooklyn, was married there yesterday to Lewis Webb Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Webb of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
J.
Edward Lewis, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the Cadman Memorial Church.
Mrs.
Webb, 25 years old, is an adminstrative assistant in New York at the national headquarters of the Girl Scouts.
Mr.
Webb, 29, graduated from Long Island University and from Brooklyn Law School.
He is a pharmacist at the Prospect Drug Store in Brooklyn.


Deirdre O'Connor Plans to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
James J. O'Connor of Manhasset, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Deirdre Anne O'Connor to Joseph William Martini, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph C. Martini of Merrick, L.I.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss O'Connor and Mr.
Martini are both 30 years old and assistant United States Attorneys in Bridgeport, Conn.
Miss O'Connor graduated from New York University and received a law degree from the University of Bridgeport.
Her father is the president of the Annamor Group, a New York importer of Irish products.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bellport 430,000
61 South Howells Point Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old ranch, library, fireplace, 1 acre; taxes $8,100.
Brookville 800,000
7 Paddock Court  5-bedroom, 5-bath, 7-year-old contemporary; family room, wine cellar, finished basement, pool; taxes $16,000.
Commack 144,500
43 Spinner Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 28- year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, den, finished basement, patio; taxes $3,400.
East Islip 490,000
88 East Bayberry Road  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 90-year-old waterfront colonial; pool, 1.3 acres, 2-car garage; taxes $12,000.
New Hyde Park 205,000
1414 Park Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, 1-car detached garage; taxes $2,800.
Sayville 285,000
26 Sunset Drive  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year old waterfront ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room, 1-car garage; taxes $5,600.
OTHER AREAS Millwood, N.Y. 389,000
Lot 5, Cornell Woods
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, deck, family room, den; taxes not yet assessed.
Haddam, Conn. 162,500
37 Weiss Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 15-year-old ranch; new kitchen w/breakfast bar, formal dining room, 1.3 acres; taxes $1,828.
Mahwah, N.J. 266,000
41 Sparrowbush Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 17-year-old split level; deck, fireplace, vaulted ceilings; taxes $4,358.


Wagnerians, Westward Ho-jo-to-ho!
Among the fascinations exerted by Richard Wagner was that he held up a mirror to a daring range of social and political, esthetic and psychological realities.
The fascination persists: at any moment, Wagner's fate in performance tells us something about ourselves, our time and place.
In Germany after World War II, the Wagner productions of Wieland Wagner projected urgent rites of purification; they necessarily broke with the past to erase the taint of Hitler, who frequented Bayreuth.
The result was a pivotal revitalization of Wagner the musical dramatist.
In the United States, where no such tainting occurred, the Metropolitan Opera has had no urgent incentive to take a fresh look at the "Ring des Nibelungen." Instead, Wagner has been revitalized by the Seattle Opera, whose caring and inquisitive "Ring" production, now five years old and more handsome than ever, is being seen three times this month.


Bridge
Consider an improbable situation.
Mr.
G., from Calcutta, India, is making his first visit to the United States.
In a Western town he is accused by a local resident, Mr.
K., of failing to observe a local ordinance, often neglected, that requires a tip of the hat on passing the statue of the town's founder.
A panel of amateur judges orders Mr.
G. to pay $5,000 to Mr.
K., without right of appeal.
In the eyes of many bridge experts, something comparable occurred early this month at the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals in Las Vegas, Nev..
The genesis of a cause celebre was a foolish regulation that requires an alert in some circumstances after a Stayman response to one no-trump.


Emily Knowlton, Journalist, Weds
Emily Knowlton, a daughter of Monique Knowlton of New Canaan, Conn., and Hugh Knowlton Jr. of Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., was married yesterday in Ponte Vedra Beach to John Quincy Hunsicker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Quincy Hunsicker of Zurich.
The Rev.
James H. Cooper officiated at Christ Episcopal Church.
The bride, 26 years old, is a freelance television reporter and was until recently an anchor and reporter at KNAZ-TV in Flagstaff, Ariz.
She graduated from Harvard University.
Her father, who is retired, was the chairman of Smith, Barney &amp; Company and of the Moet-Hennessey U.S.
Corporation, both in New York.
Her mother, an art dealer, owned the Monique Knowlton Gallery in New York.


Economy Kills Contested Plan for Flushing Project
New York City is dropping a bitterly contested plan to build a large apartment and commercial complex, Flushing Center, on a city-owned parking lot in Queens.
But city officials say it is not the opposition of many residents and civic groups in the surrounding Flushing area that has killed the five-year-old plan but the current recession, which they say has made the project no longer financially viable.


King Sues Haugen
Promoter DON KING filed a lawsuit Friday against GREG HAUGEN, who pulled out of a Sept. 14 title fight against the World Boxing Council superlightweight champion, JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ.
The suit, filed in federal court, asks for damages of more than $1 million.


Amnesty to Allow Rebel General to Flee Lebanon
The Lebanese Government has issued a general amnesty on war crimes that would clear the way for Gen.
Michel Aoun, the Christian army commander who ended a costly two-year mutiny last October, to leave the country and take up political asylum in France.
General Aoun and two of his close aides have taken refuge at the French Embassy here for the last 10 months, avoiding the risk of prosecution on charges of embezzling $35 million in public funds between 1988 and 1990.


Miss Feind Weds Roger Mondloch
Lee Ann Feind, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Carl R. Feind of Alpine, N.J., was married yesterday in Rye, N.Y., to Roger John Mondloch, a son of Joyce McCullough of Fairfax, Va., and the late Robert J. Mondloch.
The Rev.
James Parke performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection.
Mrs.
Mondloch, 27 years old, is the processing supervisor of ERA 5-Star Properties, a real-estate brokerage in Reston, Va.
She graduated from Lynchburg College.
Her father is professor emeritus of clinical surgery at Columbia University and an associate attending surgeon at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.
Her mother, Helen Feind, is the president of the Creative Theater, a children's musical theater group in Englewood, N.J.


Pittsburgh
To the Editor: When in Pittsburgh recently, I looked for traces of a native son, Henry Clay Frick, creator of New York's Frick Collection.
I discovered that his home has recently been restored and opened to the public.
Everything about the home -- the ambitious facade, the Spartan bedroom where Frick recovered from an anarchist's bullet, the collection of art -- speaks to Frick's personality, career and taste.
As for his move to New York, he apparently wanted to save his paintings from the soot that paid for them.
Next door, in a museum built by his daughter, is an art collection that is itself worth a visit.
When I was there, the museum was also showing drawings from a private Paris collection.
CHARLES SKRIEF St.
Paul, Minn.


Let's Limit Presidential Campaign Season
To the Editor:
As a further word regarding the election checkoff fund, Senator Mitch McConnell's comments ("Presidential Campaign Checkoff Is a Rip-Off," letter, July 28), taking into consideration your good editorial intentions of July 9 ("$2 to Enrich Democracy"), were on target.


Poland's 2d City Will Revive The Pillory for Wrongdoers
Poles plan to revive the medieval pillory in Lodz, the country's second-largest city, the official press agency reported today.
Local press reports say citizens will be allowed to use the device to hold wrongdoers until the police arrive.
In the Middle Ages, people manacled to pillories were jeered at by crowds and pelted with rotten fruit or worse.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Vintage Lifeguards
Old lifeguards don't swim off into the sunset on Long Island.
If they are like Frank Russell and Albert (Reggie) Jones, both of whom are 64 years old, they keep on saving lives and causing women, albeit older women, to swoon at the beach.
Because both men are from Bellmore, perhaps the drinking water should be analyzed there.
Mr.
Jones has been an ocean lifeguard for 48 years, Mr.
Russell for 47.
"I had to take last summer off," Mr.
Russell said.
"I had triple-bypass surgery."


Olivia Bruce and Burton Hurlock Wed
Olivia Marie Bruce, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wallace Benjamin Bruce Jr. of Memphis, was married there yesterday to Burton Charls Hurlock, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Bickford Hurlock of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
Henry B. Strock Jr. performed the ceremony at the Idlewild Presbyterian Church.
Mr. and Mrs.
Hurlock are both 27 years old and both graduated cum laude from Princeton University.
She is an independent film coordinator.
Her father is the executive vice president of Valley Products, soap manufacturers in Memphis.


In the Flesh
To the Editor:
Angela Carter's review of John Vernon's novel "Peter Doyle" misses the prairie schooner by failing to mention that the eponymous Peter Doyle is a characterization of the historical Peter Doyle, a Washington trolley operator and companion of Walt Whitman.
DAVID G. SARLES  Fairfield, Conn.


James Kjorlien Marries Deirdre Atwood Wilde
Deirdre Atwood Wilde, the daughter of Elaine Wilde of Belmont, Mass., and the late Dr.
W.
Lawrence Wilde, was married yesterday to James Edward Kjorlien, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Clarence J. Kjorlien of Wianno, Mass.
The Rev.
Raymond Webster performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church in Wianno.
Mrs.
Kjorlien, 30 years old, graduated from Harvard University.
Her father was a surgeon in Cambridge, Mass.


Hard Times at Auction Houses: Has the Art Market Hit Bottom?
In one week in May 1990, the Japanese industrialist Ryoel Saito paid $160 million for two paintings bought in New York: $82.5 million for van Gogh's "Portrait of Dr. Gachet" (1890) at Christie's and $78.1 million for Renoir's "At the Moulin de la Galette" (1876) at Sotheby's.
This year, by comparison, the most expensive work auctioned was Degas's "Racehorses" (1870's), which was sold for $9.7 million in June to an unidentified buyer at Christie's in London.
After five years of rapidly rising prices, the frenzied buying of art at auction is over.
Sotheby's and Christie's have gone into reverse: the two aucton houses, the world's largest, announced record declines in total sales for the season, which ends on Aug. 31.
Sotheby's is projecting a 59 percent decline in international sales, to $1.3 billion from a record $3.2 billion in 1990.
Christie's worldwide sales are expected to fall 50 percent, to $1.2 billion from $2.4 billion.


Alexander Weinstein, Teacher, 76
Alexander Weinstein, a teacher in the New York City school system for more than 30 years and a championship tennis coach, died on Saturday at his home in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
He was 76 years old.
He died of brain cancer, his grandson, Allan, said.


Injury to Hansel May End The 3-Year-Old's Career
Hansel, the leading money winner among the contenders for racing's highest honors in 1991, was found today to have suffered a torn tendon in his left foreleg Saturday during the Travers Stakes.
He will not race again this year and probably will never race again.
"He's finished racing for the year," his trainer, Frank Brothers, reported today.
"A decision about his career will be made shortly. It's not a bowed tendon. It's a small tear in a tendon. Can you repair it and get him back to the races? It's possible, but not probable."


New Jersey And Indiana Act on Trash
After months of antagonism New Jersey and Indiana agreed yesterday to crack down on the illegal dumping of New Jersey's garbage in Indiana's landfills.
Under the agreement, announced by Gov.
Jim Florio and Gov.
Evan Bayh at a conference of the nation's governors in Seattle, the two states will share information and coordinate investigations into the dumping, which has been a contentious political issue in Indiana.


'Grave, Critical Hour': A Soviet Message
Following is the text of the message to the Soviet people made public here today by Tass, the Soviet press agency:
Compatriots, citizens of the Soviet Union, we are addressing you at the grave, critical hour for the destinies of Motherland and our peoples.
A mortal danger has come to loom large over our great Motherland.


New York's 3 Police Forces Open New Recruiting Battle
He is everywhere, or so it seems.
Popping up on subway stations in the dead of night, appearing on television and radio talk shows, narrating his own radio commercials and drumming up recruits in leaflets that are beginning to blanket the city.
The Bostonian-accented message is clear: William J. Bratton, Chief of the New York City Transit Police, wants you.
He wants you as a rider.
He wants you as a transit police officer.


CHRONICLE
A.
THOMAS YOUNG, president and chief operating officer of the Martin Marietta Corporation in Bethesda, Md., accepted the Distinguished Service to Higher Education Award on Friday at the national convention in Denver of Alpha Kappa Psi Fraternity, an 87-year-old business group.
The Alpha Kappa Psi Foundation's president, BILL REEVES, presented the award to Martin Marietta at the Sheraton Denver Tech Center for substantial assistance and support to American colleges and universities.


Stop Rewarding Peru for Brutality
To the Editor:
"What the U.S. Can Do in Peru" (editorial, Aug. 11) falsely presumes that drug trafficking and the Shining Path guerrillas can be combated through the same means: military might.
The Shining Path clearly benefits from the drug trade in Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley, and antinarcotics programs are obviously difficult to carry out as long as the guerrillas maintain a stronghold in the region.
However, linking counternarcotics and counterinsurgency objectives, though politically expedient, will do more harm than good.


Silver and Black and Little White Lies
The mystique -- or is it mystery? -- of AL DAVIScontinues.
The picture accompanying this story is of the 1948-49 Syracuse University basketball team.
The young man in the top row, second from right, is Al Davis, more well known as the controversial managing general partner of the Los Angeles Raiders.
The picture hangs in the school's Varsity Club lounge.
And Davis's biography in the Raiders' news media guide says he played basketball, football and baseball at Syracuse.
But in Orangemen records, there is no mention of an Al Davis ever playing basketball, or any other sport, for Syracuse.


Museum of Ads Thrives Amid a Cultural Debate
Because Bo knows everything, one could plausibly argue that Portland knows advertising.
So where better to locate the only museum in the United States devoted solely to advertising?
Portland, after all, is home to Wieden &amp; Kennedy, currently the ad trade's hottest agency, whose 10 years of work for Nike athletic shoes -- including the slogans "Bo knows" and "Just Do It" -- are the subject of a study by the Smithsonian Institution in Washington.


Abroad at Home; Profiles in Cowardice
There is something in the nature of Congress that makes it periodically subject to fits of fear.
Certain issues cause these Gadarene rushes: Communism, of course.
Pornography.
Crime.
Legislators have to be tough on such things -- or, rather, look tough.
So a demagogue can come up with the most irrational proposals, call them tough and frighten his colleagues into voting for them.
A Joe McCarthy or Jesse Helms trades not on the regard of other members but on their fear.


Norris Wants to Move Up
After his quick knockout of Brett Lally on Saturday night, Terry Norris, the World Boxing Council super-welterweight champion, said he would like to move up to the middleweight division.
"If I can, I will fight middleweight," Norris said after gaining the victory at 2:40 of the first round of a scheduled 12-round bout at the Sports Arena.
"I won't gain weight, but I will bulk up. If Ray Leonard can do it, I will do it."


A Day Full of Festivals


Armed Bicyclists Kill Man and Wound Girl
A patchogue man was fatally shot and a 14-year-old girl was wounded early yesterday when armed bicyclists fired into a street crowd near a Suffolk County social club, the police said.
The shooting occurred at 3:30 A.M. outside the Circle C club when three people on bicycles rode past a group and one displayed a handgun, said Detective Lieut.
John Gierasch.
The crowd confronted the bicyclists, a disturbance began and several shots were fired, he said.


Amy P. Melstein Is Married
Amy Pamela Melstein, a daughter of Marilyn Melstein of Huntingdon Valley, Pa., was married yesterday to Craig Alan Damast, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Damast of Pomona, N.Y.
Rabbi Ira Grussgot, assisted by Cantor Daniel Gildar, performed the ceremony at Shaare Shamayim Synagogue in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Damast, 24 years old, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is studying for a doctorate in experimental psychology at New York University.
The bridegroom, 25, graduated from Penn and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
He is to join the law firm of Shaw, Licitra, Esernio &amp; Schwartz in Garden City, L.I., next month.


New Owners Pay, and Pay Some More
San Jose is joining the National Hockey League this season,, having successfully come up with a $50 million expansion fee.
But the outlook is more unsettled for next year's expected entrants, Tampa Bay and Ottawa, neither of which has yet made a $21.5 million payment as part of its initiation fee.
Sports franchises have become big-ticket items.


Hurricane Hits North Carolina and Moves North
A hurricane with winds of 115 miles an hour pounded North Carolina's barrier islands today as it moved northward along the Atlantic Coast.
Residents along the coast as far away as Plymouth, Mass., were warned to prepare for high winds and heavy rains if the storm continues on its present path.


Dr. Wallach Wed To Victor Mintz
Dr.
Elizabeth Jane Wallach, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert C. Wallach of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Victor Karl Mintz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herman Mintz of Trenton.
Rabbi Alvin Kass performed the ceremony at the East Midwood Jewish Center in Brooklyn.
The bride, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a fellow in pediatric endocrinology at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
She received a bachelor's degree and her M.D. magna cum laude in a program of Brooklyn College of the City University of New York and the State University Health Science Center at Brooklyn.
Her father is an account executive at the Gruntal &amp; Company brokerage in New York.
Her mother, Roberta Wallach, is a retired teacher


Screening for Breast Cancer: Questions of Cost and Quality
Sandra Thomas snapped her wallet shut and walked out of the Breast Cancer Detection Center in Charlotte, N.C., recently, $39 poorer but the very model of the modern medical consumer.
In the course of 15 minutes, her breasts had been X-rayed, films had been developed to be sure the pictures were complete and she was on her way back to work six miles away.


Corrections
An obituary on Aug. 7 about Persis Emma Gladieux, a horticulture expert, omitted a surviving son.
He is Russell V. Gladieux of Berne, N.Y.


Sidewalk Artist Is Slain In Dispute Over Portrait
It was a typical scene for a hot summer night: a small crowd of tourists and passers-by paused to look over the shoulder of a sidewalk artist sketching a portrait with pastel.
The artist was a young immigrant from China, an aspiring oil painter who earned pocket money in areas like Times Square or Greenwich Village by peddling a small piece of his talent.
At 2 A.M. yesterday, in an argument over a portrait, the artist, Ling Ling, 34 years old, was shot and killed, while a small crowd looked on, on Eighth Avenue at West 45th Street near the Milford Plaza Hotel.


Hypocrisies Abound in the Plight of Pee-wee Herman; Shades of Oscar Wilde
To the Editor:
In 1895, when Oscar Wilde was convicted on charges of indecency, booksellers withdrew his writings -- including essays, plays and "The Picture of Dorian Gray" -- from their shelves, and his publishers broke all ties with him.
His work remained unavailable in Britain (and America) until years after his death.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Recalled Willie Blair, pitcher, from Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League.
Placed Mike York, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Activated Russ Swan, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Dave Fleming, pitcher, to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Optioned Steve Wilson, pitcher, to Iowa of the American Association.
Purchased the contract of Scott May, pitcher, from Iowa.
SAN DIEGO PADRES -- Placed Bip Roberts, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Paul Faries, infielder, from Las Vegas of the Pacific Coast League.
BASKETBALL Continental Basketball Association  RAPID CITY THRILLERS -- Signed Orlando Graham, center.
FOOTBALL National Football League  HOUSTON OILERS -- Agreed to terms with Cris Dishman, cornerback.
HOCKEY National Hockey League  MONTREAL CANADIENS -- Signed Jim Campbell, center.
COLLEGE  CLARK, MASS. -- Named Larry Mangino men's basketball coach.


For a Street Artist in Times Square, a Portrait Ends in Death


Lisa Beth Lewis, A Clown, Marries
Lisa Beth Lewis, a daughter of Dr.
Linda Burson of New York and H. Kirke Lewis of Memphis, was married yesterday in Memphis to Jeremy Randolph Kumin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald J. Kumin of Durham, N.C.
Rabbis Harry Danziger and David Scott performed the ceremony at Theater Memphis.
The bride, 24 years old, is a clown with the Clown Care Unit of the Big Apple Circus in New York.
She graduated from Brandeis University and the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &amp; Bailey Clown College in Venice, Fla.
Her father is a salesman for the Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company.
Her mother is a theatrical director and playwright.


Quote to Creditors Looks a Bit Off
What will the new Pan Am Corporation be worth?
No one knows for sure, but one view publicized last week, that of Delta Air Lines' investment bankers at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, seems to some bankers, analysts and airline executives to be inflated.
Various creditors say Goldman, Sachs advised them that the new airline would be worth 10 times its projected 1995 net earnings, or $830 million -- in 1995.
The firm was said to have arrived at that conclusion by assuming that revenues would grow about 5 percent a year, while costs would rise only 1 percent a year.
The creditors' 55 percent stake would then be worth $456 million in 1995.But upon a closer look, the valuation is generally considered high.


Announcement of Ouster
Following is the official English-language text of the statement today announcing the ouster of Mikhail S. Gorbachev as President of the Soviet Union:
*IN VIEW of Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev's inability, for health reasons, to perform the duties of the U.S.S.R.
President and of the transfer of the U.S.S.R.
President's powers, in keeping with Paragraph 7, Article 127 of the U.S.S.R.
Constitution, to U.S.S.R.
Vice President Gennady Ivanovich Yanayev,


For Cubans, 17 Days of Cheering
Anybody who has visited Cuba for the last 17 days will surely leave humming the "Himno Nacional." It was played 140 times at gold-medal ceremonies for the Pan American Games, giving this proud island bragging rights over the United States, which won 130 gold medals.
While international meets do not emphasize a national total of medals, everybody was aware of the count and could not miss the major accomplishment for an island of 10 million residents over a nation of 250 million.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Upheaval at Salomon
The Treasury Department suspended Salomon Brothers from bidding in Treasury auctions because of a widening scandal.
But hours later, the department largely reversed itself after a personal appeal to Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady by Warren E. Buffett, the new chairman and chief executive of the Wall Street firm.
Salomon, however, will be restricted to bidding only for itself and not for its clients.  [ Page A1. ]
Trading has always been a form of war at Salomon Brothers, an attitude that now threatens to destroy the firm.
Part of the problem appears to have emerged from the greed of the 1980's and changes in traders' compensation.
News Analysis.  [ A1. ]


Gerson D. Cohen Is Dead at 66; Ex-Chancellor of Jewish Seminary
Dr.
Gerson D. Cohen, chancellor emeritus of the Jewish Theological Seminary, who in 1985 ordained the first female rabbi in Conservative Judaism, died on Friday at the Hebrew Home for the Aged in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
He was 66 years old.
Dr.
Cohen died of a disease of the nervous system, according to a spokeswoman for the seminary.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7
Mikhail S. Gorbachev was apparently ousted from power by military and KGB authorities as he was on vacation in the distant Crimea.
Page A1
Soviet veterans of the Afghan war have mounted an exhibition that, for the first time, shows ordinary citizens the savagery of the 10-year conflict.
Many visitors are stunned into silence at the displays.
A5


Judge Backs Cable TV on Music Fees
In a court decision hailed by cable television officials, a Federal judge here has ruled that one of the two principal music-licensing associations cannot demand separate royalties from both cable television networks and individual cable systems.
The decision affects tens of millions of dollars in copyright payments for background music for everything from serial comedies to old movies.


GORBACHEV IS OUSTED IN AN APPARENT COUP BY SOVIET ARMED FORCES AND HARD-LINERS: ACCUSED OF STEERING INTO A 'BLIND ALLEY'
Mikhail S. Gorbachev was apparently ousted from power today by military and K.G.B. authorities while he was on vacation in the distant Crimea.
The announcement by "the Soviet leadership" came as Mr.
Gorbachev was about to proceed into a new era of power sharing with the nation's republics.
The sudden announcement this morning stunned the nation and left it groping for information as Kremlin officials declarted a state of emergency.
Coup Had Been Predicted
The apparent removal of Mr.
Gorbachev, six years into his "perestroika" reform program, came three days after his former confidant and reform adviser, Aleksandr Yakovlev, left the Communist Party, warning of a coming coup d'etat.


Metro Matters; Peoples' Defender Retains a Taste For New Causes
The news that the head of the Transit Authority had suggested cutting services in those areas not organized enough to offer opposition was no news to low-income New Yorkers, especially those who are black or Hispanic.
For years they have seen reduced services and hazardous sites in their midst -- often when communities with more political and economic clout retained services and kept those projects out of their backyards.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 19


Bluma R. Gardenberg Weds Stephen Snyder
Bluma Rivka Gardenberg, a daughter of Chana Gardenberg of Brooklyn and the late Rabbi Yehuda Gardenberg, was married yesterday to Dr.
Stephen Laurence Snyder, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gilbert Snyder of Miami.
Rabbi Jacob Frankel, an uncle of the bride, officiated at the Lincoln Square Synagogue in New York.
The bride, 31 years old and a graduate of Touro College, is a manager in New York at Andersen Consulting, an international management consulting firm.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
American Airlines, Dallas, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $165 million in pass-through certificates through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co. *
Consolidated Rail Corp., Philadelphia, has privately sold $79 million in equipment trust certificates through Merrill Lynch.
The certificates are noncallable and rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service and AA by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Stacey Schiff Is Married
Stacey Beth Schiff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon F. Schiff of New York, was married in New York last night to Daniel Andrew Kohl, the son of Allen Kohl of Beverly Hills, Calif., and Barbara Kohl-Spiro of Milwaukee.
Rabbi Morris Friedman and Cantor Chaskele Ritter performed the ceremony at the Pierre.
The bride, 25 years old, is a freelance commercial producer in Milwaukee.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
The bridegroom, 25 and a graduate of Brown University, is a law student at the University of Wisconsin at Madison.


The House's Pork-and-Tax Bill
Properly embarrassed, the House leadership has postponed action on its 1991 transportation bill until after Labor Day.
Speaker Tom Foley was aiming for a vote before the vacation break, but retreated in the face of a members' revolt against paying for pork with higher taxes.
The Public Works Committee's bill earmarks $6.3 billion for 458 "Congressional projects of national significance." That's the new euphemism for home-district programs that used to be called "demonstration projects," which itself was a euphemism for "pork barrel."


Harlan Foss, 50, Dies; An Operatic Baritone
Harlan Foss, a longtime New York City Opera baritone, died on Saturday at his in-laws' home in North Myrtle Beach, S.C.
He was 50 years old.
He died of colon cancer, said his agent, Martha Munro.


Surprise and Questions On Treasury's Retreat
The Treasury Department's unusual regulatory two-step, in which it first suspended Salomon Brothers from bidding in Treasury auctions, and then later partially lifted that ban, spurred much puzzlement among financial market observers.
The reversal came after Salomon's new chief executive, Warren E. Buffet, had talked personally to Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady.
But Treasury officials said the reasons for the back-to-back regulatory actions were actually quite straightforward.
According to a Treasury official who spoke on the condition of not being identified, the Treasury wanted to send a signal to the marketplace and to the world that behavior like Salomon's would not be tolerated.
Moreover, it wanted to get that message out before the Treasury's weekly bill auction on Monday.
Needed to Be Made Public
The Treasury also wanted to let Salomon executives know of the suspension before their morning board meeting, the Treasury official said.
While it might have been simpler just to tell Salomon executives of the threat of suspension privately, before they met -- and then wait to see what actions the board voted to take to reform the Wall Street house -- the Government officials felt strongly that such information needed to be made public.
If they risked a leak and it got out, they reasoned, it could create other problems, and possibly affect markets elsewhere, the Treasury official said.


CHRONICLE
AL TELLER, chairman of the MCA Music Entertainment Group, whose career spans the dynamic expansion of recorded contemporary music, will be honored on Sept. 4 by the Music and Entertainment Industry Chapter of the City of Hope.
GLADYS KNIGHT, STEPHANIE MILLS and JODY WATLEY are to be among the performers at the "Spirit of Life" benefit, one of Hollywood's biggest annual tribute parties, at Universal Studios Sound Stage 12 in Universal City, Calif.


How to Control Health Costs
Discontent with our system of financing health care is sweeping middle America, but most policy makers and opinion leaders, insulated by high incomes, have yet to realize it.
Most assert that incremental reform is all that is needed or possible.
But they're wrong.
Though Americans enjoy some of the highest quality health care, our method of paying for it has given us the industrialized world's highest costs and lowest coverage.


Hard Times at Auction Houses: Has the Art Market Hit Bottom?
In one week in May 1990, the Japanese industrialist Ryoel Saito paid $160 million for two paintings bought in New York: $82.5 million for van Gogh's "Portrait of Dr. Gachet" (1890) at Christie's and $78.1 million for Renoir's "At the Moulin de la Galette" (1876) at Sotheby's.
This year, by comparison, the most expensive work auctioned was Degas's "Racehorses" (1870's), which was sold for $9.7 million in June to an unidentified buyer at Christie's in London.
After five years of rapidly rising prices, the frenzied buying of art at auction is over.
Sotheby's and Christie's have gone into reverse: the two aucton houses, the world's largest, announced record declines in total sales for the season, which ends on Aug. 31.
Sotheby's is projecting a 59 percent decline in international sales, to $1.3 billion from a record $3.2 billion in 1990.
Christie's worldwide sales are expected to fall 50 percent, to $1.2 billion from $2.4 billion.


Suddenly, an Outsider Becomes 'Mr. Inside'
Deryck C. Maughan, the newly appointed chief operating officer of Salomon Brothers, began the job of Mr.
Inside yesterday in the effort to rescue the investment bank from the trading scandal that has rocked it in the last week.
As Warren E. Buffett, the interim chairman, deals with the consequences of the scandal, the investigation and the new direction of Salomon, Mr.
Maughan will be running the firm's day-to-day business.
He will do the hiring and firing.He will see that new rules governing trading, and efforts to steer Salomon's culture into safer waters, are followed.
And perhaps most important, he will have to set a tone in the management of the firm that will reassure customers and give many talented employees the will and desire to ride out the storm.


Kenyans on Informal Path to Success
Every morning during his school vacation as the sun brings the first light to the fields, 14-year-old Philip Mosima springs out of bed onto the dirt floor of his thatched room and heads off through the hills and valleys to run.
In cool, fresh air, he runs past grazing cows, on narrow red earth paths that separate small plots planted with tea and maize, brushing the green plants with his bare legs.


Pope Meets Hungarian Jews And Calls Anti-Semitism a Sin
Pope John Paul II assured Hungarian Jews today that the Roman Catholic Church considers anti-Semitism and other forms of hatred "sins against God and humanity."
He asserted that Jews had made "an essential contribution to the spiritual and cultural life of the world," and condemned "the wickedness which made you suffer."


10 Games, 10 Losses And a Long Ride Home
It was a pathetic, even pitiable perfection the Mets achieved today, but perfection it was.
There were 10 games, there were 10 losses, and there were at least 10,000 reasons why.
So the road trip to oblivion in the National League East ended the way it had begun: with a defeat without emotion, as the Mets were once more put in their place, if not out of their misery, by the Pirates in a 9-2 manhandling at Three Rivers Stadium.


Youth Held in Death Of 11-Year-Old Girl
A teen-ager was charged yesterday with shooting an 11-year-old girl to death on a city street, the police said.
Witnesses told Newburgh city police that Tykecai Johnson was sitting in front of a downtown building at about 1 A.M. when she was shot once in the face by someone in a group of teen-agers who were standing nearby.


Cancel the Crisis: Taylor Back on Feet
The best news for the Giants would have been that Lawrence Taylor was not really injured Saturday night against the Jets.
But today, the Giants got the next-best news.
Taylor's injury, a sprained right ankle, is a lot less serious than suspected, and he may be sidelined as little as two days.
There was no news on the quarterback front.
Coach Ray Handley said he had not decided whether Phil Simms or Jeff Hostetler would be the Giants' starter.
He said he planned to make that decision this week, and it appeared that Simms remained the favorite.


Market Place; The 'Baby Bells' As Godparents
AS Congress and the courts move to lift rules that prohibit the regional Bell companies from manufacturing equipment and owning information services they carry over their telephone networks, a political debate continues on whether the "Baby Bells" will squeeze out rivals or bring new vitality to the telecommunications industry.
Some investors, however, are already wondering whether such new freedoms for the Bells might lift the stock prices of potential acquisition targets.
Altogether, the Bell companies have roughly $1.4 billion in cash, and most analysts say the companies are unlikely to try to build major businesses from scratch.
Although none of the telephone companies have disclosed their plans, they have suggested that their primary interest lies less in making big purchases than in forming joint ventures with companies that have carved out lucrative niche markets.


GORBACHEV IS OUSTED IN AN APPARENT COUP BY SOVIET ARMED FORCES AND HARD-LINERS: ACCUSED OF STEERING INTO A 'BLIND ALLEY'
Mikhail S. Gorbachev was apparently ousted from power today by military and K.G.B. authorities while he was on vacation in the distant Crimea.
The announcement by "the Soviet leadership" came as Mr.
Gorbachev was about to proceed into a new era of power sharing with the nation's republics.
The sudden announcement this morning stunned the nation and left it groping for information as Kremlin officials declarted a state of emergency.
Coup Had Been Predicted
The apparent removal of Mr.
Gorbachev, six years into his "perestroika" reform program, came three days after his former confidant and reform adviser, Aleksandr Yakovlev, left the Communist Party, warning of a coming coup d'etat.


Foote, Cone Finally Lands A Vacillating Executive
FOR the second time this summer, a leading creative executive's dilatory decision-making over whether to switch advertising agencies has fascinated his industry colleagues.
And now, he, too, has made up his mind to change jobs.
Eric Weber, an executive vice president and creative director at Young &amp; Rubicam New York, is joining Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Chicago as executive creative director, effective Sept. 3.
He is expected to be elected an executive vice president at an agency board meeting soon.
The flagship office of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding had been searching for a top creative talent since December 1989, when Lou Centlivre retired after seven years in the post.


INSIDE
Storm Pounds Outer Banks  The first hurricane of the season swept North Carolina's barrier islands as it headed up the Atlantic Coast.
Roads from beach communities were jammed, and hundreds of islanders were stranded.
Page A10.


New York State Account Is Lost by Wells Rich
The New York State travel and tourism advertising account, famous for its longtime "I Love New York" slogan, is leaving its agency of 14 years, Wells Rich Greene BDDP, for McCann-Erickson New York.
"I'm disappointed, but I'm not surprised," Kenneth S. Olshan, chairman and chief executive of Wells Rich, said Friday.
Billings, which ran as high as $15 million during the campaign's heyday in the 1980's, have fallen to around $2.5 million.


Series of Scandals Have Japanese Debating if Country Has Grown Corrupt
The first trickle of scandal came last winter, with reports of a major bank arranging illegal loans for a convicted stock manipulator.
Then some respected corporations were reported to have used purchases of European paintings to launder money and evade taxes.
A torrent of additional disclosures has come in recent months.
Now the Japanese are awash in scandals involving major institutions and politicians, about a dozen arrests and billions of dollars in questionable payments and transactions.


Bridge
A Canadian team, an Australian team and two American teams were leading in the race to qualify for the playoffs in the NEC World Junior Team Championships here today.
Teams from Norway and Denmark, which were fancied to win before the start, are trailing, but could qualify with a late burst in the final three rounds.
Most unexpectedly at this stage, 10 of the 12 teams are still in contention in play at the University of Michigan.


As Science Gauges Life's Perils, More Can Be Less
Dioxin, once thought of as the most toxic chemical known, does not deserve that reputation, according to many scientists.
But electric blankets may be dangerous.
And cyclamates, banned from diet soda 21 years ago as a cancer risk, may be coming back because more recent research casts doubt on the original suspicions.
In nearly every aspect of modern life, in food, fuel, even building materials, there are ingredients suspected of causing cancer or organ damage, and the list is growing.
New threats, like catching AIDS from a doctor, arouse public concern, often far out of line with their statistical probability.
And the commonly used method to determine whether something is dangerous over long periods and in low doses is little trusted even by those who use it.


Gail Gorin Wed To David Furman
Gail Hilary Gorin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alvin Gorin of New York, was married yesterday to David James Furman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Furman of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Rabbis Robert Rothman and Daniel Mehlman officiated at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
The bride, 29 years old, is the national projects coordinator at Cap Gemini America, a computer consulting company in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Breger, Gorin &amp; Leuzzi.


America West Plans to Join Northwest in Some Services
Northwest Airlines and America West Airlines said yesterday that they had reached a broad marketing agreement that is intended to encourage passengers on one airline to use the other as well.
It will enable passengers to book flights on both airlines by calling either Northwest or America West.


Those Who Have Taken Leadership in the Kremlin
Gennadi Ivanovic Yanayev
Vice President
Appointed Vice President a year and a half ago by Mikhail S. Gorbachev. . . .
Liberals and reformers in the Party said he was a committed member of the right wing. . , .
But Mr.
Yanayev calls himself "a Communist to the depths of my soul." . . .
Born in Gorky region of Russia in 1937. . . .
Graduated from the Gorky Agricultual Institute and the All-Union Law Institute. . . .
Holds an advanced degree in history. . . .
Rose through Soviet youth groups locally and nationally until he earned a place on the Politboro in 1990. . . .
His rise to vice president disappointed reformers who had hoped for a more aggressive supporter. . . .
Many saw him and Mr.
Gorbachev as kindred spirits. . . .
Initially an active proponent of perestroika, which caused some to say Mr.
Gorbachev had found a yes man. . . .
But he told the Soviet Congress of People's Deputies, "I'm a normal guy, I assure you," and Mr.
Gorbachev pleaded, "I want someone alongside me I can trust."


While Simms Waltzes, Hostetler Boogies
Were they dancers, Phil Simms might be viewed as a classy Fred Astaire to Jeff Hostetler's more dazzling Gene Kelly; if artists, it would be the elegant Rembrandt versus the improbable Picasso; if generals, it would be the stately Lee and the earthier Grant, and in victuals, it would be Simms's solid potato to Hostetler's flashier tomato.
Each in his time and place, each worthy on their merits, and each difficult to choose one over the other.
Which is the situation that the Giants' rookie head coach, Ray Handley, found himself in before the Giants' pre-season game against the Jets in the Meadowlands on Saturday night.
Both Simms, more of a stay-at-home and in-the-pocket player, and Hostetler, the intrepid voyager, are superb quarterbacks, and with track records to prove it.
But the team can have just one starting quarterback and Handley will soon have to decide whom it will be.


Battery Park City Journal; Box Steps in the Sunset, And Suddenly, It's 1941
There was no moon hanging over the Hudson the other night, but that must have been the only bit of romance missing.
The sun had just set, casting a rosy spell over the warehouses of Jersey City.
A moth flitted through a spotlight.
And the Count Basie Orchestra played a serenade beside the water.
It was a night for fantasy.
As a breeze lofted slow strains of saxophone over the river, Kenneth Sheldon, 65 years old, leaned in close to his wife, Linda, and sang in her ear as they danced on their 37th wedding anniversary.
"It's wonderful. The best," Mrs. Sheldon said. "If not Paris, here."


Travel Agents for Troubled Lands
Since Kompas International Inc. opened in the United States in 1975, the Yugoslav-owned travel agency has done a brisk business in booking tourists to resorts on the Adriatic.
But with age-old hatreds between the Serbs and the Croats now threatening to plunge Yugoslavia into civil war, frightened Americans are staying away in droves.
"Some groups have canceled, and since the beginning of July no tourists or vacationers from the States have said they want to go there," said Zeljko Basica, the director of Kompas, with offices in New York and Los Angeles.


At the New York Film Festival, Works on Art
"What delighted me and my colleagues is that we found a number of films by directors whose work has previously been seen at the festival but who are now showing a new side, giving a little more of themselves."
Richard Pena, the chairman of the selection committee of the New York Film Festival and the program director of the Film Society of Lincoln Center, which sponsors the festival, was discussing what will be new at festival this year.


World Economies


Corrections
An article last Monday about the restoration of the Guggenheim Museum omitted the name of the architectural firm for the project.
It is Gwathmey Siegel &amp; Associates, which also designed the annex.


Health Care Issue Dominates Governors' Meeting
The nation's governors assailed the state of the American health care system here this weekend, asserting that it costs too much, leaves millions of Americans uninsured and is placing the states in a fiscal vise.
The annual summer meeting of the National Governors' Association was dominated by the health care issue, which many governors asserted was draining more and more state money that would otherwise go toward education, housing, nutrition and other needs.


Mitchell Ohlbaum and Jennifer Dion Are Married
Jennifer Dion, the daughter of Sandra Dion of Hollywood, Fla., and Karl Horwitz of Paris, was married yesterday in Branford, Conn., to Mitchell Ohlbaum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Emerich Ohlbaum of West Hartford, Conn.
Rabbi Haskell Lindenthal performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Kevin Coady.
The bride, 26 years old, is a movie and and television producer in Connecticut and New York.
She graduated from the University of Arizona.
Her father is the president for international operations of The New York Times Syndication Sales Corporation in Paris.
Her mother is a biologist and a science teacher at North Miami Senior High School.


Treasury Is Selling Only Bills This Week
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings for this week is confined to the bill market, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three-month and six-month bills.
The Treasury will hold an auction of new one-year bills on Thursday.
By late in the day Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.24 percent and the six-month bill was bid at 5.29 percent.
The one-year bill was at 5.31 percent.


Quotation of the Day
"I'm trying to get a vacation here." -- President Bush, refusing to meet with anti-abortion officials in Kennebunkport.  [ A11:1. ]


Gunman Shoots 2 In Crowd on Street
A 26-year-old man and a 13-year-old boy were both shot in the stomach yesterday by a gunman who fired into a crowd on a Brooklyn street corner, the police said.
The man, David Simancis of 363 55th Street in Brooklyn, was treated and released from Lutheran Hospital, the police said.
The boy, whose name was not released, was listed in stable condition at the same hospital.


Such Is War at Salomon
At Salomon Brothers, trading has always been a form of war in which the opponent is entitled to no pity and the rules are viewed as impediments.
Now that attitude threatens to destroy the firm.
Just how this situation developed is not completely clear.
Part of the answer may be in a change in the corporate culture of the big Wall Street firm, where the greed of the 1980's led to an attitude of looking out for No. 1.


New Delhi Journal; Bereft of Dancing Bear, A Master Feels Abused
It is not so much by miles and minutes that distances in this city are measured, but by caste, cash and connections.
By this yardstick, traveling from the fetid alleyways and mud huts of Pandav Nagar to the domed chambers of the nation's Supreme Court is not a simple taxi ride, but a journey of absurd fantasy.
Hassan Deen began that journey last year, after his bear was abruptly seized during a performance in front of several hundred people.
His trek has yet to end.


Katherine Dunham's Mission: Giving Children a Gift of Dance
The summer heat bears down on a scrubby lawn in East St.
Louis, a small desolated city on the banks of the Mississippi River that has become a national symbol of poverty and despair.
But the air also throbs with excitement and pride as the young dancers of the Katherine Dunham Children's Workshop here expertly move through pieces in a wide variety of styles.
Well-schooled, they dance with a rare expansiveness and joy.
All are black and what the world calls disadvantaged.
But each is a member of an elect group.
Each is a dancer, moving across the makeshift stage of the workshop with an easy, gracious consciousness of self.


Vouchers for Homeless Only Lessen Our Guilt; Just the Rats
To the Editor:
Last month New York City officials directed a major police effort to remove a large group of homeless people who inhabited Columbus Circle with their cardboard shelters and makeshift bookselling stalls.
Residents of the area were assured that a restaurant facility was coming.


The New Pan Am Rumbas Ahead
One of the first things Pan Am did after it got court permission last week to sell its trans-Atlantic routes and Northeast shuttle to Delta Air Lines and to reorganize as a Latin American carrier was to slash its prices 25 percent on tickets to many popular destinations.
"I call it our 'staying in business' sale," said Thomas G. Plaskett, chairman of Pan American World Airways.


Preseason Blues: 0-3 Jets Show a Talent for Losing
After the Jets' 24-10 loss to the Giants in their third game of the 1991 preseason, the coaching staff must be wondering if the team's lack of execution is tied to a lack of concentration or a lack of ability.
The former could be corrected in the two weeks before the Jets' regular-season opener against Tampa Bay.
The latter would be far more troubling, and difficult to fix.
Which is the correct answer?
The Jets have one more exhibition game -- against Washington in Columbia, S.C., next Saturday -- to find out.


Economic Calendar Listed below are this week's scheduled release dates for major economic indicators. Monday None Tuesday None Wednesday Budget Deficit...July Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims Friday Durable Goods...June 10-Day Auto Sales...Mid-August


Seth Farber Wed to Patricia Matthews
Patricia Allyn Matthews, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman S. Matthews of Purchase, N.Y., was married at her parents' home yesterday to Seth Charles Farber, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Seymour Farber of San Francisco.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree and a doctorate in educational administration from Harvard University.
Her father is a retail consultant in New York.


A.C.L.U. to Remain Neutral On Nomination of Thomas
The American Civil Liberties Union will remain neutral on the nomination of Judge Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
An effort by members to oppose the nomination fell short by a single vote.
On Saturday, a motion to oppose the nomination was approved by 36 to 25, one vote short of the 60 percent majority required under the organization's guidelines to take a position.


Police Witness Shooting and Arrest Suspect
Two police officers on patrol in the Bronx saw two men shoot and kill a third man in front of a grocery store yesterday, and later arrested one of the suspects after a brief chase, the police said.
The shooting occurred at 2055 Anthony Avenue in the Tremont section about 5:30 P.M. as the two officers were driving by in their squad car, said Sgt.
Nick Vreeland, a police spokesman.


Phone Call for Mr. Gay, Mr. Ben Gay
DAN QUINDAZZI isn't looking for MICHAEL JORDAN numbers.
He doesn't expect a seven-figure deal to wear Nikes.
But he's hoping that athletic skills of competitors of a certain age are worth
something
.
Quindazzi is a 55-year-old who finished second in tennis and in cycling at this year's Connecticut Senior Games (he was one day too young to be eligible for the comparable national event).
The Bethel resident said ruefully, "There are 63 million people out there who are 50 or over -- and none of us is earning endorsement money."


Muscovites Glimpse Afghan War's Brutality
Two years after the last Soviet soldiers left Afghanistan, the Afghan war has finally come home to Moscow.
In a hall near the Kremlin, war veterans and their supporters have mounted an exhibition that, for the first time, shows ordinary citizens the savagery of the 10-year conflict.
Most visitors are stunned into silence as soon as they arrive, and some weep openly as they gape at the stark displays.


R. E. Lipson Wed To Ms. Eckstein
Felicia Ann Eckstein, a daughter of Mrs.
Otto Eckstein of Lexington, Mass., and the late Mr.
Eckstein, was married yesterday to Robert Eliot Lipson, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Charles Lipson of Newton, Mass.
Rabbi Cary Yales performed the ceremony at Temple Isaiah in Lexington.
The bride, 28 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a marketing manager at the American Express Travel Related Services Company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, from which she also received an M.B.A..
Her father was an economics professor at Harvard.


Laws Improve Access to Mammography Tests, but Not for All Women
Over the past four years, 37 states and the District of Columbia have passed laws requiring insurers to pay for or offer screening tests for breast cancer.
But thousands of women, particularly those who do not have health insurance, are not covered for such tests.
Last month, the New Jersey Legislature became the latest state body to adopt a measure requiring insurers to pay for a screening mammography, the X-ray procedure that can detect a tumor in a woman's breast.
The New Jersey bill was opposed for two years by some business groups and insurers who agreed that mammograms could save lives but argued that they should not be forced to pay for them.


Nathalie Jeger Is Married
Nathalie Jeger, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David Jeger of Antwerp, Belgium, was married yesterday in Washington to Salvador Alexander Litvak, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Agustin Litvak of Bethesda, Md.
Rabbi Jonathan Z. Maltzman performed the ceremony at the Mayflower Hotel.
The bride, 27 years old, is a lawyer.
She received a law degree from the Universitaire Instelling Antwerpen and, in May, a master's degree in law from New York University.
Mr.
Litvak, 26, is an associate in the New York law office of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
He graduated from Harvard University and received a law degree from N.Y.U.


Thompson to Develop Campaign for H.U.D.
The Federal Government has awarded J. Walter Thompson Atlanta a new advertising account intended to help turn houses back into homes.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development has selected the agency to handle its sales program for single-family houses.
Thompson Atlanta will create advertising, marketing and promotional campaigns, both national and regional, to sell properties that H.U.D. has acquired through foreclosures of federally insured home mortgages.


Barbara Mooney Married
Barbara Mooney, a daughter of Evelyn Mooney of Wayne, N.J., and the late William Mooney, was married yesterday at the Whitehall Club in New York to Jonathan Sommer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Faber of Boca Raton, Fla.
Rabbi Charles Lippman officiated.
The bride, is the grant program manager at the Louis Calder Foundation in New York.
The bridegroom, is a senior financial analyst at Merrill Lynch in New York.


Little League Moms Earn Recognition
It used to be fashionable to put down Little League mothers for pushing their youngsters.
But several years ago, at a White House ceremony, BARBARA BUSHtold the head of Little League that this sort of mother doesn't get the recognition she deserves.
That led to a Little League Baseball Mom of the Year Award, with moms nominated by their sons and daughters.
The first winner will be announced tomorrow.


Review/Television; He Watches TV Sports; She Eyes Another Sport
In "Crazy From the Heart," tonight's television movie at 8 on TNT, Christine Lahti plays a high-school principal in Tidewater, Tex., who finds herself spinning into spinsterhood because her longtime boyfriend, Coach Dewey Whitcomb (William Russ), is too busy watching sports on television to propose.
The appearance of a new and very obliging school janitor, Ernesto Ontiveros (Ruben Blades), peps up her sex life but threatens her career, since the Tidewater Establishment does not encourage intergroup intimacies.
Despite the presence of a bigoted school-board member who comes on like the wicked witch of the Southwest, "Crazy From the Heart" is saved from being a tract by Linda Voorhees's lighthearted script and the equally light touch of the director, Thomas Schlamme.
The students in the background are generally doing something amusing, and the supporting characters are agreeably eccentric.
Ernesto's father (Tommy Muniz) has a habit of setting fire to billboards that picture Hispanic people drinking and smoking, and Mr.
Russ's Coach Dewey is a joke on jocks.


Vouchers for Homeless Only Lessen Our Guilt
To the Editor:
The new voucher program for panhandlers in Berkeley, Calif. (news article, July 26), may have some things going for it, but separating hustlers from the homeless isn't one of them.
Granted, it's an old problem: how to insure "tamper-resistant" aid that meets only basic needs and provides no disincentive to work for those who can.
The answer has been to make formal relief so onerous or degrading that people will turn to any means of surviving on their own.
The rub is that humiliation is a less-than-discriminating sieve.


CHRONICLE
VARTAN GREGORIAN, president of Brown University, is expected to announce today, on what would have been the 72d birthday of his friend Malcolm S. Forbes, that Brown's Center for Modern Culture and Media will be named in honor of the publisher, who died in March.
"A center devoted to the analysis of media in modern culture is a perfectly fitting memorial to the life and work of Malcolm Forbes," Mr.
Gregorian said.
The center, with three full-time faculty members and nine others from other academic departments, will be supported in part by a $2 million endowment from the Forbes Foundation of New York City and private donations.
The foundation gift was announced by TIMOTHY C. FORBES, a son of the publisher, who is the president of American Heritage magazine and a 1976 graduate of Brown.


Review/Dance; Pilar Rioja in 2 Styles Of a Spanish Art Form
Pilar Rioja has carved a solid place for herself in the dance life of New York City, serving as a model of what many dancegoers think Spanish dancing ought to be.
Her audience at a gala performance on Thursday night at the cozy Gramercy Arts Theater (138 East 27th Street), where Miss Rioja performs through Sept. 2, responded to her like eager, loyal students to a beloved teacher.
Indeed, the charismatic performer's new program is a clear exposition in dance and in words, in an accompanying anecdotal lecture by Robert Federico, of two styles of Spanish dance.
The first half of the program is devoted to "bailes estilizados," or dances created for the stage, incorporating elements of traditional folk, classic and flamenco dancing.
In the second half, Miss Rioja performed an alegrias, a solea and a farruca with the grave, cool passion and technical skill for which she is known, and with an intriguingly new, harder and more biting attack.


Letter: On NASA; Space Station's Mission Isn't Science
To the Editor:
"NASA's Untouchable Folly" (editorial, July 14) speculates on a long list of what the space station Freedom won't do, but avoids mentioning what it will do.


Those Who Have Taken Leadership in the Kremlin
Gennadi Ivanovic Yanayev Vice President


Hard Times at Auction Houses: Has the Art Market Hit Bottom?
In one week in May 1990, the Japanese industrialist Ryoel Saito paid $160 million for two paintings bought in New York: $82.5 million for van Gogh's "Portrait of Dr. Gachet" (1890) at Christie's and $78.1 million for Renoir's "At the Moulin de la Galette" (1876) at Sotheby's.
This year, by comparison, the most expensive work auctioned was Degas's "Racehorses" (1870's), which was sold for $9.7 million in June to an unidentified buyer at Christie's in London.
After five years of rapidly rising prices, the frenzied buying of art at auction is over.
Sotheby's and Christie's have gone into reverse: the two aucton houses, the world's largest, announced record declines in total sales for the season, which ends on Aug. 31.
Sotheby's is projecting a 59 percent decline in international sales, to $1.3 billion from a record $3.2 billion in 1990.
Christie's worldwide sales are expected to fall 50 percent, to $1.2 billion from $2.4 billion.


A Smart Start in Haiti
The impossible keeps happening in Haiti.
The long dictatorship, too entrenched to be ousted, is gone.
The people too poor to care about a democracy have created one.
And now the President too radical to avoid destructive confrontations has completed six solid months in office.
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide once electrified audiences with his blasts at American neocolonialism and angry attacks on the lending policies of the International Monetary Fund.
He excoriated military leaders for their complicity with the old regime.
And he promised that if he were elected, he would propel a popular tidal wave of revolutionary change.


Shift at Macy Is Reported
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company is planning a reorganization of its department store divisions, retailing executives inside and outside the company said yesterday.
They said the Macy's South operating division, based in Atlanta and including Bullock's, would be eliminated.
Bullock's, a West Coast chain that Macy acquired from Federated Department Stores Inc., would report to San Francisco-based Macy's California, while Macy's stores in the Southeast and Texas would report to New York- based Macy's Northeast.


Disruption Of Bonds Is Doubted
The Treasury Department's curious handling of the way Salomon Brothers operates in the government securities market will probably have little influence on the future course of interest rates, credit market analysts and Wall Street executives said yesterday.
Indeed, while the Treasury's disciplinary action is likely to be a big topic of conversation this week, traders said any movement in bond yields was more likely to be precipitated by the Federal Reserve, whose policy-making Open Market Committee is expected to meet in Washington tomorrow.


Shall Last Be First? Braves Are Hoping
Something is wrong with this picture: September is close and so are the Atlanta Braves.
The season has come down to its final seven weeks, but the Braves, who in recent years seemed to take a lease on last place, haven't wilted yet.
As the week begins, the Braves are just a winning streak away from catching the Los Angeles Dodgers in the National League West, which suddenly has a race as tight and tense as any in baseball.


HIV-Positive Pharmacist Fights Job Limits
He is not a surgeon, not a dentist, not a nurse.
He is a pharmacist who is infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
He says his condition could not possibly endanger the patients he would like to prepare drugs for at a Westchester hospital -- and the Federal Government, entering a long court dispute, now agrees.
So far, the national debate on health-care workers with AIDS has centered on surgery or dentistry -- invasive procedures in which the potential for contact between clean blood and infected blood is greatest.


LaFontaine's Agent and Torrey to Meet
Don Meehan, the agent for Pat LaFontaine of the Islanders, says he expects to meet early this week with Bill Torrey, the general manager of the Islanders, to discuss a possible new contract for LaFontaine.
LaFontaine has demanded a trade unless the team is sold.
The current owner, John D. Pickett, has been trying to sell the franchise since early this year.
Meehan said over the weekend that he believes a sale of the Islanders is imminent.


Robin S. Gottlieb, Teacher, Is Wed
Robin Sharon Gottlieb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Gottlieb of Flushing, Queens, was married yesterday to Wayne Harris Goldstein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin I. Goldstein of Atlanta.
Rabbis Mordecai Efron and Arnold Goodman officiated at Temple Judea in Manhasset, L.I.
Mrs.
Goldstein, 27 years old, is a science teacher at the Bromfield School in Harvard, Mass.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and received a master's degree in teaching from Boston University.
Her father is the president of David's Outfitters Inc., a men's clothing company in New York.


Washington at Work; Democrat's Invisible Man Specializes In Making Inequity to Poor Easy to See
Few things give Wendell Primus as much pleasure as a bar chart that looks like this:
Few things in recent years have given the Republican Party more grief.


Donna Dikman Wed To Eric O. Dubinsky
Donna Karen Dikman and Eric Ophir Dubinsky were married yesterday at Temple Beth-El in Great Neck, L.I., by Rabbi Abraham B. Eckstein.
The bride, 26 years old, is the daughter of Priscilla Dikman of Bayside, Queens, and Michael Dikman of Roslyn, L.I.
The bridegroom, 29, is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eli Dubinsky of Merrick, L.I.
Mrs.
Dubinsky is an associate in the law firm of Dikman, Dikman &amp; Botter in Jamaica, Queens, of which her father is a partner.
Her grandfather, a former judge of Family Court in Queens, is the senior partner in the law firm.
She graduated from St.
John's University and received a law degree from Hofstra University.


Child-Abuse Case Is Ordeal for a Town
More than two years since charges of sexual abuse at a day-care center rocked this town to its historic roots, the first of seven defendants is to go on trial Monday.
The case of the Little Rascals Day Care Center will test anew the courts' ability to deal with the testimony of children.
It will raise questions of pros ecutorial zealousness and the influence of the news media.
And it will test the fragile emotions of Edenton, a town of striking 18th-century houses on the shores of the choppy waters of Albemarle Sound; nearly every one of the 6,000 citizens has been forced to take a side.


Salomon's Remaining Challenges
Warren E. Buffett quickly proved himself a hero yesterday, shortly after his formal confirmation as chairman and chief executive at Salomon Brothers, by managing to persuade the Treasury Department to partially reverse its decision to suspend Salomon from participating in the auctions for Treasury securities.
But as Mr.
Buffett himself said, there clearly is a lot more to do.
He must reassure clients.
He must appoint new managers.
He must quickly project a new image of absolute integrity for the firm.
But perhaps the most important task -- and the most daunting -- he faces is trying to change the hell-bent-for-leather corporate culture of Wall Street's premier trading powerhouse.
Must Be Above Reproach
Mr.
Buffett is already well into the process of trying to contain damage from the scandal, but as he indicated to the firm's executives on Friday, Salomon's way of doing business will henceforth have to be beyond reproach.
Activities that fall just within the rules, Mr.
Buffett has made clear, will no longer be tolerated, and a renewed respect for regulatory authority must be injected into Salomon's corporate culture.


Question Box
Last to Integrate
Q.
Which were the last baseball teams in each league to have a black play for them for the first time?


Dividend Meetings


Happy Land Jurors Rehear Testimony of Doctors
Jurors in the Happy Land mass murder trial recessed without reaching a verdict shortly before 9 P.M. yesterday after rehearing testimony about the mental condition of the defendant.
The 12 jurors heard the testimony of three psychologists and one psychiatrist who were called as expert witnesses by the prosecution and defense.


U.S. Jumper Mingles In Very High Places
Maybe the first time Charles Austin knew he had an aptitude for high jumping was late in his senior year in high school when several friends prodded him to join the track and field team.
At the tryout, he cleared the bar easily at 6 feet.
Wearing street clothes.
That was little more than five years ago.


Bush Monitors 'Serious Situation' As U.S. Scrambles for Information
President Bush was caught by surprise today by reports of the ouster of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and was closely monitoring the "serious situation," a White House official said.
Mr.
Bush was informed of the dramatic change by Brent Scowcroft, the White House national security adviser, who learned of the announcement through news reports.


Neighborhood Politics: Choosing the Council - An occasional look at the races for New York's new City Council; Varied Interests Vie to Represent Brooklyn District
Hussein Jaber, a Palestinian who moved from Jerusalem to Brooklyn 12 years ago, has creatively adapted himself to life in Sunset Park -- one of New York City's most ethnically diverse neighborhoods -- by hanging a sign in his bodega's window, which caters to the area's large Hispanic population, saying "Mexican grocery."
A few blocks to the north, along Eighth Avenue, a thriving community of recent immigrants from China have created New York's newest Chinatown, replete with dim-sum restaurants, Asian groceries and -- merchants uneasily acknowledge -- Chinese and Vietnamese gangs bent on extortion.


Katherine Dunham's Mission: Giving Children a Gift of Dance
The summer heat bears down on a scrubby lawn in East St.
Louis, a small desolated city on the banks of the Mississippi River that has become a national symbol of poverty and despair.
But the air also throbs with excitement and pride as the young dancers of the Katherine Dunham Children's Workshop here expertly move through pieces in a wide variety of styles.
Well-schooled, they dance with a rare expansiveness and joy.
All are black and what the world calls disadvantaged.
But each is a member of an elect group.
Each is a dancer, moving across the makeshift stage of the workshop with an easy, gracious consciousness of self.


Vouchers for Homeless Only Lessen Our Guilt; 90,000 in New York
To the Editor:
In a July 30 news article you suggest that New York City's seemingly intractable problems, including poverty and homelessness, are beginning to abate.
Nothing could be further from the truth.


With New Talks Near, Cypriots Wonder How the Divide Can Be Bridged
In the quiet no man's land between the feuding Greek and Turkish Cypriots, the sandbags and barbed-wire fences loom like images from the cold war, a mean place of rival flags and minefields that have partitioned this island nation for 17 years.
But in the flurry of diplomatic activity that has followed the end of the Persian Gulf war, Muslim Turks and Christian Greeks are cautiously measuring whether the time has come to heal old wounds and reunite the broken halves of Cyprus.


Salomon Is Punished by Treasury, Which Partly Relents Hours Later
In an extraordinary action, the Treasury Department yesterday suspended Salomon Brothers Inc., one of Wall Street's biggest trading and investment houses, from bidding in Treasury auctions, because of the scandal involving the firm's illegal bidding in that market.
But hours later, the department partly reversed itself after a personal appeal to Nicholas F. Brady, the Treasury Secretary, by Warren E. Buffett, who was named chairman and chief executive of the scandal-torn firm at a dramatic board meeting yesterday.


Equity Issues This Week
BMC West Corp., 1.9 million common shares.
Salomon Brothers.
EZCORP Inc., 1.8 million common shares.
Kidder, Peabody.


Faltering Mexican Opposition Back on Defensive
Three years after their stunning gains moved President Carlos Salinas de Gortari to declare an end to the era of one-party control in Mexico, the country's opposition parties went into mid-term elections today with slim hopes.
While the rightist opposition has struggled and that on the left has splintered and lost ground, the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party has capitalized on the success of Mr.
Salinas's market-oriented economic policies to reassert its political dominance.


More Yugoslavs Roll Into Croatia; Civilian Leader Ponders His Role
Tanks and reinforcements from the Yugoslav national army crossed a river into the republic of Croatia today, joining troops massing in an area where ethnic Serbian rebels are fighting for unchallenged control.
Yugoslav leaders discussed the continuing clashes at a meeting Saturday, and the chairman of the nation's collective presidency, Stipe Mesic of Croatia, threatened to step down if a firm truce were not reached in his republic, which has declared its independence.


The Secret of Cuba's Sports Success? Spot the Children Who Are Athletes
For the last two decades, Cuba has been that crushing left hook that United States athletes have always been wary of.
While the other Caribbean nations cannot begin to compete with the United States' amateur sports machine, Cuba, an island with 10 million inhabitants, has become the United States' chief rival in the Americas in boxing, baseball, volleyball and weight lifting.
Now, Cuba is beginning to focus on fencing and rowing.


Mothers of Gulf War Victims Gather in Queens


RESULTS PLUS
AUTO RACING Jarrett Nips Allison Dale Jarrett beat Davey Allison by eight inches in a dramatic side-by-side battle of Nascar racers yesterday in the Champion Spark Plug 400 in Brooklyn, Mich., for his first Winston Cup victory.
Jarrett took the lead in the pits during a caution period on lap 188 of the 200-lap event at Michigan International Speedway when he got only gas while the rest of the leaders had either two or four tires changed.
The winner, who earned $74,150, averaged 139.887 m.p.h. (AP)


Eiland and Johnson Bring Another Unhappy Day in Youth Movement
Dave Eiland recently complained that people were omitting him when they discussed the Yankees' young pitchers.
"I'm not a 30-year-old on the way down," the 25-year-old said.
"I'm part of the youth movement."
Eiland showed yesterday that he fits right in with the other young pitchers in a general skid, teaming with one of them, Jeff Johnson, in pitching the Yankees to an 11-3 loss to the Chicago White Sox.


Unlikely Eden
Among the many reasons to go to a New York City greenmarket is one that has nothing to do with buying tomatoes fresh from the vine, or sweet corn with still-silken tassels and swollen kernels.
This one has to do with seeing, and sniffing.
It's a pleasure to see squash blossoms and tiny courgettes and baby Asian corn in a city of hard edges.
It's a pleasure to sniff coriander and young garlic buds and rubrum lilies in the midst of asphalt and exhaust and urine.
But an even greater pleasure lies in witnessing what ordinary city dwellers do with a tiny patch of earth.


Newspapers See a Threat Of Spreading Sales Taxes
AFTER being largely exempt from sales taxes on circulation, newspapers and magazines have come under mounting pressure from state legislatures looking for new revenues to balance budgets ravaged by the recession.
In July, California repealed its long-established exemption on sales taxes for all periodicals, which means newspapers and magazines must now pay up to 8.25 percent in taxes on circulation revenues, plus bear the added administrative costs involved with such a tax.


Reviews/Television; Dance Produced Just for the Camera
This summer's edition of the Alive From Off Center series of dance programs is focusing on work produced especially for the camera.
The differences in the way each film maker sees the dance before him and the way the choreographers have adapted their pieces are intriguing.
The first installment of the six-week series can be seen tonight and the second tomorrow night.
The first program, on Susan Marshall and Dinizulu, will be shown tonight at 9:30 on WNYC, Channel 31.
The second, "Roseland," will be on Channel 13 at 11 P.M. tomorrow.
"Roseland" is the work of Wim Vandekeybus, a Belgian choreographer who is a hot item on the new-dance circuit these days, and the video makers Octavio Iturbe and Walter Verdin.
The half-hour dance, performed to a percussive score by Thierry de Mey and Peter Vermeersch, takes its title from a rundown old ballroom of the same name in Brussels and is based on three stage pieces: "What the Body Does Not Remember," "The Bearers of Bad News" and "The Weight of a Hand." (A new work by Mr. Vandekeybus called "Always the Same Lies," which incorporates film projections, will be performed in November at the Next Wave festival of the Brooklyn Academy of Music.)


Reservists Answered the Call of Duty
To the Editor:
"Why Is Congress Scared of the Reserves?" (Op-Ed, Aug. 5) by Don M. Snider is inaccurate and misleading.
As commander of a United States Army Reserve unit, the 300th Field Hospital, Ashley, Pa., I brought a wealth of medical, surgical and nursing talent to the Saudi Arabian theater that was far superior to any active-duty unit.
In a single hospital unit we could boast having the heads of the departments of trauma surgery at Yale, Hahnemann University and Community Medical Center, Scranton, Pa.; a prominent infectious-disease consultant, as well as numerous other outstanding specialists in surgery, medicine, anesthesia and nursing from across the country.


Those Who Have Taken Leadership in the Kremlin
Gennadi Ivanovic Yanayev Vice President


Ms. Ruoff Is Wed To Merrill Freund
Jessica Lynn Ruoff, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl E. Ruoff of Shady, N.Y., was married yesterday at her parents' home to Merrill Jason Freund, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Freund of Port Washington, L.I.
Rabbi Jonathan Eichorn officiated.
The bride and bridegroom, both 27 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., in 1986.
Mrs.
Freund received a master's degree in engineering telecommunications from the University of Colorado at Boulder, where the bridegroom is completing studies for the same degree.


Coach Is Headed for Hall
After a long day studying, Yeshiva University basketball players of the 1940's, 1950's and 1960's didn't always have time for chalk-talks.
So BERNARD (RED) SARACHEK, who coached at the school for most of those decades, often instructed his players on the subway as they rode to games.


Books of The Times; Nostalgic Look at TV News by One Who Knows
Out of Thin Air The Brief Wonderful Life of Network News By Reuven Frank 415 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.95.
When NBC announced earlier this month that it had reached an agreement with PBS to combine staffs to cover the 1992 political conventions, Reuven Frank should have permitted himself a grin of satisfaction.
He was in the right place at the right time again.


Hypocrisies Abound in the Plight of Pee-wee Herman
To the Editor:
While I enjoyed "Babes in Toyland," Anna Quindlen's humorous July 31 column about the problems of parents of children who admire Pee-wee Herman, I believe that Mr.
Herman's plight provokes serious thought about American society, its values and our civil liberties.


Details Magazine Seeks a Market Outside of Downtown
These days, Details magazine is trying to steer clear of articles on heavy petting, facts about sexual organs and how to make appropriate conversation during sex.
Abrasive photographs, like one of an electric chair victim's scorched scalp, have also been banned.


Ms. DeLuca Wed to Alessandro Soldi
Francine DeLuca, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Frank DeLuca of Barrington, R.I., was married yesterday in Providence, R.I., to Alessandro Soldi, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Volmaro Soldi of Florence.
The Rev.
Henry J. Bodah, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Manning Chapel at Brown University.
The bride, 29 years old, is the program coordinator in Florence for the foreign study program of the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York.
She is a graduate of Brown.
Her father is the chief of pediatric surgery at Rhode Island Hospital in Providence.
Her mother, Joyce DeLuca, is the owner of the Barrington Early Learning Center.


Accounts
*
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment banking firm, to Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York, for its advertising account.
Billings were not disclosed.
The agency said the account was previously handled by Brouillard Communications, New York.


CHRONICLE
A spirit of internationalism and social protest filled the World Financial Center Plaza overlooking New York Harbor on Sunday as 10,000 people showed up for a concert by MIRIAM MAKEBA, the singer, and DIZZY GILLESPIE, the trumpeter.
It was the last stop on a 22-city tour of Europe and the United States that began April 15 in Paris.
"Help me buy a house in South Africa again," Ms.
Makeba, 59 years old, laughingly told her audience.
"I don't have a home there anymore." She returned to her native country last year after 31 years after banishment for her opposition to apartheid, and is planning to make her home there again.


Yer Out! For 3 Days
JACK McDOWELL, the Chicago White Sox pitcher, lost his appeal yesterday to have his three-game suspension and $1,000 fine lifted.
Dr.
BOBBY BROWN, the American League president, who had listened to McDowell's appeal last Friday, let the penalties stand.


Dollar Increases Sharply; Gold Also Moves Upward
The dollar soared in wild foreign-exchange trading yesterday, reflecting a surge in demand for the safe-haven currency on news that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union had been overthrown.
The dollar's rise came despite heavy intervention by several central banks, which sold dollars to contain the currency's strength.
The United States currency's increase was especially sharp against the German mark, because Germany is seen as the Western nation most vulnerable to Soviet political and economic upheaval.


'Midsummer' Derby Clouds View
The moral, learned again in the $1 million Travers Stakes: You can lead a horse to the post, but you can't necessarily make him run.
They led some of the finest 3-year-old colts in the country to the post Saturday for a race known as the "midsummer Kentucky Derby." Five of the colts were old rivals from the Derby, still contending for the year's highest honors.


Under the Heel -- for Now
Today, Mikhail Gorbachev was to sign a new union treaty with the presidents of major republics.
Its text has not been released yet but it was known to transfer much authority from the central organs of the Communist Party and Soviet state to institutions in those republics.
But the most reactionary elements in the Communist leadership -- die-hards of the party nomenklatura, army and K.G.B. -- pre-empted the event with a coup.
These elements had at first approved of Mr.
Gorbachev's reforms because they promised to revitalize the country's economy and, by so doing, renovate the armed forces, the mainstay of the regime.
But perestroika turned out to be more than they had bargained for.
To energize the economy Mr.
Gorbachev had to restore freedom of speech; freedom of speech led to the emergence of public opinion and the formation of political parties.


BUSINESS DIGEST
A Jolt From Moscow
The world's financial markets reacted quickly and sharply to Gorbachev's ouster, with stock markets around the world falling as much as 9 percent.  [ Page D1. ]  U.S. stocks plummeted, with the Dow losing 69.99, to 2,898.03, its largest drop since the early days of the Kuwait crisis.
Defying the trend were military equipment stocks and oil shares.  [ D7. ]  The dollar soared in wild trading, reflecting a surge in demand for a safe currency.
The dollar's rise came despite heavy intervention by several central banks.  [ D16. ]


A Software Innovator Moves Into a New Niche
Frank Dodge, a software pioneer who became the odd-man out after the company he started and ran for 20 years merged, is back at work.
Eighteen months after leaving Dun &amp; Bradstreet Software in anger, Mr.
Dodge is starting a new company, called the Dodge Group, which will be based in Waltham, Mass.
The new company will focus on building financial software to run on networks of desktop computers in what is called the "client/server" environment.
This market, Mr.
Dodge said, is just unfolding but has the potential to grow to several billion dollars in a short time.
The idea is to provide software to corporate users who have powerful desktop computers hooked to larger computers, called servers, which send and receive data on a network.


Mandate Health Warning in Alcohol Ads
To the Editor:
In response to the Aug. 1 letter by Stephen K. Lambright of Anheuser-Busch Companies about health warnings in alcoholic beverage advertisements, let me share a few facts.


Bonn Warns of Aid Cut; Former Bloc Is Shaken
A shaken Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany warned today that Western aid to the Soviet Union would end if the new Government there violated human rights or abandoned Mikhail S. Gorbachev's "policy of democratization and reform."
In the formerly Communist nations of Eastern Europe, clearly stunned government leaders insisted that they would not be deterred from their policies of liberalization.


Say Goodbye To Glasnost Ad Themes
SINCE 1988, advertising agencies have eagerly sought to capitalize on the good will that Mikhail S. Gorbachev's policy of glasnost generated in the West.
But that could all be over with news of Mr.
Gorbachev's ouster.
Scores of print and broadcast campaigns for consumer-products giants like Pepsico, McDonald's, Nestle and General Electric saluted Mr.
Gorbachev as well as improved relations with the Soviet Union and the East bloc's move toward democracy.


Student Flunks Out And Dies in Plunge
A 22-year-old Asian student apparently jumped to his death from his sixth-floor apartment yesterday after learning that he had flunked out of the Columbia University School of Engineering, the police said.
The student, identified as Myeng Soek Oh of 545 West 111th Street, was last seen alive by his roommate at 1 P.M.
His body was found on the sidewalk in front of the apartment building at 3:20 P.M., said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McGinnis.


Jeffries Shows Strain
Speculation over trades and personnel changes has dominated clubhouse conversations among the Mets of late and the player most acutely affected has been Gregg Jefferies.
Jefferies, the infielder with suspect defensive skills, a poor relationship with his teammates and a performance at the plate that does not resemble the offensive force he was projected to become, has heard talk that he'll either be traded or moved to the outfield and has shown the strain.


Music in Review
Mostly Mozart
Avery Fisher Hall
The music was all by you-know-who at Saturday night's Mostly Mozart concert in Avery Fisher Hall.
There was Mozart young (the D-major Divertimento) and Mozart relatively old (the "Prague" Symphony), and in between Kathleen Battle sang two arias and the familiar "Exultate, Jubilate." Andre Previn conducted the festival's orchestra.


O'Brien Gets Nod; 15 Jets Hit the Road
With three losses in the preseason, and with one more exhibition game to go before the defeats start to count for real, the Jets looked ahead to Tuesday's cutdown date and made some bold moves today.
The Jets had to trim 17 players to get down to the limit of 60 by the 4 P.M.
Tuesday deadline.
They trimmed 15 of them today while Hurricane Bob swirled outside, postponing drills.


Refugee Found Guilty of Killing 87 in Bronx Happy Land Fire
A Bronx jury convicted a 37-year-old Cuban refugee yesterday of causing one of the worst mass murders in United States history, a fire that killed 87 people in the Happy Land social club in the Bronx.
The man, Julio Gonzalez, who had entered insanity pleas, was convicted of all charges, including 174 counts of murder -- two for each victim.
He was also found guilty of arson and assault for setting the blaze after arguing with hs ex-girlfriend and being thrown out of the club in the early-morning hours of March 25, 1990.


What Gorbachev Did to Reinvent His Country
DEMOCRATIZATION Glasnost
Increased openness, was perhaps the most profound change inaugurated by Mr. Gorbachev.


Music in Review
Summergarden Concert  Museum of Modern Art
The Sculpture Garden at the Museum of Modern Art is a feast for the eyes.
Unfortunately, eyes do not hear.
Neither, I suspect, did the casual crowd that showed up for Friday night's Summergarden concert.
Especially unhappy was the choice of music: all by Erik Satie.
Its fragile charms found themselves frail competitors against the jackhammers and rumbling trucks just beyond the garden walls.
Audience good will and a lot of amplification functioned up to a point, but as chunks of street surface were being dislodged during the "Uspud" excerpts, the term "musique concrete" took on a new significance.


State of Emergency Committee's Statement: 'A Mortal Danger Has Come'
Following is the text of a statement to the Soviet people issued today by the State Committee for the State of Emergency in the U.S.S.R., as provided by Tass:
Compatriots, citizens of the Soviet Union, we are addressing you at the grave, critical hour for the destinies of Motherland and our peoples.
A mortal danger has come to loom large over our great Motherland.


In a 4-Week Race for Council Seats, Money Is Talking Louder Than Ever
Money is generally a crucial factor in political campaigns, but political strategists say it will play an even bigger role than usual in the City Council elections this fall.
That is because the all-important Democratic primary has become a short four-week sprint with a field of more than 250 candidates, none of them household names and most of them complete unknowns, political experts said.


Angry Doctors Condemn Plans to Test Them for AIDS
PROPOSALS to test all doctors for the AIDS virus and to ban them from certain procedures if they test positive have left many, particularly surgeons, feeling angry and betrayed.
As a group, these doctors say, they face far greater risks from their patients than patients do from them.
They contend it is unfair to demand that they be tested when it is against the law for them to require the same of patients.
And if infection with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, will cost surgeons their profession, some worry that surgeonsbe reluctant to treat patients who carry the virus.


Suspension of Publications
Following is the text a decree by the State Committee for the State of Emergency suspending publication of many newspapers and journals, as provided by the English-language service of Tass:
In view of the declaration of a state of emergency in Moscow and some other territories in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as of Aug. 19, 1991, and in connection with Clause 4, Paragraph 14, of the U.S.S.R. law "on the legal regime of a state of emergency," The State Committee for the State of Emergency in the U.S.S.R.
Resolves:


FLAWS ARE FOUND IN JOBS PROGRAM
Congressional investigators studying a $4 billion Federal job training program have found that women and blacks are more likely than white men to be channeled into lower-paying jobs.
The investigators said they also found instances of blatant racism and sexism by the private companies that provide classroom and the on-the-job training in the program, which serves economically disadvantaged people, dislocated workers and others who face significant employment barriers.


Federal Lender Plans Offering
The office of finance of the Federal Home Loan Bank system plans to announce the interest rates today for a debt offering totaling $3.6 billion, that consists of five different maturities.
Investors are being offered $750 million of a three-month issue that matures on Nov. 25, and another $750 million of a six-month issue that matures on Feb. 25, 1992.
The financing also includes $1 billion of a one- year issue that matures Aug. 25, 1992; $413 million of a two- year issue due Aug. 25, 1993, and $687 million of a three-year issue due Aug. 25, 1994.


Condemnation And a Halt to Aid
Amid strong condemnations of the overthrow of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Western governments demanded today that the new Soviet leadership maintain the ousted leader's reform program and honor Moscow's international commitments.
The English-speaking allies -- the United States, Britain and Canada -- announced the freezing of economic assistance to the Soviet Union, and European Community foreign ministers scheduled a meeting on Tuesday to discuss a suspension of the Community's $1.5 billion aid program.
French and British officials said a summit of Community leaders may also be called to discuss the crisis.


An Antimatter Fuel Inches Toward Reality
THE dream of driving a rocket to the stars on a pin-head quantity of antimatter fuel has come a step closer to reality with successful tests by scientists in Canada and Germany of a method for making antihydrogen.
Antimatter, which exists on earth only as ephemeral particles created by giant accelerators, has long been considered a potentially ideal fuel for interstellar travel.
When antimatter combines with ordinary matter, mutual annihilation occurs, with the release of vast amounts of energy, far greater even than that produced by thermonuclear fusion.


Moscow Fears It Awoke to a Nightmare
As a dozen tanks rolled through Mayakovsky Square, kicking up a cloud of exhaust in the moist evening air, Alla Mikhailovna, in the capital for a visit with her 7-year-old son, stood on the sidewalk and cried.
"It is horrible, just horrible," said the 43-year-old geologist from Tashkent, who identified herself with her given name and patronymic, in the Russian fashion, but declined to give her last name.
"I am so sad for my country. What will come of this? Where will it end? War? It is just so frightening."


Lawyers Trade Allegations at Child-Abuse Trial
Prosecutors of a day-care center operator said in opening statements today that children learned to dread nap time as a time when they could be singled out by the operator and taken off to be sexually abused.
"You will hear that they didn't like nap time," said William Hart, a deputy State Attorney General assisting in the prosecution of the Little Rascals Day Care Center and Robert F. Kelly Jr., who operated the center in Edenton, N.C., with his wife.
"You will hear how they hated Mr. Bob for what he did and how they hated their parents for sending them there."


K.G.B.-MILITARY RULERS TIGHTEN GRIP; GORBACHEV ABSENT, YELTSIN DEFIANT; WEST VOICES ANGER AND WARNS ON AID
The engineers of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's ouster from power moved quickly today to reimpose hard-line control across the nation.
The coup leaders, dominated by the military and the K.G.B., banned protest meetings, closed independent newspapers and flooded the capital with troops and tanks.
Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian federated republic, who has often been at odds with Mr.
Gorbachev, became one of his strongest supporters today, seeking to rally resistance to the Soviet leader's overthrow by climbing atop an armored truck and calling for a general strike on Tuesday to protest the move as an unconstitutional act, a coup d'etat.


Hurricane Bob Barrels Through Long Island


Our Towns
Nicole Colon is 40 years old, and a woman of considerable authority, but when it comes to things like going to the park, she knows who is boss: her granddaughter, Migdalia Melendez, who is bright, chubby and 2 1/2.
"I don't bring her, she brings me," said Mrs.
Colon.
"I got custody of her. Or maybe she got custody of me."


New Kremlin Leadership: A Committee of Hard-Liners and Party Loyalists
Gennadi I. Yanayev  Acting President
54 years old . . .
Chosen by Mr.
Gorbachev last December . . .
Said at a news conference yesterday that the committee remained committed to democratic and market reforms . . .
Likes ice hockey and has been described as having an earthy sense of humor . . .
Made his way to the top through the Communist Party, its Komsomol youth wing and the trade union movement . . .
Told a German radio agency two months ago that he strongly backed Mr.
Gorbachev but said popular discontent against his economic reforms was rising, adding: "We need about two years to stabilize our country and get moving slowly forward. I hope Gorbachev will be at the forefront of this process" . . .
Told the Soviet Parliament in December: "I am a convinced Communist to the depths of my soul. You can't make me budge from that." . . .
Failed at first to win election to Vice President's post on first try, when dismayed radicals and others joined to deny him victory on the first ballot . . .
Graduated from an agricultural institute in 1959 and later studied law and earned a doctorate in history, writing a thesis on "Problems of Trotskyism and Anarchy." Vladimir A. Kryuchkov Chairman of the K.G.B.


Quebec Earthquake
THE 1989 Ungava earthquake in a remote area of northern Quebec was the first ever to rupture the surface of the interior of North America's continental plate, researchers say.
The Ungava earthquake is only the 10th documented intra-plate quake in the world to produce ruptures on the surface.
Earthquakes usually occur where plates of the earth's crust collide, along the San Andreas fault in California, for example.
But they can also occur in the more stable interior of continental plates.


Madden at the Top of His Game
The beefy man with the wrinkled blue shirttail hanging out of his tan pants attracts outsized attention wherever he goes.
So as John Madden sat on a chair in a room packed with reporters and CBS's football crew last week, he was naturally the big draw, the Rabelaisian figure who had redefined sports broadcasting.
Dan Fouts, the former San Diego Chargers quarterback who is beginning his fourth year as a CBS football analyst, glanced at Madden, who seemed etched in mid-gesticulation.
Fouts is being touted as an up-and-comer among the group of non-Madden analysts, all of whom exist inside the big man's shadow.


Salvadorans Fear Effect on Talks
The coup in the Soviet Union immediately raised concern in El Salvador today over the future of the already lagging peace negotiations between leftist guerrillas and the Government of President Alfredo Cristiani.
"Obviously, this can affect our situation," said Ernesto Altschul, Mr.
Cristiani's deputy chief of staff, "but it would be totally irresponsible for us to speculate on a fluid situation that is still developing."


No Sign of Glee Despite Animosity
The Chinese press announced the ousting of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev promptly and factually on radio and television news programs on Monday, with no sign of the glee that some Chinese hard-liners may feel for their apparent reprieve from the time when their Soviet "Big Brother" in the Communist movement would slip into political pluralism and capitalism.
Chinese leaders have long appeared to feel a deep animosity for Mr.
Gorbachev, based on the view that he has undermined Communist governments in other countries as well as his own.
While Beijing did not publicly criticize Mr.
Gorbachev, China's hard-liners have characterized him in conversations and internal documents as a dangerous revisionist who had betrayed Eastern Europe and abandoned Leninist principles.


West Is Uneasy at Possible Default
The coup by hard-line Soviet Communists put in question Western investment and many public and private programs for developing the Soviet economy.
But any losses in the West would mostly be suffered by governments, particularly in Western Europe.
Private foreign investment in the Soviet Union from all other countries was negligible until the late 1980's, and totaled only $3.15 billion from 1987 through 1990, according to the Institute for Comparative Economic Studies, a research center in Vienna.


Patterns
Matters of Strength
Men's fashion week began yesterday with a triumphal moment for Roger Forsythe, the men's wear designer for Perry Ellis.


Text of Resolution Ousting Gorbachev as Soviet Leader
Following is the text of the statement issued by senior Soviet officials yesterday announcing the ouster of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, as provided by the English-language service of Tass:
IN VIEW OF Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev's inability, for health reasons, to perform the duties of the U.S.S.R.
President and of the transfer of the U.S.S.R.
President's powers, in keeping with Paragraph 7, Article 127 of the U.S.S.R.
Constitution, to U.S.S.R.
Vice President Gennadi Ivanovich Yanayev,


Review/Music; Is Mendelssohn a Heavyweight? Festival Puts Him on the Scales
Why Felix Mendelssohn?
Why devote an ambitious two-weekend music festival with a dozen concerts and lectures to a composer so apparently transparent and uncontroversial?
Why give the festival a subtitle of "Rediscoveries"?
Is there something about the composer of the Overture to "A Midsummer Night's Dream" that requires rediscovery, let alone such intensive and extensive review?
After spending the first weekend at Bard College, I am tempted to answer yes to the final question and am no longer puzzled about the others.


Hurricane Sideswipes East Coast, Leaving Damage and Two Deaths
The first hurricane of the 1991 season in the Atlantic barreled up the Eastern Seaboard yesterday, causing at least two deaths, knocking out electricity to at least a million homes and businesses and flooding low-lying areas from North Carolina to Maine.
Hurricane Bob, a swift-moving 350-mile-wide mass of dense swirling clouds that blustered along with winds of 125 miles an hour, hugged the coast of Maine on its way to Canada last night after lifting shingles off roofs on eastern Long Island and snapping majestic old locust trees on Cape Cod like twigs.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 20


Soviets Expected To Appear In Tokyo
The coup in the Soviet Union on Monday has left officials of the International Amateur Athletic Federation scrambling to learn whether the Soviet team of nearly 100 athletes would still compete in the world track and field championships, which start here on Saturday.
By this morning, I.A.A.F. officials had ascertained that the bulk of the team, about 95 athletes, was preparing to fly to Tokyo on Wednesday by chartered aircraft from Vladivostok, the site of the team's training camp.


Observer; Alms for The Love Of Gore
We are watching wholesale butchery being committed by Grant and Lee on public television: corpses stacked like winter's woodpiles.
Doctors sawing off shattered arms, legs.
It is great television.
It is the kind of television you get only on public television.
Abruptly, the slaughter halts so tireless beggars can tell us so -- "This is the kind of television you get only on public television" -- while browbeating us with demands for money until we sob for mercy.


Defense Chief Saw Gorbachev Hours Before Coup
The Soviet Defense Minister, Gen.
Dmitri T. Yazov, flew to the Crimea on Sunday and met with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev hours before Mr.
Yazov and other senior officials staged a coup and removed Mr.
Gorbachev from power, according to Bush Administration officials.
The nature of the conversations between the two men is not known, according to these officials, and General Yazov's flight has become a critical indicator only in hindsight as the Administration sought today to reconstruct the events of the weekend to understand the coup, which caught the world by surprise.


Ames Stores' Sales Estimate
Ames Department Stores Inc. yesterday lowered its estimates of sales and earnings for the year, saying sales during the back-to-school period were less vigorous than it had hoped.
Ames, which operates 448 discount stores in the Northeast, said it no longer expects to achieve sales of $3.14 billion and earnings before interest and taxes of $21.6 million for the year that will end Jan. 26, 1992.
"Although our sales were below plan for the first nine months of 1991, we had been somewhat optimistic about achieving stronger sales during the back-to-school period," said Stephen L. Pistner, Ames chairman and chief executive.
"However, recent sales have remained soft."


B.C.C.I. Case Delayed
The arraignment of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International on bribery and fraud charges was postponed for one month yesterday so court-appointed receivers of the banks' assets could decide whether they will represent B.C.C.I. in the criminal case.
Justice Peter McQuillan of State Supreme Court in Manhattan granted a delay until Sept. 19 after attorneys said they needed time to study whether the receivers were required to act as the bank's agents.


CHRONICLE
Decades before the women's movement took hold of the American consciousness, MIRRA KOMAROVSKY was defining the subject in her writing at Barnard College.
Now 86 years old, with the title of professor emeritus of sociology even though she still teaches at Barnard, Ms.
Komarovsky will be honored Saturday with the ultimate accolade from her colleagues: the Distinguished Career Award from the American Sociological Association, to be presented at the association's annual meeting in Cincinnati.
Ms.
Komarovsky, an immigrant from Baku in Azerbaijan, now part of the Soviet Union, graduated from Barnard in 1926.
She received a master's degree in 1927 and a doctorate in 1940, both in sociology, from Columbia University.
In 1946 she published "Cultural Contradictions and Sex Roles," her first major work in gender studies.
The Komarovsky work that was to frame much of the movement that was to follow, "Women in the Modern World," was published in 1953.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption in some copies yesterday about the events in the Soviet Union reversed the identities of the two officials shown with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Defense Minister Dmitri T.  Yazov was at the top right; Vladimir A. Kryuchkov, the head of the K.G.B., was at the bottom right.


Professor Shouldn't Be Dismissed for Views; Worth Debating
To the Editor:
I agree with your Aug. 9 editorial that Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr.'s comments at the Empire State Black Arts and Cultural Festival were offensive, but that doesn't mean he should not have been a featured speaker.
As odious as Dr.
Jeffries's comments were, inviting him to the festival was appropriate if only because he represents an opinion worth debating.


Corrections
An illustration on the Consumer's World page on Saturday, with an article about coiled postage stamps separated by slit perforations rather than holes, showed the wrong stamps.
Slits will be used on 29-cent flower stamps, not on the stamps bearing an "F" in place of a price.


Infonet Set To Begin TV Ad Program
Infonet, a 24-hour network devoted exclusively to program-length commercials known as infomercials, will start beaming the infomercials nationwide on Labor Day, executives of Home Shopping Network Inc. said yesterday.
"We are taking this art form to a new level," said Earl D. Greenburg, president of HSN Infonet Inc. and HSN Entertainment Inc., in announcing the new service..


L. A. Gear Gains New Credit Line
L.
A.
Gear Inc. said it had renegotiated with bankers for a $200 million lending line of credit, $100 million less than the previous amount.
By posting recent losses, the financially struggling athletic shoe company violated terms of its banking agreements, requiring the renegotiation.
L.
A.
Gear said the deal had eliminated covenants requiring it not to lose money in any fiscal quarter.


COUP SETS YELTSIN AT CENTER STAGE
As Mikhail S. Gorbachev was deposed today, attention turned quickly to the one dominating figure left on the Soviet political stage: Boris N. Yeltsin, the first elected president of the Russian republic, an ex-Communist who has made a second career out of doing battle with the Communist Party and who is arguably the most popular politician in the Soviet Union today.
The crowds outside the Russian federated republic's government building in Moscow today repeatedly chanted Mr.
Yeltsin's name, pleading with him to come out for a speech or at least show his face at the window.
When he appeared at a noon press conference, he was greeted by applause from Soviet journalists present, who did little to hide the hopes they have pinned on him.


Charitable End to Hair Flap
The now-famous locks from Don Mattingly's controversial mane found a happy and charitable home yesterday when a New York policeman paid $3,000 for them.
Tom Tumminia of Staten Island, who calls himself "a huge Yankee fan," paid $3,000 for the hair during in an on-air auction by WNEW Radio.
The money will go to New York City's Children's Health Fund, which provides health care to homeless children.


INSIDE
Gandhi Case Suspect Dead
The Sri Lankan Tamil militant believed to have masterminded the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi was found dead, the police said.
Page A6.


MOSCOW AND THE MARKETS: Kremlin Shake-Up Jars the Financial World; Stock Prices Drop In Global Selloff; Dollar, Bonds Up
The world's financial markets reacted quickly and sharply yesterday to the ouster of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, with stock markets around the world falling as much as 9 percent.
The American dollar soared 3 percent against some currencies as the uncertainty sent investors looking for a safe harbor.
The Tokyo market was the first to feel the jolt and ended by losing nearly 6 percent, but as the trading day followed the sun westward and the immediate emotional impact of the coup wore off, some European and American stock markets regained a portion of their lost ground.
And in morning trading today in Tokyo, prices were down only slightly at midday.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Activated Glenn Davis, first baseman, from the 60-day disabled list.
Assigned Roy Smith, pitcher, to Rochester of the International League.
TEXAS RANGERS -- Placed Gerald Alexander, pitcher, in the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to Aug. 15.
Activated Nolan Ryan, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.


Text of White House Statement
Following is the text of a statement by President Bush, issued today by the White House:
We are deeply disturbed by the events of the last hours in the Soviet Union and condemn the unconstitutional resort to force.
While the situation continues to evolve and information remains incomplete, the apparent unconstitutional removal of President Gorbachev, the declaration of a state of emergency, and the deployment of Soviet military forces in Moscow and other cities raise the most serious questions about the future course of the Soviet Union.
This misguided and illegitimate effort bypasses both Soviet law and the will of the Soviet peoples.


Careers; When You Can't Get In Front Door
WITH graduating seniors still having a tough time searching for jobs, their job-seeking techniques are changing.
It is back to the old days of using contacts for all they are worth, said Lee J. Svete, college placement director of St.
Lawrence University, in Canton, N.Y.
"About 66 to 70 percent of those who do find jobs have been finding employment this year through contacts with alumni, parents, friends and others, compared to only half the class relying on contacts a year ago," he said.
"If you cannot go in the front door you go through a side door."


MOSCOW AND THE MARKETS: Kremlin Shake-Up Jars the Financial World; Ambitions for Soviet Deals Are Suddenly Placed on Ice
The march of foreign private investment into the Soviet Union seemed to freeze mid-stride yesterday, as business executives watched the events in Moscow with confusion and concern, struggling to decipher what the shift in leadership means for their own fledgling ventures there.
At least one major project, the planned privatization of the Soviet automobile ministry through a possible deal with Fiat, the Italian auto manufacturer, has been put on hold, said Alan Siegel, a New York lawyer who has been representing the ministry in the negotiations.


MORE ON THE CRISIS
Financial Markets  Tumble Worldwide
Global stock markets declined tumbled, with prices off more than 9 percent in Germany and 6 percent in Japan.
But the Dow Jones industrials lost only 2.4 percent, to 2,898.03, down 69.99, and the Tokyo market turned higher in trading today.
The dollar soared, while the price of oil and gold also rose.
Page D1. (Other financial reaction, pages D6-8, D14 and D16.)  The Gorbachev Overthrow  And a Vastly Changed World
A power struggle is in store in the Soviet Union as President Bush's vision of a new world order is thrown into disarray.
Articles on the once and future Kremlin, and how the world is reacting to it, pages A10-17.


Critic's Notebook; Irish Theater Imbued With New Life and Works
The boldness that Deborah Warner brought to Shakespeare in her productions at the Swan Theater in Stratford-on-Avon was reasserted this summer with Ibsen at the Abbey Theater.
As directed by Miss Warner and as compellingly portrayed by Fiona Shaw, "Hedda Gabler" becomes an even more impassioned, psychologically prescient study of a woman totally out of step with her time and her society.
The fact that this striking production opened in Dublin rather than at Stratford or in London says something about the convocation of talent that is energizing the Irish theater.
The revitalization comes not only from new Irish plays but also from a linkage with a world theatrical tradition.
Clearly this is one reason Dublin was named the European City of Culture for 1991.


No Honors This Year? Try Suing
What to do when your 16-year-old -- who, by his father's account, has a 3.93 grade point average, volunteers in a hospital cytology lab and has been a member of the N.A.A.C.P. since age 7 -- does not get into the National Honor Society?
Sue his high school in Federal Court, of course.
A Federal judge has reluctantly decided that the Constitutional issues the dispute aises must have their day in court.
That will pit Richard and Lisa Dangler, whose son, Justin, is a junior at Yorktown High School in Westchester County, against school officials at a hearing in the White Plains courthouse on Thursday.


For Mets, the Future Is Full of Changes, If Not Fans
Empty seats for empty games in September.
It's the universal fear for proprietors of the national pastime.
"For those of us who were there in the early 1980's, it won't be the first time we've seen it at Shea Stadium," said Al Harazin, the executive vice president of the Mets.
"But it's been a long time."


Music in Review
Bargemusic
Fulton Ferry Landing Brooklyn Heights
At a time when chamber music is typically heard in halls scaled for full orchestra performances, the concerts at Bargemusic are a reminder of the form's intimate roots.
The series was started in 1977 by Olga Bloom, whose refurbished 92-year-old coffee barge on the East River seats about 130.
The barge's stage is set before a picture window that looks out on the Manhattan skyline, and except for a gentle bobbing on the water, its atmosphere is like that of a large living room.


Alzheimer-Like Effect Is Reported Cut in Rats
A TINY fragment of a protein that is implicated in Alzheimer's disease causes brain cells to degenerate in rats, researchers have found.
But if the animals are first injected with another protein fragment, their brains are protected.
The study provides the first hint that it may be possible to prevent the otherwise unrelenting brain-cell death that occurs in Alzheimer's disease.
The researchers caution, however, that the findings need to be replicated in rats and then in monkeys, whose brains are more like human brains.
They also warn that the deterioration they created in the rat brain cells is not identical to the changes that occur in the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease.


Shoemaker Makes Visit
BILL SHOEMAKER, who has been undergoing rehabiliation at Craig Hospital in Denver for the paralysis he sustained last spring in an automobile accident, visited Castle Pines Golf Club Sunday for the final day of the International tournament.
It was one of Shoemaker's first ventures out of the hospital.(AP)


Bush Condemns Soviet Coup And Calls For Its Reversal
In a sharp condemnation of the coup that overthrew President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, President Bush made a blunt demand today for Mr.
Gorbachev's restoration to power and said the United States did not accept the legitimacy of the self-proclaimed new Soviet Government.
Back at the White House after rushing from his vacation home here, Mr.
Bush issued a strongly worded statement that followed a day of consultations with other leaders of the Western alliance and a concerted effort to squeeze the new Soviet leadership by freezing economic aid programs.
He decried the coup as a "misguided and illegitimate effort" that "bypasses both Soviet law and the will of the Soviet peoples."


One F.D.A. Hurdle Cleared, Collagen Head Faces Second
For medical products executives, the Food and Drug Administration can give or it can take away.
For Howard Palefsky, president and chief executive of the Collagen Corporation, the F.D.A. did a bit of both on Friday.
In Washington, the company received a unanimous recommendation for approval of its Collagraft bone implant from an F.D.A. advisory panel that reviews orthopedic rehabilitation devices.
But, closer to its Palo Alto, Calif., headquarters, agents seized inventory of the company's core injectible collagen product on the basis of inadequate labeling.


Professor Shouldn't Be Dismissed for Views; Judge for Competence
To the Editor:
Your view, shared by many others, that the First Amendment and the principle of tenure necessarily protect Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. from dismissal is too broad ("A Professor Flaunts His Bias," editorial, Aug. 9).


Truce in Croatia on Edge of Collapse
Fighting in the Yugoslav republic of Croatia over the weekend and today has brought the teetering cease-fire declared 12 days ago to the verge of collapse.
Fierce gun battles and mortar attacks between ethnic Serb rebels and Croatian militias and police units were reported in Pakrac, Vrgin Most and at least a half-dozen other Croatian towns today, but casualty figures are still unavailable.


U.S. Warns Americans Against Soviet Travel
American tour operators and cultural-exchange organizations that specialize in travel to the Soviet Union reported dozens of telephone inquiries yesterday but only a few cancellations as a result of the ouster of Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
The State Department warned late in the afternoon against travel to the Soviet Union, citing the declaration of a state of emergency there and "the possibility of civil disruption for an indeterminate period."


On My Mind; The Last Act
For six years now, ever since Mikhail Gorbachev came to power, the United States and other Western governments have done their best to avoid facing the one most important truth about the Soviet Union.
Now that reality, which Mr.
Gorbachev knew better than any man on earth, has led to the coup against him.
It is this: The Soviet Union is not a country but a collection of nationalities forced to live under a system of control that rests on a Communist Party whose own authority and protection are provided by the police organization known as the K.G.B.


Suicide of Suspects in Gandhi Case Reported
The Tamil militants from Sri Lanka who are said to have masterminded the assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi committed suicide this morning after they were surrounded by commandos and police forces, news reports said.
The seven dead included Shivarasan, known as one-eyed Jack, who is said to be the chief conspirator behind the May 21 bomb blast that killed Mr.
Gandhi.
A woman associate named Subha and five other militants from the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam were said to have died with him, radio broadcasts and Indian news agencies reported today.


CHRONICLE
Dame JUDITH ANDERSON, hospitalized for more than two weeks with an undisclosed ailment, was described by her doctors yesterday as doing well and responding to treatment.
The 93-year-old Australian-born actress was admitted to St.
Francis Hospital in Santa Barbara, Calif., on Aug. 4 for tests.
She has lived in Santa Barbara since 1950.
"She's in pretty good condition," said a hospital spokeswoman, Jean Mangus.


Of Labor and Birth
New findings by British scientists suggest that parental occupation does not have a pronounced effect on the risk of premature birth of babies.
Previous studies have shown that women involved in manufacturing electrical or metal goods experienced higher rates of premature births.
But these studies had inconsistent or inconclusive results because of the small number of births examined.


Deputy Executive Quits in Westchester
Less than two weeks after it was learned that he had held private parties at a county-owned site closed to the public, the Westchester Deputy County Executive, Roger Biagi, resigned yesterday from county government.
In a statement, Mr.
Biagi, 46 years old, said that his decision to leave the government was "the culmination of a process on my part that began some time ago."


Professor Shouldn't Be Dismissed for Views; Sounds Familiar
To the Editor:
Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr.'s racist references to Russian Jewry's control over the movies seem to have been plagiarized from one of America's most notorious Naziphile bigots and Jew-bashers, the Rev.
Gerald K. Smith (news article, Aug. 7).


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Friday referred incorrectly to BDM International Inc., of McLean, Va.
Formerly a unit of the Ford Motor Company, it is now independently owned.


Oil Up $1.17 on Concern Over Coup
The price of oil jumped on world markets yesterday as traders worried that the coup in the Soviet Union, the world's largest oil producer, would disrupt that nation's exports.
In New York, oil closed up $1.17 a barrel, after trading as high as $1.80 above the Friday close.


New York Capital To Banco Popular
Banco Popular de Puerto Rico acquired the New York Capital Bank of New York City for an undisclosed price.
New York Capital, with $70 million in deposits, had been held in Federal receivership.
Banco Popular said it would keep about 25 of 200 employees of New York Capital and one its branches.
Its four other branches will be closed, and customers will be shifted to branches of Banco Popular.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Meskhi Advances  Although preoccupied by concern over her family in the Soviet Union, Leila Meskhi advanced to the second round yesterday in the Virginia Slims of Washington.
Meskhi, a native of Soviet Georgia, was leading Linda Ferrando of Italy, 6-3, 4-4, when Ferrando retired because of heat exhaustion.
"I'm nervous, because I don't know what's going on yet," said the 23-year-old Meskhi, who was seeded seventh.
She said she had been unable to reach her parents by telephone.
Meskhi's parents and older sister reside in Soviet Georgia.
In other matches, fifth-seeded Zina Garrison defeated Cristina Tessi, 6-2, 6-2; Katerina Maleeva, seeded sixth, beat Carrie Cunningham, 6-4, 6-0; Magdalena Maleeva defeated Catarina Lindqvist of Sweden, 6-4, 6-3.
Nathalie Tauziat of France, seeded eighth, was upset by Andrea Strnadova of Czechoslovakia, 6-4, 7-5; Regina Rajchrtova of Czechoslovakia defeated Helen Kelesi of Canada, 7-5, 6-4; Gigi Fernandez beat Shaun Stafford, 6-7, 6-3, 7-6; and Mariaan De Swardt of South Africa beat Rosalyn Fairbank-Nideffer, 6-3, 7-6 (7-3). (AP)


Q&amp;A
Rocked to Sleep
Q.
I fall asleep on trains or buses.
Babies fall asleep if you walk back and forth and gently rock them.
Why?
Would it be a good treatment for insomnia?


Coming-Out Scheduled For the Jockey Model
The mystery model on the Jockey for Her billboard in Times Square is undergoing a face lift of sorts in preparation for her unveiling next month.
The sign, 18 feet by 90 feet, carries the image of a woman whose face is obscured, sparking speculation all summer about who she is.
Sports Illustrated has guessed it is the Olympic champion swimmer Nancy Hogshead, who has posed for other Jockey ads.


Mervyn Nelson, 76, Actor and Director
Mervyn Nelson, who acted, wrote, produced and directed for the stage, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 76 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of cancer, said Sam Crothers of the Producer Circle Company.


Business and Health; More State Curbs On Insurer Rates
A SMALL but growing number of states are cracking down on health insurers that aggressively reduce premiums to attract small businesses with young, healthy employees, and raise rates to discourage employers with potentially high medical costs.
Critics say that such practices make access to health care unaffordable for those who need it most, adding to more than 34 million Americans already without insurance.
Vermont and Oregon enacted sweeping laws this year that require all insurers to spread risks evenly among small businesses by offering uniform community rates, regardless of the health status of employees.
Bob Opel, a vice president with Blue Cross in Vermont, said the new law prohibited setting rates based on medical or demographic criteria.


Chess Game With Big Differences
PLAYING chess on a personal computer is nothing new, but here is a program with three important differences.
First, it was designed to work with Windows 3.0, so it does not force you into the contortions sometimes required to get a plain DOS program to run in that environment.
Second, if you have a modem and a friend with a modem, as well as his own copy of the program, you can play chess over the telephone lines.
Finally, if your computer is linked to other computers in a Netbios-compatible network, you can play through that.
ChessNet for Windows, version 2.0, plays a good game, too, much better than this writer's.


Maxxam Group in Filing To Offer Notes for Exchange
The Maxxam Group said yesterday that it had filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a new issue of notes that reach maturity in 1995.
According to the company, which is engaged in aluminum through its Kaiser Aluminum Corporation subsidiary and in forest products principally through its Pacific Lumber Company subsidiary, these new notes are to be offered in exchange for $140 million of Maxxam Group and $30.9 million of Maxxam Inc. notes that mature in 1992.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a pharmacist infected with the virus that causes AIDS reversed a statistic from a survey of hospital pharmacists.
The survey, published in January in a magazine called Hospital Pharmacist Report, asked whether an infected pharmacist should be allowed to mix intravenous solutions, "using proper gloving procedures"; 51 percent of the 276 replies said no, and 49 percent said yes.


Blind Lead the Blind on Insurance Companies
To the Editor:
Having missed the boat on the failures of three giant insurance companies, the three big insurance rating agencies, A. M. Best, Moody's Investors Service and Standard &amp; Poor's, are adding "investor confidence" to criteria used in analyzing the financial strength of insurance companies (news article, Aug. 2).
Maybe I'm mistaken, but I thought it is supposed to work the other way around: investor confidence should stem directly from Moody's, Best's and S. &amp; P.'s ratings.


Cairo Journal; A Desert Theme Park Has Dry Tongues Wagging
Amid a desolate landscape of bleached stone and sand, a half-day's camel ride beyond the Sphinx and the Great Pyramids of Giza, a more contemporary monument is rising slowly from the desert outside Cairo.
It is an American-style water park, the first of its kind in Egypt and, its builders say, the Arab Middle East.


Redgrave Rebuffed on 'Lettice' Tour
An arbitrator ruled yesterday that Vanessa Redgrave was not discriminated against because of her political beliefs when she did not get the starring role in a proposed national tour of Peter Shaffer's "Lettice and Lovage."
The arbitrator, Daniel G. Collins, said he believed the contention of the tour's producers -- the Shubert Organization, Roger Berlind and Robert Fox, Ms.
Redgrave's son-in-law -- that it was all a matter of economics.
The producers had said that their decision not to hire Ms.
Redgrave was based on their belief that public reaction to statements the actress made in January about the situation in the Persian Gulf eliminated any possibility that a national tour starring her would be financially successful.


A Sharp Arrest, Some Gunshots, Then an Escape
It had been a good collar.
Two police officers on patrol in Brooklyn had stopped a car for a traffic infraction and discovered that they had caught three suspects in a burglary that had occurred only minutes before.
But like a story line on "Hill Street Blues," where events do not always happen as planned, things started to go awry rather quickly.


Sentence Appealed in Theft at Church
The Camden County prosecutor's office has appealed a five-year probation sentence handed down for a former Lutheran Church treasurer who admitted stealing more than $133,000 from his congregation, the authorities said yesterday.
The appeal was filed in the case of Gary Marks, who was sentenced earlier this month by Judge John B. Mariano of Superior Court, said the county prosecutor, Edward F. Borden Jr.
Mr.
Marks was ordered to pay restitution but was not fined.


If Power Fails, Take Care
When the power goes down, dangers abound -- whether it is dark or not.
With storm-related power failures in thousands of homes in New York, Connecticut and on up into New England, utilities are warning people to take these precautions:


Review/Fashion; Still Enthusiastic, Galanos Still Dazzles
James Galanos has been in business 40 years now, but he has lost none of his enthusiasm.
There he was yesterday, in a suite at the Plaza Hotel, personally showing his fall collection, nearly 200 pieces strong.
He wheeled racks around the room, whipped dresses and suit off hangers and onto his model, swathed her in yards of tulle or taffeta, and then leaped back to survey the effect.
"I think this is a sexy young collection," he said.
"It runs the gamut of silhouettes from spare to romantic. I'm very optimistic about business for fall." Still Experimenting
The Los Angeles-based designer still works at developing new cuts and new techniques, experimenting with different fabrics and expanding his repertory.
He is known for using luxurious fabrics like cashmere, alpaca, velvet, brocade and lace, but this time he has played with sheerness and lightness as never before.
He combines materials and textures in new ways to achieve a wide-ranging collection that includes tailored suits in men's wear flannels, slinky evening dresses, pleated tulle confections and sheaths encrusted with beadwork.


Rates Plunge in Rush to Buy Bills
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's stunning ouster as president of the Soviet Union sent investors from around the world running for the safe, secure haven of Treasury securities yesterday.
As often occurs at times of crisis, short-term Treasury bills were the investment of choice, and interest rates fell sharply.
Three-month bill rates fell well below 5 percent for a while yesterday, the first time they have been below that level since after the stock market crash in October 1987.
Meanwhile, bond yields dropped below 8 percent for a time, at one point falling as low as 7.92 percent, their lowest of the year.


L.I. Was 'Shaking, Rattling and Rolling,' but It Missed the Worst
Hurricane Bob knocked out the electricity in up to 300,000 homes across Long Island; deposited broken tree branches across countless driveways, yards and roads; and frightened Susan Israelson just enough that she was almost happy at the prospect of spending her day at a local high school instead of at home.
"Things were shaking, rattling and rolling," said Ms.
Israelson, explaining how she decided to evacuate her small house, in an exposed potato field in Wainscott, and seek shelter with a thousand others at the East Hampton High School.
"Plus my mother was calling every three minutes with a doomsday bulletin from New York."


The New Range War Has the Desert as Foe
AS much as 85 percent of the rangeland in the Western United States -- about 685 million acres -- is being turned into desert by overgrazing and other problems, according to a study prepared for the United Nations Environment Program.
The desertification manifests itself through low groundwater tables, salinization of topsoil and water, reduced surface waters, high soil erosion and acute loss of native vegetation.
The result is the general impoverishment of an ecosystem's productivity.


What Gorbachev Did to Reinvent His Country
DEMOCRATIZATION Glasnost
Increased openness, was perhaps the most profound change inaugurated by Mr. Gorbachev.


Hurricane Chases President's Family Inland
After President Bush returned to the shelter of Washington to deal with the coup in the Soviet Union, the rest of his family and their dogs were evacuated from the President's ocean-front compound this afternoon as a hurricane churned up the East Coast.
Barbara Bush went to stay at the home of a friend, Jerry Weintraub, a Hollywood producer who has a residence here.
The President's mother, Dorothy Walker Bush, and one of his aunts who also has a home on the estate, went to stay with other friends.


Gorbachev and His Fateful Step; Pact to Give Republics More Power Drew Fire
The spark that kindled today's takeover of the Soviet Union was, by all indications, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's acceptance of a new union treaty that promised the final demise of the old Soviet order and a surrender of power to elected leaders in the republics.
The pact, which Mr.
Gorbachev was to have signed on Tuesday with the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, and two other republic leaders, posed an imminent threat to the power of all the institutions represented in today's conspiracy: the overlords of the central economy, the demoralized military, the state police agencies and the Communist Party.


McDonnell Sale To G.M. Unit
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation said yesterday that it would sell its engineering software division to the Electronic Data Systems Corporation of Dallas.
A spokeswoman for McDonnell Douglas said the price was still being negotiated and declined to provide any details of the deal's terms.
In a statement, McDonnell Douglas said the sale of the unit, known as the McDonnell Douglas Systems Integration Company, would enable it to reduce its nearly $3 billion in debt.
In a letter to employees, the aerospace company's chairman, John F. McDonnell, said the deal would also allow McDonnell Douglas to work with E.D.S,, a unit of the General Motors Corporation, on improving the unit's Unigraphics software.
Unigraphics is used in the design and development of the company's aerospace products.


80's 'Poison Pill' Strategy Is Dropped by Time Warner
Time Warner Inc. announced yesterday that it would end a stock rights plan adopted in the mid-1980's to thwart hostile takeovers.
The "poison pill" defense, created in 1986, gave stockholders the right to purchase a new issue of stock in case of an attempt to purchase at least 15 percent of the company's common stock.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- ADDENDA
*
Delta Air Lines to BBDO South, both Atlanta, for the air routes that Delta has acquired from Pan Am.
The assignment had been expected, as BBDO South is Delta's agency.
Billings have not been determined.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an article about dance at the Katherine Dunham Children's Workshop was published in error.
It showed Lucille Ellis, an instructor, and not Miss Dunham.


Fire Department Fills Top Uniformed Post
Assistant Fire Chief William Feehan has been named chief of department, the highest ranking uniformed position, the New York City Fire Commissioner, Carlos Rivera, announced yesterday.
Chief Feehan, whose promotion takes effect immediately, succeeds Joseph DeMeo, who retired on July 22 as head of the 11,588-member force.


Critic's Notebook; TV Leaps to Cover Soviet Coup
Hurricane Bob was much easier to track than the storm over Moscow.
Viewers awakened yesterday to the news that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had been displaced by some sort of emergency committee.
And then came the pictures, so much like others that have filled screens since 1989, of civilians confronting or consorting with soldiers.
Only this time, they were smack in Moscow.
Demonstrators climbed onto the tanks that had been ordered into Moscow.
There was a little jostling and an apparently testy exchange or two, but mostly the soldiers seemed relaxed, even friendly.
Hands were shaken, cigarettes shared.
Steve Hurst, the CNN man in Moscow, told of hearing a woman say to one of the tankmen, "Think about what you are doing." Some soldiers showed that their guns were not loaded.
But the tension persisted.
Boris N. Yeltsin, the President of the Russian Republic and the country's most persistent reformer, was seen addressing a crowd from what looked like the top of a tank.
There was no sound, but reporters said it was a call to resistance.


Source for Hearst War Cable Is Credible
To the Editor:
The time should be past when a newspaper correspondent is discredited simply because he or she has been expelled by a government for reporting on military atrocities or human rights abuses.


In a Brooklyn Haven, Fear for the Homeland
Soviet emigres in the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn reacted yesterday with shock, anger and sadness to the news that the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, had been deposed in a coup.
"If the K.G.B. takes over, it's like fascism," said Nina Koganovsky, who owns the Cafe Zodiac on Brighton Beach Avenue and who came to the United States from the Ukraine 10 years ago.
"Gorbachev brought a better life for people, but he couldn't change the Soviet Union. The Russian people don't understand freedom."


C.B. Hutchenrider, Clarinetist, 83, Dies
Clarence B. Hutchenrider, a clarinetist who emerged as a top-ranking instrumentalist when he worked with the Casa Loma Orchestra 50 years ago, died on Sunday at the Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 83 years old and lived in Fresh Meadows, Queens.
He died of lung cancer, said David Ostwald, leader of the Gully Low Band, with whom Mr.
Hutchenrider performed until his final illness.


Professor Shouldn't Be Dismissed for Views
To the Editor:
If the press accounts of the views and remarks of Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. are at all accurate (news article, Aug. 7), then he and his inflammatory bigotry, racism and anti-Semitism deserve all the vehement denunciation being heaped on him.


What Gorbachev Did to Reinvent His Country
DEMOCRATIZATION Glasnost
Increased openness, was perhaps the most profound change inaugurated by Mr. Gorbachev.


Cole Porter, but Not Just the One That Audiences Expect to Hear
Fans of Cole Porter have been zooming to the heights of 30 Rockefeller Plaza and being surprised.
"What a Swell Party!," a revue with five singers, two pianos and a spectacular view of New York for a backdrop at Rainbow and Stars, offers such Porter numbers as "By the Mississinewah."
Never heard of it?
Neither had Mary Cleere Haran, Terri Klausner or Helen Schneider, the three women in the cast.
In fact, most of the songs are little-known Porter, and audiences have been responding variously.
Some welcome a survey that goes beyond war horses, to the likes of "Georgia Sand," "Find Me a Primitive Man," and "Ace in the Hole."


Defense Chief Saw Gorbachev Hours Before Coup
The Soviet Defense Minister, Gen.
Dmitri T. Yazov, flew to the Crimea on Sunday and met with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev hours before Mr.
Yazov and other senior officials staged a coup and removed Mr.
Gorbachev from power, according to Bush Administration officials.
The nature of the conversations between the two men is not known, according to these officials, and General Yazov's flight has become a critical indicator only in hindsight as the Administration sought today to reconstruct the events of the weekend to understand the coup, which caught the world by surprise.


MOSCOW AND THE MARKETS: Kremlin Shake-Up Jars the Financial World; Stock Prices Drop In Global Selloff; Dollar, Bonds Up
The world's financial markets reacted quickly and sharply yesterday to the ouster of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, with stock markets around the world falling as much as 9 percent.
The American dollar soared 3 percent against some currencies as the uncertainty sent investors looking for a safe harbor.
The Tokyo market was the first to feel the jolt and ended by losing nearly 6 percent, but as the trading day followed the sun westward and the immediate emotional impact of the coup wore off, some European and American stock markets regained a portion of their lost ground.
And in morning trading today in Tokyo, prices were down only slightly at midday.


Chess
The routine expectation is for success to foster success, for a victory to bolster one's confidence in the next game.
But it does not always work that way.
In the elimination match for the United States Invitational Championship in Los Angeles Aug. 6 to 9, the player who won a game exhibited raggedy nerves of one kind or another in the next game and gave back the advantage by losing.


Books of The Times; That Other Fitzgerald Could Turn a Word, Too
Zelda Fitzgerald The Collected Writings Edited by Matthew J. Bruccoli.
Introduction by Mary Gordon. 480 pages.
Charles Scribner's Sons. $24.95.
Consider the following two passages:


Democrats Attack Bush on Economy As Spotlight Shifts to Foreign Policy
Democratic Governors tried to escalate the pressure on President Bush today over his handling of the economy and other domestic issues, but found themselves overshadowed by a foreign policy crisis that threatened to freeze Presidential politics once again.
The Democrats, gathered here for the annual summer meeting of the National Governors' Association, passed a resolution assailing Mr.
Bush for his "refusal to recognize that 8.5 million Americans out of work is a tragedy and an emergency." They urged him to reverse his decision last week to block the spending of money needed for extended unemployment benefits authorized by Congress for more than three million people out of work for more than half a year.


Prospects for a 'New World Order' Are Precarious, and Critics Line Up
The edifice of hope that George Bush has spent much of his Presidency building may not come crashing down as a result of the epochal events in Moscow today.
But it will probably be much harder to maintain, because the Soviet Union no longer seems a ready or reliable partner.
To some extent Mikhail S. Gorbachev had cooperated with the United States to create a new world order, on issues ranging from the Gulf War to arms control, because his country was weak and he thought he had no other choice.
In that sense, little has changed with his ouster; the Soviet Union is now weaker and more vulnerable to internal disruption than it was two weeks ago, and the United States is therefore proportionately stronger.
That reality was reflected in the flight to the dollar around the world.


EXECUTIVES
*
CCAir Inc., Charlotte, N.C., which operates as USAir Express, named Wesley C. Moore senior vice president-administration. *
Cablevision Systems Corp., Woodbury, L.I., a cable television service, appointed William J. Quinn president of its cable operations.


Rates Plunge in Rush to Buy Bills
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's stunning ouster as president of the Soviet Union sent investors from around the world running for the safe, secure haven of Treasury securities yesterday.
As often occurs at times of crisis, short-term Treasury bills were the investment of choice, and interest rates fell sharply.
Three-month bill rates fell well below 5 percent for a while yesterday, the first time they have been below that level since after the stock market crash in October 1987.
Meanwhile, bond yields dropped below 8 percent for a time, at one point falling as low as 7.92 percent, their lowest of the year.


THE DOCTOR's WORLD; Unraveling the Mystery Of Bypass Survival
To learn why death rates from heart bypass operations varied as much as 400 percent in a New England study, researchers are reviving an old practice: Surgeons are visiting each other's hospitals to watch colleagues operate.
But in new twist, they are taking engineers, anesthesiologists, technicians and nurses with them.
The teams are seeking clues to death rates that defied explanation in a study of 3,055 bypass operations by the 18 heart surgeons in the five hospitals that do all the bypass operations performed in Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont.


BRIEFS
*
Convex Computer Corp., Richardson, Tex., said the Government of Finland had ordered two supercomputers for an undisclosed amount. *
R.
R.
Donnelly &amp; Sons Co., Chicago, a printing company, said its magazine group would put its Danville and Glasgow, Ky., manufacturing divisions under one management team.


Fallout From the Coup, In Brief"
The Overthrow and the Coming Leadership Struggle
Why It Happened: The spark was a new union treaty stripping the Kremlin of power.
News analysis, page 1.


On Ice With the Big Boys, Lindros Does Little Wrong
The match was billed as an exhibition hockey game and Eric Lindros was exhibit A -- or, more precisely, exhibit No. 88, according to the matching set of big red numerals on his broad back.
He played for Team Canada against Team U.S.A. in the Forum here Sunday night in the second of five consecutive practice games between the two teams as they prepare for the Canada Cup tournament, a six-nation invitational that begins on Aug. 31.


New Kremlin Leadership: A Committee of Hard-Liners and Party Loyalists
Gennadi I. Yanayev Acting President


Salomon's Rules Provide View of What They Avert
Salomon Brothers entered yesterday's Treasury auctions with restrictions on employees' actions from a new set of rules that are intended to prevent the kind of abuses that have shaken the firm over the last week and a half.
Some of the rules, which were adopted late last week, are substantive, indicating that the Treasuries market may have a series of illicit arrangements between dealers and customers that may eventually be uncovered.
But other rules are so basic that they seemed the equivalent of telling bank tellers not to embezzle money.


Restore Gorbachev, Bush Urges Moscow
In a sharp condemnation of the coup that overthrew President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, President Bush made a blunt demand for Mr.
Gorbachev's restoration to power and said the United States did not accept the legitimacy of the self-proclaimed new Soviet Government.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.55
5.50
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.17
5.24
7.55
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.23
5.29
7.45
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.62
7.62
8.68
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.10
8.08
8.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.08
9.08
9.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.98
6.98
7.50
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Change at Top Of P.R. Firm
The Hill &amp; Knowlton public relations firm said yesterday that its president and chief executive, Robert Dilenschneider, was no longer directly overseeing day-to-day operations and was reporting to an executive committee.
The changes in status for Mr.
Dilenschneider, 47 years old, were confirmed following an article in this week's issue of Advertising Age.
Industry executives have speculated about the status of Mr.
Dilenschneider, whose colorful personality and willingness to accept clients in fields like religion have made him controversial.


Jersey Turnpike's Bonds Are Priced
A $422.6 million tax-exempt revenue bond issue by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority was initially priced yesterday with a maximum yield of 6.943 percent for an issue due in 2014.
The bond issue is the first of a series of refinancings the authority will undertake over the next six to 12 months.
The purpose of the refinancings is to eliminate the authority's obligation to repay existing bonds.
Instead, interest and principal on those bonds will come from a pool of United States Government securities bought with the proceeds of this offering, thus allowing the authority to issue new debt.


Hail the Perfect Hero: Martinez Goes Home
Nicaragua gave Montreal Expos pitcher DENNIS MARTINEZ a hero's welcome yesterday on his first visit home since pitching a perfect game against the Los Angeles Dodgers last month.
Several hundred screaming fans and a guitar-strumming band greeted Martinez at the country's international airport in Managua.
The 36-year-old pitcher was given the keys to the city by Managua Mayor ARNOLDO ALEMAN and had lunch with President VIOLETA CHAMORRO.


New Kremlin Leadership: A Committee of Hard-Liners and Party Loyalists
Gennadi I. Yanayev Acting President


Independent Newspapers and Broadcasters Draw Coup's Early Fire
As the Kremlin power shift took hold of the nation today, some of the earliest targets were the independent newspapers that had taken healthy root in the years of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's glasnost policy of press freedom.
The new Kremlin group that seized power from Mr.
Gorbachev attended to the newspapers quickly.
In its second emergency proclamation of the day, it required them to reregister with the Government for approval to publish again.


California Medical Researcher Nominated as New York State Health Chief
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today nominated Dr.
Mark R. Chassin, a California medical researcher and businessman who has worked to improve the quality and affordability of health care, as the state's new health commissioner.
In selecting Dr.
Chassin, Mr.
Cuomo placed the state's evolving policies on AIDS, health insurance, medical malpractice and health care regulation in the hands of a man with little experience in New York's singular health care problems.
But aides to Mr.
Cuomo and Californians who know Dr.
Chassin praised his intelligence and his openness to diverse opinions, and said those qualities would offset his lack of familiarity with New York.


BRIEFS
Debt *
American Express Co. announced yesterday that it had completed a private sale of $300 million in preferred stock with Berkshire Hathaway Inc.


I.O.C. Eyes Soviet Republics
Officials of the International Olympic Committee met with sports officials in Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia last month about the possibility that those three Soviet republics could field their own national Olympic teams, it was revealed today.
Richard Pound, an I.O.C. member from Canada, told a news conference that despite the coup in the Soviet Union, those negotiatons would continue.


Music in Review
Bridgehampton Chamber Music
Presbyterian Church Bridgehampton, L.I.
One of the more uncommon roadside attractions for weekend-weary travelers along the Montauk Highway comes out of a white frame Presbyterian church in the center of Bridgehampton.
Inside, on four weekends during the summer, estimable young professionals -- many of them Long Island summer people -- play chamber music to well-tanned audiences of up to 425.


Ann Castle Is Married To Dr. Richard Seager
Ann Castle, the director of research in the development office at Harvard University, was married yesterday in Milwaukee to Dr.
Richard Hughes Seager, a lecturer on religion at Harvard.
Thomas Cooper, a Commissioner of the Milwaukee County Court, officiated at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Schuyler F. Seager 5th, the bridegroom's brother and sister-in-law.
The bride, 35 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
D.
L.
Castle of Ann Arbor, Mich.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in theology from Harvard.


A Sanitation Worker Dies in Truck Accident
A sanitation worker was killed yesterday when he was thrown from the garbage truck he was driving on to the Prospect Expressway near Greenwood Cemetery in the Park Slope section of Brooklyn.
His own truck then ran over him, the police said.
The driver, Edwin Plaza, 35 years old, was taken to Maimonides Hospital, where he died.


Trottier Stays a Penguin
BRYAN TROTTIER signed a one-year contract with the Penguins yesterday almost identical to the deal that paid him $400,000 last season.


Mexico's Ruling Party Leads in Elections
The ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party took a commanding lead tonight in early returns from Mexican midterm elections that the opposition said were marred by fraud.
Leaders of anti-Government parties said the irregularities in Sunday's voting were heaviest in two central states, Guanajuato and San Luis Potosi, where the races were most competitive.


Next: Players
STEVE STETSON, who spent three years as head coach at Boston University and was the head coach before that at Hamilton College, has been named the football coach at Hartwick College, which will resume a football program in 1992 after a lapse of 41 years.
Hartwick plans a a schedule of six or seven games in 1992 against an opposition of two-year, junior varsity and varsity programs.
Athletic Director KEN KUTLER anticipates that Hartwick will be ready to play a varsity N.C.A.A.
Division III schedule by 1994.
Stetson will spend this season recruiting players.(AP)


New York Will Raise Fees to Doctors for AIDS Patients
New York State will more than double, and in some cases triple, the Medicaid fees paid to private doctors for AIDS-related services to encourage more of them to treat patients infected with the AIDS virus.
The state is believed to be the first in the country to offer higher Medicaid reimbursements to primary care and specialty doctors for treating HIV-infected patients.
The state already pays higher special rates for AIDS-related care by hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, home-care services and hospices.


Bronx Man Is Guilty In Fire That Killed 87
After deliberating four days, a jury convicted Julio Gonzalez, a 37-year- old Cuban refugee, of setting the fire that killed 87 people at the Happy Land Social Club in the Bronx.
There were so many counts -- including 174 for murder, two for each victim -- that it took five minutes for the jury's foreman to read the verdict.
Relatives of the victims, some of whom had attended the trial every day, cried with joy and relief and hugged each other.


Editorial Notebook; The Hurricane's Eye
A hurricane is a thing of elemental force, like one of those monsters in a Peter Benchley novel, a giant squid or a huge shark: It's there, it's coming, and there's nothing that anyone -- Arnold Schwarzenegger, 500 meteorologists, 10 network weatherpeople, least of all
you
-- can do to stop it.
Even a hurricane with a benign and boring name like Bob therefore inspires not just fear but odd behavior -- revealing the power of Mother Nature and the idiosyncracies of human nature.


23 Candidates Endorsed
The Majority Coalition for a New New York has decided to endorse 23 City Council candidates and lend its support to nine others.
Four incumbents will be among the candidates sharing the $500,000 the coalition has said it will raise for the campaign.
Seven of the candidates the coalition is supporting are running against incumbents.


Britons Recount Misgivings on Ending Gulf War
The British Government wanted to continue to pursue Iraqi forces to inflict greater military damage on President Saddam Hussein, but was overruled by United States officials who insisted on calling a cease-fire, a former member of Britain's war Cabinet said today.
Sir Charles Powell, who retired earlier this year after having been foreign affairs adviser to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and her successor, John Major, said British officials politely deferred to the American decision, although senior British advisers believed that allied forces should have "closed the loop" on the fleeing Iraqis and denied the Government as much military equipment as possible.


Gorbachev's Loss, and Ours; The Unfinished Revolution
Rarely in history has there been a more drastic course correction than the new Russian revolution led by Mikhail Gorbachev.
Consider some of the changes in Soviet policies that were deemed almost unthinkable when the Gorbachev era began six years ago:
The Iron Curtain became a figure of speech and the Berlin wall a quarry for souvenir hunters with the end of the cold war, as Mr.
Gorbachev turned enemies into allies.


Excerpts From Bush News Conference on Soviet Coup: Hope and Warnings
Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference this morning in Kennebunkport, Me.: OPENING STATEMENT
While we're still watching the situation unfold -- and it still is unfolding -- all is not clear -- it seems clearer all the time that contrary to official statements out of Moscow that this move was extra-constitutional; outside of the constitutional provisions for constitutional change.


Daly Glad to Be Part of the Skins Game
John Daly, who captured the public's imagination by bashing his way to the P.G.A.
Championship two weeks ago with some of the longest drives ever seen in competition, has accepted an invitation to play in the Skins Game.
According to his agent, John Mascatello, Daly will join defending champion Curtis Strange, United States Open champion, Payne Stewart, and perennial participant, Jack Nicklaus, in the made-for-television event.


Weather Stalls Hartford Budget Plan
State lawmakers had set aside today for one more hard push to pass a budget for the fiscal year that began seven weeks ago, but, like so many other budget plans, this one was derailed -- this time because the weather was so threatening that legislators were told to stay home.
But there was renewed hope that a budget compromise was perhaps within reach in the State Senate, which has been the main bulwark of opposition to the income tax and revenue overhaul plan being pushed by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.


Some Similarity To Khrushchev
The removal of Mikhail S. Gorbachev from power calls to mind similarly stunning events of nearly 27 years ago -- on Oct. 15, 1964 -- when one of Mr.
Gorbachev's predecessors, Nikita S. Khrushchev, was deposed.
Like Mr.
Gorbachev, Mr.
Khrushchev was a figure cut from a different cloth than other Communist Party leaders.


Test-Drive for Software
A PICTURE used to be worth a thousand words.
Today, in the age of personal computers, a graphical display is worth a kilobyte of text.
At least that's the premise behind Select Demos, a CD-ROM product that contains more than a thousand graphical demonstrations of popular (and not so popular) MS-DOS and Windows programs.
It requires an I.B.M.
PC or compatible equipped with a CD-ROM drive.


MOSCOW AND THE MARKETS: Kremlin Shake-Up Jars the Financial World; Stock Prices Drop In Global Selloff; Dollar, Bonds Up
The world's financial markets reacted quickly and sharply yesterday to the ouster of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, with stock markets around the world falling as much as 9 percent.
The American dollar soared 3 percent against some currencies as the uncertainty sent investors looking for a safe harbor.
The Tokyo market was the first to feel the jolt and ended by losing nearly 6 percent, but as the trading day followed the sun westward and the immediate emotional impact of the coup wore off, some European and American stock markets regained a portion of their lost ground.
And in morning trading today in Tokyo, prices were down only slightly at midday.


Larry Bogart, an Influential Critic Of Nuclear Power, Is Dead at 77
Larry Bogart, an influential critic of the nuclear power industry and editor of widely read newsletters published from the basement in his home, died yesterday at East Orange General Hospital in East Orange, N.J.
He was 77 years old.
Mr.
Bogart, whose given name was Herman, but who used Larry all his life, died of injuries from an accident on June 19 when he was struck by a vehicle, said his oldest son, Roger.


Excerpts From Bush News Conference on Soviet Coup: Hope and Warnings
Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference this morning in Kennebunkport, Me.: OPENING STATEMENT
While we're still watching the situation unfold -- and it still is unfolding -- all is not clear -- it seems clearer all the time that contrary to official statements out of Moscow that this move was extra-constitutional; outside of the constitutional provisions for constitutional change.


NEWS SUMMARY
THE SOVIET CRISIS A10-17
The group that engineered the ouster of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev moved to reimpose hard-line control across the nation.
They banned protests, shut independent newspapers and flooded the capital with troops and tanks.
Page A1
News analysis: The takeover's spark was, by all indications, President Gorbachev's acceptance of a union treaty that promised the final demise of the old Soviet order and a surrender of power to the republics.
A1


Defense Chief Saw Gorbachev Hours Before Coup
The Soviet Defense Minister, Gen.
Dmitri T. Yazov, flew to the Crimea on Sunday and met with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev hours before Mr.
Yazov and other senior officials staged a coup and removed Mr.
Gorbachev from power, according to Bush Administration officials.
The nature of the conversations between the two men is not known, according to these officials, and General Yazov's flight has become a critical indicator only in hindsight as the Administration sought today to reconstruct the events of the weekend to understand the coup, which caught the world by surprise.


Species Loss: Crisis or False Alarm?
RATS, weeds, cockroaches and other hardy, ubiquitous "tramp" species may never inherit the earth.
But some scientists say they could make a run for global ascendancy if humans, as many biologists fear, precipitate a mass annihilation of less adaptable creatures.
In this scenario, the actions of an exploding human population are sundering the ecological webs that support life by setting off a worldwide wave of extinctions comparable to the one in which the dinosaurs perished some 65 million years ago.


Bridge
The semifinal stage of the World Junior Team Championship will be played here Tuesday at the University of Michigan campus, with Canada facing Australia in one match and two United States teams in opposition in the other.
The competition is being staged by the American Contract Bridge League for the World Bridge Federation, and is sponsored by NEC, the Japanese technology corporation.
In the last round of qualifying play Monday, Canada defeated Australia and as a result will begin Tuesday with a lead of 11 imps.
United States II will have a lead of 5, as a result of beating United States I in an earlier round.


At Kemper, No Defaults But Lots of Skepticism
Among the nation's major insurance companies, the Kemper Corporation would appear to be an exception in this real estate recession: virtually none of its $1.97 billion in commercial real estate mortgages and real estate joint ventures are in default.
Or so it seems from its financial filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
But over the last few months, insurance ratings agencies and stock market investors have become increasingly skeptical of Kemper's real estate portfolio.
In particular they have questioned whether the insurer is hiding losses in its joint-venture mortgages, in which Kemper lends money to partnerships it is a part of.


By Design; Clip-On Button Covers
When is a shirt not just something to hide under a jacket?
When it's gussied up with fancy buttons that transform it into an important article of clothing.
But not to worry.
The buttons won't get mangled in the laundry if they are the latest fad: button covers that clip onto a shirt's basic plastic buttons.


Harlan Foss, 50, Dies; An Operatic Baritone
Harlan Foss, a longtime New York City Opera baritone, died on Saturday at his in-laws' home in North Myrtle Beach, S.C.
He was 50 years old.
He died of colon cancer, said his agent, Martha Munro.


How Not to Identify Endangered Species
To the Editor:
The specious argument advanced by Lee J. Weddig of the National Fisheries Institute (letter, Aug. 6) must be exposed immediately.
Mr.
Weddig would have us believe that increased catches of marine fish demonstrate that this resource is not endangered.
Would he also argue that the ever-increasing rate at which rain forests are being destroyed demonstrates the lack of danger to that resource as well?
What is not generally understood is that more efficient technologies both conceal and accelerate the demise of valuable resources.
BRUCE WALLACE Blacksburg, Va., Aug. 13, 1991 The writer is a professor of biology at Virginia Polytechnic Institute.


Mattingly Powers Yanks to A Victory
Every inning, it seemed, the Yankees had more and more runners on base.
They were waiting, pleading, begging to be driven in.
But they wilted on the artificial turf while teammate Eric Plunk continued to tame the Royals.
The waiting ended and the pleading stopped when Don Mattingly clouted a two-run double in the ninth inning tonight that broke a 2-2 tie and carried the Yankees to a 6-2 victory over Kansas City at Royals Stadium.
The Yankees have won four of five games since Mattingly was benched last Thursday for not getting a haircut.


Continental Cuts
Continental Airlines Holdings Inc. said it would return up to 22 airplanes to lessors in an effort to cut costs among its fleet of 340.
The cutback will be among older planes and those considered least efficient.
Continental filed for bankruptcy protection in December and has since operated its full schedule of flights.
The fleet reduction will result in an unspecified cut in workers and in fewer routes as the airline adjusts schedules for the fall, when traffic normally tapers off.
The reduction plan was disclosed in a quarterly filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.


Dow Drops By 69.99, To 2,898.03
News of the Soviet coup sent the stock market plummeting yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average posting its largest drop since the early days of the Kuwait crisis a year ago.
Defying the trend, though, were military equipment stocks, which rose apparently on the belief that cuts in spending might be reversed, and oil shares, which were strong on the prospect of supply interruptions from the Soviet Union.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about Attorney General Dick Thornburgh's last day in office, and an article on Aug. 10 about his resignation to run for the Senate from Pennsylvania, misstated the length of the term being served by Harris Wofford, the appointee who succeeded the late John Heinz.
The term expires in 1995, not 1993.


Declaration of Emergency
Following is the text of a decree by the Acting President, Gennadi I. Yanayev, on the state of emergency in Moscow, as provided by the English-language service of Tass:
In view of the aggravation of the situation in Moscow, capital of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, caused by failures to fulfil resolution No. 1 of the State Committee for the State of Emergency in the U.S.S.R. of Aug. 19, 1991, by attempts to organize rallies, street processions and marches, and by instances of incitement to unrest, as well as in the interest of protecting citizens and their security in accordance with Article 127, Paragraph 3, of the U.S.S.R.
Constitution, I hereby resolve:


MOSCOW AND THE MARKETS: Market Place; A Flight to Safety That Slowed by Day's End
American investors leaped to get out of the stock market early yesterday after prices plunged overseas following the coup in the Soviet Union.
But later in the day, as prices stabilized, they began to move back in.
The retail buying was a source of support for share prices, which ended the day far above their lows, albeit with the Dow Jones industrial average down 69.99 points, or 2.4 percent, to 2,898.03.


People
*
Stephen J. Magee, a creative supervisor, has been promoted to senior vice president at Ayer Inc., New York, from vice president. *
Joel Shinsky, a creative director, has been promoted to senior vice president at D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, Chicago, from vice president.


Fears for Emigres And Peace Efforts
For the Israeli authorities and newly arrived Soviet immigrants, the ouster of Mikhail S. Gorbachev spread doubt and consternation today on two central issues: the destiny of Jews still waiting to leave the Soviet Union, and the future of efforts for a Middle East peace.
Because of totally different perspectives on the same two themes, however, news of the overthrow brought something like hope to many Palestinians in Israeli-occupied lands.
The new authorities in Moscow have not so far clarified their policies either on Soviet Jewish emigration or on the Middle East diplomacy that had been set to lead to a peace conference in October under joint United States and Soviet auspices.


Gorbachev's Loss, and Ours; The Lunge for Legitimacy
The world stopped yesterday in the Soviet Union.
The coup against Mikhail Gorbachev may not have been a surprise, exactly, but it's still a shock.
The Grand Bargain advocated by some Westerners to aid Soviet reform might never have worked; but now the world is threatened with a grievous loss.
Everybody knew the Soviet President was walking a tightrope.
And there were warnings of a coup, like the one last Friday from Mr.
Gorbachev's old ally Aleksandr Yakovlev.
But even so, after standing at the nuclear brink for decades, Americans were just starting to trust the forces of change that Mr.
Gorbachev set free.


U.S. Lifts Northrop Ban
The Northrop Corporation said today that the Pentagon had lifted a two-year suspension against a portion of the company's military electronics division.
The operation based in Norwood, Mass., was suspended from Pentagon business after Federal prosecutors accused Northrop of falsifying tests on missile guidance devices and other military electronics components, charges to which Northrop later pleaded guilty.


Hertz Sues Gralla And Avis Over Survey
The Hertz Corporation, Park Ridge, N.J., yesterday filed a lawsuit against Avis Inc., Garden City, L.I., and Gralla Publications, New York, over a recent survey in Gralla's Corporate Travel magazine that indicated business travelers prefer Avis.
The survey, which polled Corporate Travel's readers, was featured in a campaign by Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc., New York, Avis's agency.
In its suit, Hertz charged that the poll did not use survey methodology and, as a result, that Avis's claims were misleading.
The suit also charges that as employees who conducted the survey left the magazine, the survey data also disappeared from Corporate Travel's office under "mysterious circumstances."


Jazz It Up, Says Pele
The retired soccer star PELE is calling for radical rule changes that he thinks will make the sport more exciting.
"All sports from tennis to basketball have progressed, while soccer has changed almost nothing in its rules," Pele said in Montecatini, Italy, where he is attending the under-17 world championships.
"It's time for a change."


High Stakes for New York Lobbyist
Senior aides to some New York and New Jersey members of Congress occasionally greet Judy L. Chesser by dropping to their knees.
Others address her simply as "Your Royal Highness."
The majestic treatment lavished on Ms.
Chesser, New York City's official lobbyist, is a jibe at her celebrated nickname: the Sludge Queen.
She was unofficially crowned two years ago in recognition of her success in persuading Congress not to fine New York $730 million for dumping sewage sludge off the New Jersey coast.


2 Retailers Post Profits For Quarter
The K Mart Corporation said yesterday that its second-quarter earnings increased by 10 percent.
But profits of another big retailer, Toys "R" Us Inc., slid 11.7 percent.
Following are details of the companies' results: 1 K Mart
K Mart said profit rose to $162.8 million, from $148 million in last year's period.
Earnings per share were 81 cents, compared with 74 cents last year.


Jury Acquits Kramer
For the second time in four years, former Minnesota Vikings quarterback TOMMY KRAMER has been found not guilty of drunken-driving charges.
A jury in Minnetonka, Minn., deliberated about two hours yesterday before acquitting Kramer of driving while intoxicated.
Kramer faced the same charge in 1980 and 1987.
He pleaded guilty and paid a fine in 1980 and was acquitted in 1987.


Fatal Crash Starts Melee With Police In Brooklyn
A 7-year-old boy was struck and killed and his cousin was injured when a car jumped a sidewalk in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn last night and pinned them against a window grate, the police said.
More than 100 police officers, some in riot helmets, surrounded the accident scene as more than 250 neighborhood residents, mostly black teen-agers shouting "Jews! Jews! Jews!" jeered the driver of the car, a Hasidic man, and then turned their anger on the police.


Review/Rap; Third Bass, With Others on First
Third Bass's show at the Beacon Theater on Friday night was about cultural, political and commercial inclusion.
The group, which has a best-selling album, "Derelicts of Dialect" (Columbia), on the charts, is white and works in a predominantly black idiom, rap.
Like white jazz musicians before it, Third Bass starts from the notion that black culture and entertainment forms are learned; enough work spent understanding the culture and the idiom, and doors open before you.
The most energetic audience response of the show came when the group, offstage, had samples played from rappers not considered pure enough by the East Coast rap community, of which Third Bass is a member.
Included were snippets of M. C. Hammer's "U Can't Touch This" and Vanilla Ice's "Ice Ice Baby." The crowd howled in derision, and Third Bass came out and did its current hit, "Pop Goes the Weasel," a song given over in its entirety to exposing Vanilla Ice as rap's own fraud.


Baby Is Found And Reunited With Relatives
A woman whose car was stolen on Sunday with her 6-month-old daughter inside was reunited with the child today.
"It's a miracle," the woman, Anita Crosby, said.
"All we did was pray all night. We were all very worried. We just wanted her back with us."


Quotations of the Day
"Anyone who wants to live and work in peace, who does not accept the bloodshed, who wants to see his homeland in prosperity, must take the only right choice. We call on all genuine patriots, all people of good will, to put an end to this turbulent time." -- Gennadi I. Yanayev, after taking power as Acting President of the Soviet Union.  [ A12:2. ]
"We are absolutely confident that our countrymen will not permit the sanctioning of the tyranny and lawlessness of the putschists, who have lost all shame and conscience." -- Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian republic.  [ A11:6. ]


Giants Edge Oh-So Close, but Still No Starter
The Giants' quarterback decision is drawing closer.
"I'm 85 percent sure," Coach Ray Handley said today.


Some Conoco Stations To Sell Propane for Cars
Conoco will start selling propane today from pumps next to gasoline pumps at some of its stations in the Denver area, in a push to promote a cleaner fuel and capture a big share of a new market.
Propane burns much more cleanly than gasoline, but demand for it is so low that much of it is used as a chemical feedstock.
About 500,000 vehicles in this country use propane, most of them in truck and car fleets, according to the National Propane Gas Association.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
Pepsico Inc. issued $250 million in debt yesterday through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The five-year note issue was given an interest rate of 7 7/8 percent and priced at 99.733, to yield 7.94 percent, or about 70 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


TENNIS: The Reluctant Champion; For Stich, Life Is More Than One Tournament After Another
Michael Stich loves tennis, yet he admits he's already bored with it, too.
Just last month the 22-year-old German stunned everyone but himself by winning Wimbledon; this month he wishes he was in the soft sand on a beach somewhere instead of preparing for the hardcourt, hard-line atmosphere of the United States Open next week.
"I'm tired of tennis right now," he said, "but I'm also more professional about it than I was a year ago. Back then I would have considered getting to the quarterfinals of the Open as a great success; this time I expect myself to get there."


Pentagon Considering Reactors For Missiles
IN great secrecy, the Pentagon is studying whether to build a new generation of missiles powered by nuclear engines that would hurl offensive warheads toward distant targets far more efficiently than existing chemical-fueled rockets.
A Defense Department official said the study was a responsible way to explore how to modernize the nation's land-based missiles, many of which will be retired early next century.
Moreover, some private experts said the merit of investigating new kinds of armaments had been driven home by the sudden ouster of Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and his replacement by Communist hard-liners.


S.E.C. Widens Inquiry In Treasuries Scandal
The Treasuries market scandal that has rocked Salomon Brothers Inc. widened yesterday as the Securities and Exchange Commission began requesting documents from dozens of other firms, people who have been briefed on the growing inquiry said.
The commission is seeking evidence of possible widespread collusion, fraud and other illegal practices in the $2.2 trillion Treasuries market.
The far-reaching requests began to go out over the weekend, providing the first indication that Government investigators suspect that illegal bidding practices of the sort disclosed at Salomon Brothers may have been more widespread than previously thought.
All primary dealers, which are the institutions authorized to trade directly with the Federal Reserve, are being asked to provide documents in the inquiry, said the people who were briefed on the investigation.
They spoke yesterday on condition that they not be identified.


At Site of Tragic Blaze, Flowers and Prayers
Juan Gamoneda cried on his wife's shoulders; Ruben Valladarez stood dazed and speechless; Carlos Laguna closed his eyes and prayed.
The three were among the dozen or so survivors, friends and relatives of the victims of the Happy Land social club fire who returned to the site yesterday after hearing news of the conviction of Julio Gonzalez, a 37-year-old Cuban refugee, in the case.


Sports of The Times; Disclosing The Errors Of Umpires
AN American League umpire was fined recently, but neither the public nor the general baseball population knows who, how much and for what.
An umpire once was fined for wearing an unauthorized uniform, but no one knew it.
One umpire in each league is on probation for one year, until December, but that action by the commissioner, as well as the umpires' identities, have never been disclosed.
When players and managers are fined or suspended, on the other hand, the action becomes public knowledge.
It's not always the league offices that announce the disciplinary measures, but the information spreads rapidly.


In Germany, Soviet Soldiers Voice Concern
Soviet soldiers questioned near Berlin today said they feared the consequences of Mr.
Gorbachev's overthrow.
"We must leave no stone unturned to avoid a civil war in our country, a second Yugoslavia," said Lieut.
Vladimir Smirnov as he was leaving a video shop in Potsdam.
"There is a real chance for war now, in the Baltic region or the Caucasus."


MOSCOW AND THE MARKETS: Kremlin Shake-Up Jars the Financial World; Glancing Blow Seen in U.S., with Little Lasting Damage
The downfall of Mikhail S. Gorbachev is likely to deal the United States economy a mild, glancing blow over the next few weeks.
But it is sufficiently insulated from the Soviet Union's economy to avoid much lasting damage.
Many economists said yesterday that short-term problems -- the impact on the stock market, the dollar and perhaps agriculture -- could throw the incipient recovery from recession temporarily off course.
"But over the long term, the impact won't be very great, beyond the uncertainty that is likely to prevail for a while," said David M. Kemme, a Russian expert and economist at Wichita State University.


Gambling Raid Angers Mining Town
Well before Idaho was a state, there were gambling houses, brothels and boisterous saloons in this storied mining country in the Coeur d'Alene Mountains.
So it wasn't exactly a surprise when, on the morning of June 23, Federal agents from all over the West raided virtually every bar here in Shoshone County and found more than 200 video poker machines.
Gambling, local officials say, is one of the few industries that have yet to die in the area.


Yeltsin's Remarks: A 'Reactionary Coup'
Following are excerpts from remarks made in Moscow today by Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian federated republic, as translated by the State Department:
I am reading.


RESULTS PLUS
ROWING  U.S., Germany Strong The United States and Germany made strong showings in the world rowing championships in Vienna yesterday, each putting boats into two finals and three semifinals.
The Americans clinched berths in the finals of both women's and men's coxless four.
The United States men's coxless fours won their heat in 6 minutes 28.30 seconds, well in front of Germany, Italy and Denmark.
Australia won the other final spot, racing Britain to the line with a four-second advantage.


In Building of Schools, Going Beyond a Square.
As it proceeds with one of the biggest school construction programs in the nation, New York City is experimenting with new designs for the basic building blocks of education.
Two years into the program, the city, through its contracted architects, has devised several innovations that may serve as models for schools nationwide.
They include a new basic classroom shape, corridor "streets" and school buildings that can be transformed into separate sub-schools.


Market Place; Coup Seen Aiding Stocks in U.S.
WITH stock prices down on news of the Soviet coup, many American stock market strategists are arguing that the coup, and the resulting economic and financial impacts, made American stocks a much better buy.
"My experience is that these political events do turn out to be pretty transitory" in terms of market impact, Greg Smith, the chief strategist at Prudential Securities, said yesterday.
But he added that the turmoil in the Soviet Union was likely to make investing in Europe less attractive, while improving the relative standing of markets in this hemisphere.


What Banks Can Do That Nothing Else Can; Abolish Insurers
To the Editor:
Jay G. Baris recommends we "Abolish Banks (Seriously)" (Op-Ed, Aug. 6).
Mr.
Baris believes that just as we do not need savings and loan associations, we do not need savings and commercial banks.
With the elimination of all of these, the Government would be relieved of huge financial burdens.


Newport After the Storm: Peevish but Still Standing
Like a dowager who has taken a fall into the pool, this stately resort town calmly but somewhat peevishly began to wring itself out today from the hurricane that crashed through on Monday.
Newport was the first significant city to be hit by the storm as it moved ashore, and it greeted Hurricane Bob with a kind of sturdy disapproval befitting a city that was once a summer home to the Vanderbilts and the Astors, boarding up its windows and firmly securing its yachts.


Dow Ends With 15.66 Rise; Early Rally Cut
Stock prices yesterday regained part of the ground lost in Monday's slide, with many traders apparently believing that the Soviet crisis would have a limited impact on the American economy.
Still, reports of tension in Moscow took some steam out of a strong early rally.
The Dow Jones industrial average took back nearly a quarter of Monday's 70-point loss, rising 15.66, to 2,913.69, after soaring 25 points at the opening.


Indians Sign Lease For Florida Camp
The Cleveland Indians have signed a two-year lease with the city for a new spring training center here, the team announced today.


Cuts by Team Canada
BRIAN BELLOWS and DAVE GAGNER, two members of the Stanley Cup finalist Minnesota North Stars, were among 15 players cut from Team Canada yesterday, in preparation for Canada Cup competition, which starts Aug. 31.
Team Canada General Manager MIKE KEENAN sliced the squad to 38 with the cuts, which also included right wing GARY LEEMAN and defenseman DAVE ELLETT of the Toronto Maple Leafs and center JOE SAKIC of the Quebec Nordiques.


Herbert Ferber Is Dead at 85; Abstract Expressionist Sculptor
Herbert Ferber, an internationally recognized Abstract Expressionist sculptor, died yesterday at his summer home in North Egremont, Mass.
He was 85 years old and also had a home in Manhattan.
He died of cancer of the bile duct, his wife, Edith, said.


C.D.'s and Bank Funds Fall
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were down sharply for the week ended yesterday.
According to The Bank Rate Monitor, an interest rate publication based in North Palm Beach, Fla., the rapid decline of C.D. yields has sent depositors reeling, since many of the traditional havens for depositor money are just as low, or even lower than current yields.


Bush Gamble: Coup Can Be Reversed
President Bush's risky decision to try to force the restoration of the deposed Government in Moscow appears to be based on a gamble that the coup is still reversible, as well as a recognition of the demands of domestic and international politics.
Responding to these pressures, Mr.
Bush has taken the United States into largely uncharted territory by opposing the coup in Moscow and trying to influence Soviet politics more directly than anytime in the more than 70 years since American forces fought with the counterrevolutionary army against the Bolsheviks in the Russian civil war of 1918-19.


New York Puts Its Papaya Where Its Hot Dogs Are
NEW YORK has never been a town known for its logic.
Things that make sense here often seem bizarre anyplace else.
Take papaya drinks and hot dogs.


Will the Coup Kill Communism?
The feared Communist Party of the Soviet Union is finished.
To be sure, it won't disappear overnight.
And there is a terrifying possibility that it may claim thousands -- perhaps hundreds of thousands -- of new victims before it finally submits to its inevitable demise.


Georgia Issue's Top Yield 6.98%
A $168 million tax-exempt bond issue by the Hospital Authority of Fulton-De Kalb, Ga., was tentatively priced through the Trust Company Bank in Atlanta.
The maximum yield is 6.98 percent for a bond due in 2020.
For shorter maturities, investors are offered serial bonds that are priced to yield from 5.5 percent in 1995 to 6.3 percent in 2001, 6.8 percent in 2006 and 6 7/8 percent in 2010.
For long maturities, a bond due in 2010 is priced to yield 6 7/8 percent and a bond due in 2015 is priced to yield 6.94 percent.


Rates Set on $3.6 Billion Of Home Loan Banks' Debt
The Office of Finance of the Federal Home Loan Banks yesterday set the interest rates for a $3.6 billion, five-part bond issue being offered through various securities dealers.
Traders said all maturities were priced at par, with the interest rate on the $750 million, three-month maturity set at 5.4 percent, and the rate for $750 million of a six-month issue set at 5.43 percent.
For $1 billion of one-year securities the rate is 5.625 percent, while the rate on $413 million of a two-year maturity is set at 6.22 percent and $687 million of three-year securities is 6.7 percent.
Dealers outside the regular selling group said the spread between the agency's securities and Treasury securities with a similar maturity ranged from 8.5 basis points to 16.5 basis points.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.
Proceeds from the financing will be used to refund part of $4 billion in bonds that are maturing on Aug. 26.


U.S., in New Step, Will Let In 1,000 Tibetans
A group of Tibetans and their American supporters are preparing to resettle groups of Tibetan refugees in the United States for the first time.
Until now, only a trickle of Tibetans have entered the United States -- a total of 500 in the last 30 years, officials say -- largely because Washington has been reluctant to displease China by giving Tibetans either refugee or immigrant status.
China claims historical sovereignty over Tibet, reinforced by military occupation in 1950.


Review/Television; Female Patient Involved With Twin Psychiatrists
It could happen to any beautiful fashion model.
A few months after Rachel Marks (Isabella Rossellini) begins an affair with a wholesome psychiatrist named Jonathan McEwan (Aidan Quinn), she gets involved with his unwholesome identical twin brother, James (Aidan Quinn).
Jonathan is the sort of person who makes house calls on schizophrenics; James, also a psychiatrist, boasts that he treats only wealthy neurotics with minor problems, a category that fits Rachel until she gets involved with James, who has a way of making minor problems major.
That's the plot of "Lies of the Twins," tonight's two-hour concoction at 9 on the USA cable channel.
Since her two boyfriends evidently use the same hair stylist and sometimes the same tailor, Rachel has the darndest time telling them apart, except in bed or, in James's case, on the hood of his car.
Jonathan hardly rumples the sheets; James makes the earth move and tests the athleticism of the camera crew.
"I never did that before," says Rachel.
James says, "It's always a shock to find out what you really like."


5 Family Members Killed in Truck Collision
Five members of the same family were killed in a head-on collision with a pickup truck near Sarasota Springs, N.Y., yesterday.
The driver of the truck was charged with driving while intoxicated, the Saratoga County police said.
The collision occurred on Route 50 in Northumberland at 4:05 P.M., said Sgt.
Edward Rooney, a spokesman for the Saratoga County sheriff's department.
He said the two vehicles collided at a slight bend in the road.


Foreign Affairs; Countering the Coupsters
Viktor Komplektov, the Soviet Ambassador to Washington, slipped into the White House on Monday with a personal message for President Bush from Gennadi Yanayev, the figurehead Soviet coupster.
The message revealed the coupsters' devilishly clever strategy: to persuade Mr.
Bush to treat the new hard-line Government in Moscow with the same indulgence and understanding he has given to hard-liners in Beijing.
The bait in the coupsters' message showed a keen insight into Mr.
Bush's mind: If the U.S. would not slam the door on mutual dealings, Americans would find the new Government committed to carrying out the Gorbachev reforms at home -- and more important, dedicated to working with the U.S. on foreign policy, just like Mikhail Gorbachev.


THE SOVIET CRISIS: Man in the News; Skillful Party Climber: Boris K. Pugo
When Boris K. Pugo was appointed head of the Interior Ministry in December, people in his home republic of Latvia responded with alarm.
Either Mikhail S. Gorbachev was charting a conservative course, they said, or he was being steered that way by forces beyond his control.
A career K.G.B. and Communist Party official, Mr.
Pugo, who is a key member of the coup leadership, is particularly despised in the Baltic republics, where his hard-line stance against independence movements is viewed as an unforgivable betrayal of his Latvian roots.


Now, Computers Are Bringing Comfort to the Office
An industrial designer who wants to see how an American man, 6 feet tall with a large frame, fits into a newly designed office chair no longer needs to either build the chair or find a man of the appropriate size.
A new software package called Mannequin can place a movable, three-dimensional, anatomically accurate figure onto a personal computer screen so a designer can see how he reacts to the chair.
Can he twist his body easily?
Can he reach the phone on his desktop?
Do his feet rest comfortably on the floor?
The software can provide the answers.


Jews Facing No New Emigration Hurdles
Despite the turmoil after the hard-line coup against Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Israeli officials said today that Soviet Jews had thus far encountered no apparent obstacles in leaving the Soviet Union to emigrate to Israel.
But the officials said it was too early to say whether the absence of restrictions on Jewish emigration represented a signal to the West of long-term benevolent intentions.


The Soviet Crisis at a Glance
The Struggle for Leadership
Resolve Stiffens on Both Sides: The coup leaders met rising opposition with a curfew and armored movements in Moscow that provoked clashes.
Three civilians were killed near the parliament of the Russian republic, where the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, was holding out.
Throngs of his supporters shielded the building from troops.
Page A1.


Food Notes
Mystery Over Morels
People who search the woods in spring for morels often refuse to reveal their favorite spots.
Neither, these days, does Charles Balducci, produce director for Balducci's, 424 Avenue of the Americas (Ninth Street).
Only his morels don't grow wild.
They are cultivated in greenhouses and are in the market now.


Bridge
One semifinal match proved to be lopsided at the World Junior Team Championships today at the University of Michigan.
The event is organized by the American Contract Bridge League for the World Team Championship, and is sponsored by NEC, the Japanese electronics corporation.
After 32 deals of a scheduled 64, the United States II team, consisting of Jeff Ferro, Wayne Stuart, Brian Platnick, John Diamond, Martha Katz and Debbie Zuckerberg, led by the overwhelming margin of 105 imps against the United States I team.
Barring a miracle, they will play in the final on Wednesday against either Canada or Australia.
At the midpoint of that semifinal the Canadians led by just 3 imps.


Waste Company Raises $200 Million
A $200 million note offering by Waste Management Inc. of Oak Brook, Ill., was priced yesterday through Merrill Lynch.
The notes, due in 1996, were given a 7 7/8 percent coupon and priced at 100, to yield about 63 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Third Attempt Fails to Free Antenna on Jupiter-Bound Spacecraft
The third attempt to fix a balky antenna on the Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft was pronounced a failure yesterday by mission managers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in California.
The setback cast new doubt on the fate of the $1.4 billion mission, the most ambitious American planetary expedition now under way.


A Boy's Death Ignites Clashes in Crown Heights
Hasidim and blacks clashed in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn through the day and into the night yesterday as the two communities, separately and bitterly, each mourned a member killed, one in a traffic accident on Monday night and the other stabbed in the racial melee that followed.
Bottles, rocks and ethnic slurs were hurled as hundreds of police officers struggled to separate the screaming, taunting groups near the headquarters of the Lubavitcher sect, at 770 Eastern Parkway.


Brooklyn Victims: Wrong Place and Time
The one who had just finished first grade spent most of his time racing around the block on his bicycle.
The one who was an Australian scholar spent most of his time in libraries in Manhattan, doing research for a doctoral dissertation about the Holocaust.
They lived less than a mile apart in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn -- 7-year-old Gavin Cato with his parents in a two-bedroom apartment, 29-year-old Yankel Rosenbaum with friends in a two-family house.
They did not know each other.
They had no reason to know about the longstanding, visceral distrust between blacks and Jews that informs life in their neighborhood.
They died unaware of that distrust and how it would become a focus for protesters, mourners and city officials determined to keep grief from turning into violence.
Skid Marks and Flowers
Yesterday, on the block where Gavin was struck and killed by a car that jumped a sidewalk and pinned him against a window grate, there were skid marks and a large bouquet of flowers surrounded by smaller ones.


Harrelson Focuses On Field, Not Future
Bud Harrelson insisted yesterday that he just wanted to get started.
If the Mets could win just one game, they could win a dozen.
They could make people forget about their 10-game losing streak.
He wanted to manage last night, manage the rest of this season, manage next season in New York.
But the bad luck would not go away.
It was raining hard at Shea Stadium, so the game against the St.
Louis Cardinals was postponed and became a part of a twilight-night doubleheader today.


People Have to Free Themselves
Faced with his gravest international challenge, President Bush has risen to the occasion with measured strength.
Like the rest of the world, his Administration was stunned by the Soviet coup.
Yet within hours, Mr.
Bush quickly set a principled and prudent course.
The President has emphatically aligned the United States with Soviet reformers, reaching out directly to Boris Yeltsin and calling for restoring Mikhail Gorbachev to office.
Mr.
Bush promises to continue supporting Soviet democrats in a variety of useful ways.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
Ah, young love: so sweet, so fickle.
And the young lads of Brookfield Center, Conn.: by their graffiti, shall ye know them.


Gorbachev Reportedly Arrested in the Crimea
The overthrow of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev began at 4 A.M.
Monday when two tractor-trailers manned by the K.G.B. blocked the runway of the airfield near his summer home in the Crimea, said a Soviet official who said he had detailed information from sources that he did not disclose.
The official, Sergei B. Stankevich, Moscow's Deputy Mayor and a prominent proponent of change, said Mr.
Gorbachev and his closest advisers apparently remain at his dacha at Foros, on the southern tip of the Crimean peninsula, blockaded by an armada of ships and troops.


College Town of 'Mr. Jefferson' Offers Genteel Haven for Rich and Famous
Until a couple of years ago, Tim and Daphne Maxwell Reid were living the way successful television and film actors might be expected to: They had a big house in Hollywood.
And a big car.
And big parties.
And big friends.
Then they chucked it all and moved to a little farm on the outskirts of this university town in the gentle foothills of the Blue Ridge Mountains, where they pump their own gas down at the crossroads store and the clerk at the Southern States Cooperative asks them a lot of questions about feed and fertilizer but never brings up their roles in old prime-time television shows like "WKRP in Cincinnati," "Frank's Place," "Snoops" and others.
Sometimes they go back to Hollywood to make a little money, but they don't stay away long. long List of Delights
"This is just what I needed," Mr.
Reid said of his self-imposed exile from the show business scene.
"Out on the Coast, we had it all at first glance, the good life. But my blood pressure was way up. I was getting more and more negative. There was no satisfaction. It was an unreal world. I've found what I was looking for here in Charlottesville."
So too in recent years have many other people from the entertainment world, especially film actors, along with a number of writers and a seemingly endless stream of refugees from big industry, big finance and the jet set.
Charlottesville has been "discovered" by those who seek, and can afford, a setting where privacy is respected, where there is a good balance of intellectual stimulation and lazy-dog relaxation, where the nation's early history seems to come alive, where Southern gentility, even chivalry, still thrives and, perhaps above all, where the land rolls away toward the mountains in the west with a beauty that snatches the breath at the top of each crest and the bottom of every vale.
As Patricia Kluge, the former wife of John Kluge, the media billionaire, and one of the first of the new settlers, puts it: "The world is my playground, but Charlottesville is my home."
Charlottesville was once known chiefly as the home of Thomas Jefferson and the University of Virginia, the architecturally stunning "academical village" that he founded and designed.
But over the past decade Charlottesville has become a real estate hot spot, with million-dollar tract houses spilling out toward the mountains and white-fenced, 200-acre horse and cattle farms going for whatever the heart's desire will pay.
"Every so often we have to leave to do the work that we do," said Mr.
Reid, who is probably best known for his role as Venus Flytrap in "WKRP" or as Frank Parrish in "Frank's Place."
"But once you've seen the sun set behind the hills here, just once, you'll always come back. And when you get back, nobody will pester you to talk show business and the clerk at the grocery will tell you she missed you. This is not Hollywood East."
Mrs.
Reid, who has a broad and varied television career, was also in "Frank's Place," as Hanna Griffin, Frank's romantic interest.
Besides the Reids and the Kluges (they are now divorced not only legally but also by an intervening farm), the list of actors, playwrights, novelists, poets and others of fame and fortune who own homes and farms in the area includes Lee Majors, Kate Jackson, Sissy Spacek, Sam Shepard, Jessica Lange (Mr. Shepard's companion), Ann Beattie, Peter Taylor, Rita Mae Brown, Mary Lee Settle and Muhammad Ali.
"They're everywhere," said Mariflo Stephens, a freelance writer who has chronicled some of the comings and goings.
"You run into them at the market or the dress shop. Most of the time they're just plain folks, keeping low-key on purpose, talking about kids or a sick horse or a tractor that won't start. Except for a big bash now and again at one of the Kluges, where somebody like the Governor will drop in by helicopter, there's not much glitz." Big Business, Too
Nobody has bothered to pull together a list of industrialists, business executives and financiers who have retired here or who escape to estates here on weekends.
But they include one of the Bronfmans of distillery fame and one of the Busches of brewery fame to an heir to the Champion spark plug fortune and an heir to the Scripps-Howard publishing fortune.
Charlottesville has always had a strong pull on University of Virginia alumni, and over the years many of the more successful graduates have returned here upon retirement.
Some have encouraged friends to join them.
But how did Hollywood, Wall Street and Publishers Row discover the town?
Some people say Art Garfunkel was the pioneer, taken by the place when he visited for a concert, though he eventually moved on.
Whatever the case, the word about the city and surrounding Albemarle County, whose population is less than 100,000, is spreading rapidly.
"It's mostly by word of mouth, one retiree to another, one movie star to another," said Joyce Robbins, a marketing specialist who is an active member of the Chamber of Commerce."
Some people worry that Charlottesville may have too many good things going, that it is in danger of losing its special feeling as the home of Jefferson and the University of Virginia (always referred to by tradition-infused Virginians as "Mr. Jefferson" and "the university").
As the city and university have grown, some of the rolling farmland on the outskirts has been overrun by shopping strips and subdivision sprawl.
Big-city crime has arrived, including drug dealing on Mr.
Jefferson's hallowed campus (always referred to as "the grounds").
At the same time, the influx of the rich and famous has made Charlottesville one of the most expensive places to live in Virginia.
Staige Blackford, a Charlottesville native, university graduate and Rhodes scholar who now edits the university's literary digest, The Virginia Quarterly Review, has been watching these developments with concern.
"People can talk all they want about how nice and quaint it is to rub elbows at the supermarket with Sissy Spacek or how glitzy it is to sup with one of the Kluges," he said, "but you really can have too much of a good thing."
He added: "The sad fact is that we've reached the point where the average wage earner in Charlottesville can no longer afford to buy the average home in Charlottesville. Now where does that leave us?"


Remarks by Major: Yeltsin on the Line
Following are excerpts from Prime Minister John Major's news conference today in London: OPENING STATEMENT
I spoke a short while ago to President Yeltsin in the Russian parliamentary building.
I agreed with him to make public the contents of our conversation, and so I will on this occasion refer to the notes I made during our speech, during our discussion.


Harpsichord and Handel at Merkin Hall
"The Harpsichord in France" and the complete suite from Kurt Weill's rarely heard work "Marie Galante" will open the Merkin Concert Hall season on Sept. 25 and 26 respectively.
The harpsichord program, part of the On Original Instruments series, will feature Andrew Appel and the Four Nations Ensemble in works by Couperin, Mondonville, Rameau and Schubert.
The Weill program, which is part of the Music Today series, will have the soprano Angelina Reaux as soloist, and will offer works by Bernstein, Falla, Milhaud and Poulenc.
Other programs in the Original Instruments series are a concert version of Handel's opera "Alessandro" on Oct. 31, and three Haydn symphonies by the Apollo Ensemble on Dec. 11.
The other series dates are Jan. 20, Feb. 13, March 5 and April 30.


What Banks Can Do That Nothing Else Can; Think of Workers
To the Editor:
Jay G. Baris may make some novel points in "Abolish Banks (Seriously)" (Op-Ed, Aug. 6), but he curiously overlooks one major problem.
By abolishing the roughly 16,000 banks within the United States, including the American-based branches and offices of foreign banks, Mr.
Baris will cheerfully send hundreds of thousands of people to the unemployment office, ranging from janitor to chief executive officer.


Ewing and Riley Get Together, Perhaps to Chat About Trade
Patrick Ewing has spoken.
Not publicly, but to Pat Riley, the Knicks' new coach.
The two had a one-on-one meeting last Tuesday in Washington, and, according to a person familiar with the Ewing situation, the All-Star center gave Riley a list of possible teams that he wants to be traded to.
The Knicks issued a statement from Riley yesterday in which they confirmed that such a meeting took place but refused to verify whether there was any trade talk or whether such a list existed.


Downtown Retailing; Cincinnati Puts a Mall In a Tower
Tower Place at Carew Tower, a shopping center in the heart of this city, opens Wednesday as the $100 million bait that city leaders hope will lure shoppers downtown again.
The 250,000-square-foot center eoncompasses the renovated Art Deco arcade of the 61-year-old Carew Tower, Cincinnati's tallest building, and the adjacent atrium-style Tower Place, which was completed this month on the site of the former L. S. Ayres department store.


Cornered, 7 Wanted in Gandhi's Death Commit Suicide
A three-month police hunt to capture the Sri Lankan Tamils who are believed to have planned the assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi ended abruptly when the chief suspect and six confederates committed suicide as the police closed in on their hideout in the southern city of Bangalore, officials said.
"The deaths are confirmed," said a spokesman for the Central Bureau of Investigation.
"Sivarasan shot himself in the head. His chief accomplice, Subha, and the others consumed cyanide."


Papp Names Akalaitis to Step In As Shakespeare Festival Head
Joseph Papp, the founder of the New York Shakespeare Festival and its sole artistic leader for 37 years, has appointed JoAnne Akalaitis to succeed him, effective immediately.
The appointment ends a year of speculation on who would take over for the legendary director and showman who introduced New York City to free Shakespeare in the Park in 1956, and who turned 70 in June.
The choice of Ms.
Akalaitis, 54 years old, who has been Mr.
Papp's artistic associate for the last year, signals a major change in the programming direction of the festival, long considered the premier nonprofit theater in the United States.


Top Optical Coating Job Goes to Laser Pioneer
Herbert M. Dwight, one of the pioneers of laser technology, has joined Optical Coating Laboratory Inc. as chairman, president and chief executive officer.
The Santa Rosa, Calif., company produces specialty lenses and mirrors for use with lasers and in other high-technology applications.
Mr.
Dwight, who is 61, succeeds Rolf F. Illsey, Optical Coating Laboratory's founder, who is retiring.
Mr.
Illsey, 70, will continue to consult with the company for approximately two years.


Community Health Clinics Cut Back As Malpractice Insurance Costs Soar
Rising malpractice insurance costs are forcing many of the nation's 600 community health centers to cut back or eliminate some services for low-income patients they are required to treat under Federal law.
Malpractice insurance costs for some clinics have risen 30 percent to 40 percent in the last year and have increased more than fourfold in the last decade, even though many of the clinics have not paid a penny in malpractice claims to patients.


Brokers Accept S.E.C. Barring
The Securities and Exchange Commission today said that three former brokers at J. T. Moran &amp; Company had agreed to be barred from the industry.
The commission said it settled administrative proceedings on Aug. 13 against Richard Chennisi, Kevin Sullivan and Robert Hasho.


Book Notes
A Gorbachev Scramble
In the age of instant publishing, upheaval in the Kremlin equals upheaval in the New York book business.
Faster than most people can say "coup d'etat," publishers are changing manuscripts and titles, accelerating schedules, changing covers and the tenses of verbs, trumpeting their far-sightedness and generally trying to cash in on the turmoil.


Europe Is Willing; Is Soviet Economy Able?; Economy Viewed As Achilles' Heel Of New Regime
While leaders of the Soviet coup paint themselves as the true champions of reform, few Western analysts say they have the way or the will to reverse the Soviet economy's slide toward entropy.
Indeed, the economy's grim prospects could prove the Achilles' heel of the new regime.
The emergency committee's vow to clean the streets of "squanderers of the national wealth" -- an ironic echo of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's early war on corruption -- might scare some farmers and factory managers into delivering the goods and temporarily curb their diversion to black markets.
And the more pragmatic bureaucrats who serve the new regime might imagine a Chinese- or Chilean-style economic liberalization that secures the position of the ruling elite.  'Economic Primitives'
But Jeffrey Sachs, a Harvard researcher with close ties to Polish reformers, scoffs at the prospect.
He dismisses the coup's leaders as "economic primitives" lacking the power to cope with the immediate problem of exploding prices or the knowledge to remake the failed system of production and distribution.
And he points out that leaders who earlier this year attacked foreign investors as plunderers will not be able to look westward for help.
The economy Mr.
Gorbachev inherited in 1985 offered its citizens a living standard roughly comparable to that of Mexico or Poland, one so wasteful that it was unable to grow in spite of rates of saving and investment that would put the thrifty Japanese to shame.
The economy Mr.
Gorbachev bequeaths produces even less, and seems on the verge of unraveling in a gale of inflation.
One reason Mr.
Gorbachev accomplished so little in economic terms, argues Lawrence Summers, the chief economist of the World Bank, is that he tried so little.
In the early years he played the role of Stalin with a human face, asserting that socialism could be saved if only the proletariat would pull up its socks.
Later he promulgated sweeping plans to pension off Moscow's bureaucrats, decentralize production decisions and allow wholesale prices to be set by markets.
But these bold initiatives were largely ignored by the planners.
And rather than fight, Mr.
Gorbachev generally switched to the new and improved version served up by new and improved advisers.
The other reason, Mr.
Summers suggests, is that perestroika's great political success, the attenuation of the Communist Party's authority, damaged the old-boy network that kept cheap bread and sausage on the store shelves.
And the resulting loss of power without a parallel strengthening of markets to discipline economic decision-making put the Soviet Union on the path to hyperinflation.
Enterprises were allowed to pay workers more, while bureaucrats were unable to say no when enterprise managers demanded that the resulting losses be financed with freshly printed rubles.
Meanwhile, output fell because Moscow was unable to micromanage deliveries of critical materials or to prevent hoarding within factories -- or republics.
But spendable income skyrocketed, lengthening the lines for staples sold at low fixed prices and dramatically increasing incentives to divert goods into the black market.
To cope with the crisis of too many rubles chasing too few goods, Mr.
Gorbachev decreed sharp increases in prices in April.
According to PlanEcon, a Washington consulting firm, the price reform raised the cost of living by 74 percent over the January 1991 level, enough to take the steam out of inflation if wage increases were held to prescribed levels, production was maintained and taxes collected by republics were channeled back to the national budget.
But those were all big "ifs." According to official Soviet statistics, output in the first half of 1991 was 12 percent smaller than in the first half of 1990.
Russia and the Ukraine, the largest republics, have thus far withheld 1991 tax payments to Moscow.
And before the coup the Soviet Ministry of Finance projected a budget deficit equal to 15 percent of national output.
Hard-liners backed by the military and the K.G.B. might be expected to have more leverage to break Soviet inflation and restore economic order, the way Gen.
Augusto Pinochet stabilized prices and made Chile safe for capitalism.
But Mr.
Summers argues that "it is absurd to think they will produce a Chilean-style miracle."  Food and Housing Cited
The budget deficit can be cut, Mr.
Summers explains, only by a government that is prepared to reduce living standards or deny some entrenched interest its expected slice of the pie.
He doubts that the junta, which yesterday declared its "prime concern is the solution of food and housing problems," is prepared to test its legitimacy by paring consumption.
And he finds it unlikely that a government brought to power by the Red Army could slash the No. 1 item in the budget, military procurement.
Mr.
Gorbachev used imports, financed by exports and loans, to absorb excess purchasing power.
But Keith Crane, an economist at PlanEcon, points out that this source of sustenance was already closing for Mr.
Gorbachev and is likely to slam shut on the new government.
Imports fell 45 percent in 1990, largely because oil exports fell sharply and the Government could not borrow extra cash from wary foreign banks.
This year Mr.
Crane estimates that $20 billion in principal and interest on private foreign loans will come due; before the coup Moscow was none too subtly hinting that it would need to stretch out repayments.
End of Hope for Foreign Goods
Sometime this year, Mr.
Crane predicts, "the Soviets are going to stiff their creditors," and in the process end the hope of infusions of foreign goods to tame the inflation beast.
But Mr.
Sachs argues that "even if they got the budget right, they'd solved nothing." Whoever is in charge must get the economy growing again.
And while Mr.
Sachs concedes the new leaders "may find a way to make the trains run on time," they haven't a clue about creating free markets or making them work.
None of the members of the emergency committee are trained in Western economics and none have been associated with reform-minded members of the Gorbachev Government.
President Gorbachev hoped to enlist foreign business in the transition.
Hundreds of joint ventures, most of them European, are already operating, and this summer the prohibition against majority enterprise control by foreigners was lifted.
Sufficient Pragmatism Seen
Michael Claudon, the president of Geonomics, a Vermont foundation specializing in Soviet economics, says that Acting President Gennadi I. Yanayev is sufficiently pragmatic to press the initiative.
And he says that "a strong central government could be good for Western business."
But Mr.
Claudon concedes that it would take a lot of convincing to entice foreigners to invest in the junta: "All the momentum that was building over the past few months is lost," he said.
Faced with the certain loss of power and perquisites, the old guard was obviously prepared to run the gantlet of foreign and domestic hostility.
But "this was a coup without an ideology," argues Mr.
Crane, one that cannot be sustained on dreams of a "socialist nirvana." Eventually, he predicts, they will be forced to go with what works.
And in the 1990's, that means democratic capitalism.


Housing Offering By Texas Agency
The Texas Housing Agency yesterday priced $81.7 million in single-family mortgage-revenue refunding bonds with a maximum yield of 7.125 percent for an issue due in 2012.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company led an underwriting group that priced the shorter maturities to yield from 4.85 percent for a bond due in 1992 to 6.05 percent in 1996 and 6.55 percent in 2001.
In the longer maturities, the bond due in 2006 is priced to yield 7 percent.


Unit of Dun Plans Changes
Dun &amp; Bradstreet's information services unit plans to revamp its North American operations, based in Murray Hill, N.J., a company spokesman, Reid Gearhart, said yesterday.
"This is simply a reorganization of staff in order to more efficiently meet customers' needs," Mr.
Gearhart says.
"This is not a restructuring at all." Dun &amp; Bradstreet has undergone numerous restructurings in recent years, typically by selling businesses, he said.


Bangkok Journal; Where Beauty Queens Preen, No Eyesores, Please
The World Bank and Miss Universe are coming to town, and for that reason some of Bangkok's struggling poor have been told to move out.
Thousands of Bangkok slum dwellers have been ordered to leave their homes as quickly as they can.
The first 2,000 must be out by October, when the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund open their annual conference in the new National Conference Center.
As many as 5,000 others will be evicted before May, when the glistening conference center is the site of the 1992 Miss Universe Pageant.


NUCLEAR FAIL-SAFE DESCRIBED AS FIRM
Military experts said yesterday that political turmoil in the Soviet Union might paradoxically tighten control over that country's 27,000 nuclear arms.
But they added that if events progressed to civil war, an outcome whose likelihood is impossible to assess, the struggle might conceivably end in the weapons being used for blackmail or fired in a hostile action.
Even in calm times, it is difficult to say who has a finger on "the button" to launch Soviet missiles and fire nuclear arms, the experts said.
In times of upheaval it is even more difficult.


Salomon Is Losing Big Client
The investigation of Salomon Brothers Inc. widened yesterday, and the shaken firm began to see the first significant loss of client business in the wake of the Treasuries markets scandal that has enveloped it since last week.
The giant California Public Employees' Retirement System, known as Calpers, announced yesterday that it would suspend doing business with Salomon's Government trading desk, even as another large pension fund said it would keep its business at Salomon while the Government's investigation of the firm continued.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization.
Aug.16
Aug. 9
Aug. 17
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.1
7.2
Distillate production, daily
2.9
2.9
3.1
Gasoline stocks
205.8
207.4
214.0
Distillate stocks
123.7
123.6
121.6
Crude imports, daily
7.0
6.9
6.5
Product imports, daily
2.2
1.4
3.2
Crude stocks
343.6
348.1
375.7
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
88.8
88.1
92.3
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


MANDELA'S TROOPS SEEK A NEW ROLE
The African National Congress's guerrilla wing, Spear of The Nation, is struggling to find a new sense of mission following the congress's decision a year ago to suspend its long-term threat of working toward armed struggle against Pretoria.
Though the Spear of the Nation's guerrillas can now come home from their camps in African countries to the north under a Government amnesty announced Friday, their leaders are unwilling to fully demobilize the fighters, viewing them as leverage to be used in future negotiations with the Government while also hoping that the guerrillas might play an important role in whatever South African army emerges after those talks.


The Versatile Allure of Japanese Noodles, Served Hot or Cold
AKIHIDE YONEHAMA has eaten a bowl of noodles every day since he was 3 years old.
He is now 49.
Mr.
Yonehama, the owner of Menchanko-Tei, a Manhattan restaurant whose name translates as "a house of mixed noodles," is not alone in his passion.
In fact, noodles may become Japan's next great food export, after sushi.
Slinky, slippery noodles are popular for two reasons: versatility and cost, said Elizabeth Andoh, author of "An Ocean of Flavor: The Japanese Way with Fish and Seafood" (William Morrow, 1988).


Bankruptcy Protection Is Sought by Kalikow
Peter S. Kalikow, one of New York City's biggest real estate developers and publisher of The New York Post, filed for personal bankruptcy protection yesterday.
Burdened by debt taken on to expand his empire, Mr.
Kalikow, who inherited a large fortune and was once one of the nation's wealthiest individuals, also put Kalikow Real Estate Company, one of his property partnerships, in bankruptcy.


New York State Errs on Vocational Education
To the Editor:
The Oregon attempt to educate technically minded students should be looked at carefully by the New York State Board of Regents (front page, July 24).
The Regents action plan has so far been a dismal failure when it comes to the needs of vocationally oriented students.
There is a greater incentive to drop out of school now that a foreign-language requirement has replaced industrial arts as a New York State requirement.


Pollution-Control Project Financed
The New York State Environmental Facilities Corporation yesterday priced a $48 million water-pollution-control revenue bond through competitive bidding won by Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company.
The bond offering, involving a Westchester County project, was bought and reoffered to the public at a price to yield from 4.4 percent for a bond due in 1992 to 5.35 percent in 1996, 5.95 percent in 2001, 6.4 percent in 2006 and 6.5 percent for bonds due in 2008 through 2011.


Economic Scene; German Unity: Paying the Bill
WHAT a difference a year can make.
When the eastern and western German economies merged in anticipation of political union last July, most analysts assumed that the east's financial troubles would be washed away in a torrent of Deutsche marks.
Today eastern Germany is straining to produce two-thirds as much as it did in 1989, and T-shirts bearing the legend "Bring Back The Wall" are all the rage in Berlin.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 21


John Musilli, 55, Television Producer Of Documentaries
John Musilli, a producer and director of television documentaries, died on Saturday at his home in Kinnelon, N.J.
He was 55 years old.
He died of cancer, said his wife, Linda.


An Agency Finds a Fit With Coach
EYEBROWS rose on Madison Avenue in May when Coach Leatherware, the marketer of elegant, understated and expensive leather goods, hired Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, the feisty shop best known for brash, risk-taking campaigns for Kenneth Cole shoes and No Excuses jeans.
But an advance look at the first Coach advertisements created by the agency shows the coupling is not as odd as it first seemed.
The print ads feature descendants of famous Americans to convey the image of Coach products as contemporary, yet with traditional style.
What Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond can offer Coach, the ads indicate, is a youthful, updated point of view.
That fits with the intent of the Sara Lee Corporation, Coach's parent, to steer younger customers to Coach.


France Faulted in Escape of 3 Iranians
With the killers of former Prime Minister Shahpur Bakhtiar of Iran still at large, French and Swiss police officials are shamefacedly trying to explain how those suspected of killing him have repeatedly escaped arrest over the last two weeks.
The authorities complain that tips about the whereabouts of the three fugitive Iranians have been leaked so quickly to the press that at times policemen and reporters have stumbled over each other as they rushed to check out new leads.


CHRONICLE
It took some linguistic and culinary doing, but the staff of the Mostly Mozart Festival at Lincoln Center managed to wish GERARD SCHWARZ, the festival's music director, a happy birthday in Japanese.
The message on a cake celebrating Mr.
Schwarz's 44th birthday on Monday translated as: "To the great conductor Maestro Schwarz. It's your birthday." The Japanese touch was a tribute to his scheduled departure with the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra next Wednesday for nine concerts in Toyko.
The trip, falling in the 25th season of the festival, will be the first abroad for the orchestra, whose New York summer series has become immensely successful with its informal atmosphere.


Patients Refusing to Be Well: A Disease of Many Symptoms
THE young man said his head felt as if it were filled with cotton, his heart felt "weak," his arm was numb and tingled, his veins ached.
By the time he was referred to Dr.
Arthur Barsky, a psychiatrist at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, he had been examined by specialists in infectious disease, endocrinology, allergy, kidney disease and neurology and was scheduled for tests at three different Boston hospitals.


New Phone Lines for Data Planned by Small Company
Hoping to lure more big-business customers away from traditional local telephone companies, a small Illinois company announced plans today to offer high-speed communications "superhighways" in several cities that are far faster than telephone lines now available.
The new networks are being installed over the next year by Metropolitan Fiber Systems Inc., which currently owns fiber-optic lines that serve large business customers in 11 cities, including New York.
The new lines employ advanced switching equipment that will allow them to carry up to 100 million bits of data a second.
In contrast, the fastest lines now available from local phone companies carry 45 million bits a second.


What Banks Can Do That Nothing Else Can; Where Were Lawyers?
To the Editor:
Jay G. Baris's "Abolish Banks (Seriously)" (Op-Ed, Aug. 6) makes me wonder seriously where the lawyerswere when all these fancy investments were being dreamed up by all the savings and loan associations that have gone broke.
Could these savings and loan association presidents have been so wise as to have processed all these investments without legal representation?


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Activated Lloyd Moseby, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.


U.S. and Soviet Help Sought in Salvadoran Talks
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations wrote American and Soviet authorities two days before the military coup in the Soviet Union asking help from them "to cut the Gordian knot" facing the Salvadoran peace talks.
A Soviet official said here today that he envisioned no change in his Government's policies toward Latin America, particularly El Salvador and Nicaragua.
But he added that the coup would at the very least delay any effort by the superpowers to comply with Mr.
Perez de Cuellar's request.


Review/Film; 'Barton Fink,' a Dark Comedy From Joel and Ethan Coen
Joel and Ethan Coen's "Barton Fink" looked very good at Cannes this year, where, in the first sweep ever at the film festival, it was awarded the prizes for best film, best direction and best performance by an actor.
The news this morning: "Barton Fink" looks even better on home territory.
After three movies in which they seemed to be finding their bearings ("Blood Simple," "Raising Arizona" and "Miller's Crossing"), the Coens have at last produced an unqualified winner.
Here is a fine dark comedy of flamboyant style and immense though seemingly effortless technique.


Will New Name at Mazda Bring Love at First Drive?
Mazda has found a name for its new luxury-car division, in a Latin text.
After much speculation, Mazda Motor of America said today that it had chosen "Amati" to rival Honda's Acura, Nissan's Infiniti and Toyota's Lexus.


Sites Studied By Goldman
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company has told employees it is evaluating a possible headquarters relocation to the suburbs, the latest big Wall Street company to reassess New York as a home base.
Goldman emphasized in an internal memorandum last week that the evaluation was part of a routine review.
It said alternative sites would be examined in neighboring New Jersey, Connecticut and Westchester County.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Bausch &amp; Lomb, Rochester, the health care and optical products company, named Frank M. Stotz senior vice president-finance. *
First Investors Corp., New York, a mutual fund company, appointed Michael S. Miller chief executive, Anne T. Dunne deputy chief executive and Kathryn Head chief financial officer.


Governors Urge Overhaul of Health Care in U.S.
The nation's governors approved a policy statement today urging sweeping reform of the American health care system to make "health care affordable and available for all," but only after sharp partisan debate over whether to call for the Bush Administration and Congress to act by 1994.
The policy statement passed unanimously, reflecting broad agreement that there was a growing crisis in both the cost and the availability of health care, which the governors said was straining state budgets already pressed by the recession.


INSIDE
End to Budget Impasse
Possible in Hartford
The deadlock in Connecticut may be close to resolution as three Senators switched stands and said they would back an income tax.
The plan would impose a flat 4.5 percent tax on all income, cut the sales tax to 6 percent, from 8 percent, and end the tax on income and dividends.
Page B1.
Kalikow in Bankruptcy
Peter S. Kalikow filed for personal bankruptcy protection.
The New York Post, owned by the developer, will not be affected, he said.
Page D1.
Salomon's Troubles Deepen
As the shaken firm began to see its first big loss of client business, U.S. investigators started examining executives' holdings.
Page D1.
Papp Successor Chosen
JoAnne Akalaitis has succeeded Joseph Papp as head of the New York Shakespeare Festival.
Page C11.


Liberal Coalition Pushes Goals in Council Races
Last Saturday, an unwieldy group of civic reformers, advocates for ethnic groups, elected officials and labor unionists crowded into the second-floor auditorium at a union headquarters on West 43d Street to hash out New York City's political future.
By the end of the day, they had decided to support 31 City Council candidates, including a Bronx political neophyte who had raised only $125 and a well-known son of city politics whose endorsement had been opposed by a powerful member of Congress.


An Unspectacular but Upward Course for the Yankees
There was no drama surrounding the Yankees' 7-3 victory over Kansas City tonight at Royals Stadium.
No late home runs, no pitchers' duel and no play at the plate to decide the game.
Just a lot of basic baseball.
Scott Sanderson pitched five decent innings to keep New York in front, the splendid bullpen preserved the lead without incident over the last four innings, several players had timely hits and the Yankee outfielders played as if they were on wheels with four neat catches.
The elements combined to lift New York to its fifth victory in the last six games.


Turkey Mocks Truth on Human Rights
To the Editor:
Aydin Sahinbas, minister-counselor of the Turkish Embassy, refers in his Aug. 10 letter criticizing "Torture in Turkey" (editorial, July 20), to the "progress" made in human rights in Turkey.


James Edward Clark, Dog Show Judge, 64
James Edward Clark, a dog sportsman and dog show judge, died on Monday in Centreville, Md.
He was 64 years old.
A spokesman for the family said Mr. Clark died of lung cancer.


When Parents and Children Go to School Together
In two portable classrooms, hardly more than construction trailers with desks and blackboards, two generations of students venture into often perplexing streams of printed words.
Set on a grassy elementary school playground in Louisville, Ky., one classroom contains preschool-age children, while a neighboring one contains their mothers.
Three days a week they come to the same school -- traveling in the same yellow buses, eating meals in the same cafeteria, pursuing the same certificate -- as part of an innovative program to break the cycle of illiteracy and poverty in America and establish a foundation for learning and critical thinking among families at risk.


Topics of The Times; One Cheer for Kuwait
Kuwait has taken a modest but important step to protect human rights.
For the first time, defendants convicted in special security courts have been granted a right of appeal.
The move follows a justifiable outcry over harsh sentences imposed by martial-law courts against people who allegedly collaborated during the Iraqi occupation.
Martial law has since been lifted.
And now hundreds of defendants who face trial on collaboration charges will have the right to appeal verdicts of special security courts.
But they will still face two questionable practices.
Unlike judges in ordinary courts, those in these special tribunals have no tenure; they serve at the Emir's pleasure.
And security court trials are secret; only the opening and closing hearings are open to scrutiny.


Two Deaths Ignite Racial Clash In Tense Brooklyn Neighborhood
Gavin Cato, a black 7-year-old from Guyana, and Yankel Rosenbaum, a 29-year-old Hasidic visitor from Australia, were strangers, both to each other and to the pent-up resentments that seethed beneath the calm of their Brooklyn neighborhood.
Now they are dead, mourned in bitterness by the separate communities that make up the troubled Crown Heights section.
On Monday night, young Gavin was pinned against a window grate by a car driven by a Hasidic man.
Word of the accident brought out bands of angry black youths.
Mr.
Rosenbaum was stabbed, and yesterday morning he died.
Two teen-agers were arrested in the killing.
Screams and Taunts
Blacks and Jews took to the streets of Crown Heights yesterday afternoon and evening, screaming and taunting, flinging rocks and bottles and slurs.
About a dozen police officers were hurt and at least 14 people were arrested.


Aggressive Approach Pays Off for Cardinals
They're talking about moving the fences in at Busch Stadium, talking about maybe even putting grass down too.
To lovers of Cardinal baseball, it might sound as if what they're doing is talking blasphemy.
What else could talking about taking Ozzie Smith and Jose Oquendo off the artificial turf be?
Or talking about making it possible for players who go by names other than Willie McGee to deal with the canyons that now roll on and on forever in left-center (383 feet), right-center (383) and dead-center (419)?


Excerpts From Bush's Talk: 'You Don't Set Back Democracy Very Easily'
Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference this morning: BUSH'S STATEMENT
Well, events in the Soviet Union continue to deeply concern the whole world.
The unconstitutional seizure of power is an affront to the goals and aspirations that the Soviet peoples have been nurturing over the past years.
This action also puts the Soviet Union at odds with the world community and undermines the positive steps that had been undertaken to make the Soviet Union an integral and positive force in world affairs.


Quotation of the Day
"We will stop them at the furthest point, and not let them reach here. We are completely certain of this. We have the people behind us. Tonight we will turn the course of events." -- Gen.
Konstantin Kobets, the Russian Defense Minister, defying Soviet troops.  [ A1:2. ]


BRIEFS
DEBT *
City and County of Denver priced $21.8 million in general obligation water refunding bonds through competitive bidding won by Merrill Lynch.
Rated double-A by both Moody's Investors Service and Standard &amp; Poor's Corp., the bond, which is due 2006 and being offered to the public, is priced to yield 6.5 percent.


Topics of The Times; Senator Sensitive
Senator Alfonse D'Amato of New York says months of scrutiny by the Senate Ethics Committee have made him "more sensitive" to the appearance of impropriety.
But not sensitive enough, judging from his recent mailing to constituents.
"The Senate Ethics Committee has found that I did nothing wrong," begins the letter, mailed to three million New Yorkers at taxpayer expense.
Yet the committee's findings fall far short of a total vindication.


Larsson and Slow Court Bring Wheaton's Fast Exit
Ten times already this year, Magnus Larsson had arrived at a tennis tournament only to discover that his first-round opponent was one of the three top-seeded players.
It was the sort of challenge that didn't always inspire him to bother unpacking.
A first-round scenario today at the Norstar Bank Hamlet Challenge Cup matched Larsson and third-seeded David Wheaton, and this did not bode well for the Swedish baseliner, who is ranked 56th.
Wheaton, the hard-hitting American, had defeated Larsson in both their previous encounters and earlier this summer had made it to the semifinals at Wimbledon, which helped improve his self-confidence and his ranking, to 12th in the world.


European Community Halts Economic Aid to Moscow
Alarmed and angry about the ouster of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the European Community suspended all but humanitarian aid to the Soviet Union today.
The community cut back more than $1 billion in food credits and technical aid as it demanded that Mr.
Gorbachev be reinstated.
Calling the seizure of power by the emergency committee now running the government "a flagrant violation" of the Soviet Union's international pledges to move toward democracy, the community said it would suspend economic assistance until constitutional order and human rights were restored.


Deere Net Off 72% in Quarter
Deere &amp; Company today reported a 72 percent drop in its third-quarter net income.
The maker of farm and industrial machines said a worldwide recession had dampened demand for its products.
The company's third-quarter net income totaled $31.3 million, or 41 cents a share, down from $114 million, or $1.50 a share, for the quarter a year earlier.


Voices of U.S. Scholars: 'These Forces Go Way Back in Russian History'; Scholars See a 'Putsch,' a Gang of Rivals, and Analyze the Plotters' Chances
Stephen F. Cohen
Professor of politics and director of the Russian studies program at Princeton University
For almost seven years, Gorba chev led a reformation which sought to reverse the Russian des potic tradition which existed long before the revolution.
He sought to do this through political and eco nomic democratization and open ing the country to the West.


NUCLEAR FAIL-SAFE DESCRIBED AS FIRM
Military experts said yesterday that political turmoil in the Soviet Union might paradoxically tighten control over that country's 27,000 nuclear arms.
But they added that if events progressed to civil war, an outcome whose likelihood is impossible to assess, the struggle might conceivably end in the weapons being used for blackmail or fired in a hostile action.
Even in calm times, it is difficult to say who has a finger on "the button" to launch Soviet missiles and fire nuclear arms, the experts said.
In times of upheaval it is even more difficult.


New Smith Trial Judge Sought
The prosecution in the William K. Smith rape case filed a motion today demanding a new judge.
The motion asked Judge Mary Lupo of Palm Beach Circuit Court to step down on the grounds that she was biased and had personal and professional conflicts in the case.


Short-Term Rates Drop Further
Interest rates on short-term issues moved lower again yesterday and bond prices rose as the continuing crisis in the Soviet Union gave investors ample excuse to redirect funds into high-quality, safe securities.
In addition to the Soviet crisis, traders said prices had also risen in anticipation that the Federal Reserve Board is about to lower short-term interest rates again soon and the idea that the economy may be falling back into recession.


Sports of The Times; In Cuba, Different Priorities
IT is not quite 8 A.M., but Havana is a bustling, rumbling ocean of noise and fading pastels.
Red and yellow buses spewing billows of black smoke are packed with Cubans going every which way to work.
Monday's news of the Soviet Union's political upheaval faded with Monday's sunset.
This is a new day and a new adventure.
A group of women in their 60's and 70's sits on concrete benches in Antonio Maceo Park near central Havana.
They chat quietly and prepare for their daily exercise class in a ritual that is being duplicated in parks throughout the island.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly SPECIAL COMMITTEE ON DECOLONIZATION -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
PREPARATORY COMMISSION FOR THE LAW OF THE SEAS -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Man Held in 2 Rapes Is a Suspect in Similar Crimes
A man arrested last week in the rape and robbery of a 27-year-old German ballerina in a Manhattan PATH station is a suspect in a series of similar subway crimes, the authorities said yesterday.
The suspect has already been charged in the rape of a 15-year-old girl, the authorities said, and he is being investigated in connection with two other rape cases.


Mental Workout to Fight Addiction
Two fitness specialists suggest a self-retraining process to counter irrational beliefs about exercise.
Writing in American Health magazine, the two, Dr.
J.
Morrow of John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York and Dr.
Philip Harvey of the Mount Sinai School of Psychiatry, also in New York, encourage exercise addicts to focus twice a day on these five ideas:
1. Rest days are an essential part of any good fitness program.


Teach Amtrak Crews About Passenger Safety
To the Editor:
We were on Amtrak's Empire Builder when it derailed at Saco, Mont., on Aug. 5, 1988, injuring scores of passengers.
Our responses to the investigators' included "Amtrak personnel seemed overwhelmed and confused by the situation"; "there was no direction or plan demonstrated by the Amtrak people"; there was no one in charge"; "able-bodied Amtrak employees were standing around with hands in pockets; their attitude reflected at best incompetence, at worst inhumanity, in the face of human distress."


Jets to Field Four Backs Who Can Run for Daylight
Blair Thomas, the No. 1 draft choice, gained only 620 yards last year, followed by a developmental squad graduate, Brad Baxter, with 539 yards.
Next came the veteran Freeman McNeil (458) followed by Johnny Hector (377).
The conclusion? The Jets have a suspect running attack.


Retrial of North Is Possible, Prosecutors Say
Iran-contra prosecutors said in court papers today that they might seek another trial of Oliver L. North if the convictions against the former National Security Council aide are thrown out.
"Although retrial of the defendant North on any of the remaining counts is unlikely, independent counsel cannot at this time definitively rule it it out," said the legal brief, signed by Michael R. Bromwich, a member of the North prosecution team.


Yugoslavs Grope for a Way to Rule as 4 Are Killed
Rebel Serbs attacked the eastern Croatian town of Osijek Monday night and this morning with mortars, killing four people, Croatian officials said today.
The attack was the most formidable to date by the ethnic Serbs against a city dominated by Croats.
Serious violence was also reported in or near Karlovac, Pakrac, Beli Manastir and other towns in the separatist republic.


Europe Is Willing; Is Soviet Economy Able?; Many in Europe Plan to Plod Ahead With Soviet Deals
European executives and analysts may deplore the overthrow of Mikhail Gorbachev, but they are prepared to do business with a more authoritarian Soviet Government, even one that came to power by unconstitutional means, as long as the situation does not degenerate into civil war.
Unlike some of their American counterparts, European business tends to be apolitical and sometimes even cautiously optimistic in its assessment of the Soviet change in government.
On the political front, by contrast, the European Community today suspended all but humanitarian aid to the Soviet Union.


CHRONICLE
When DAVID BRINKLEY was 10 years old, he became fascinated with the newsreel camera.
Walking down Front Street in Wilmington, N.C., to watch a parade in 1930, he saw a Fox-Movietone cameraman behind a large camera on a tripod filming the parade, the "Feast of the Pirates," and Mr.
Brinkley recalls thinking the man "must surely have the finest job on earth."
Now, after almost 50 years as a journalist, much of it spent in front of news cameras, Mr.
Brinkley has returned to Wilmington to do research for a book on his hometown.
This week he reminisced about the year his family spent at the Brinkley summer home in nearby Wrightsville Beach, a time he remembered as "probably the best year in my life." His mother, he said, was "an ardent prohibitionist married to a part-time drunk."


Pope Lauds Gorbachev For His Rights Reforms
Pope John Paul II warmly praised Mikhail S. Gorbachev today as a true champion of human rights, and pleaded that the changes set in motion by the ousted Soviet leader not "fall into decline."
Ending a five-day journey to Hungary, the Pope told tens of thousands of worshipers at an outdoor Mass in Budapest that he remembered "with gratitude" the two times that Mr.
Gorbachev visited him at the Vatican, in 1989 and 1990.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about Sony Music's new contract with the rock group Aerosmith misidentified the record company with which the singer Janet Jackson signed a large contract.
It is Virgin Records, not Island Records.


Remarks by Major: Yeltsin on the Line
Following are excerpts from Prime Minister John Major's news conference today in London: OPENING STATEMENT
I spoke a short while ago to President Yeltsin in the Russian parliamentary building.
I agreed with him to make public the contents of our conversation, and so I will on this occasion refer to the notes I made during our speech, during our discussion.


Moorer Proves Pushy Outside of Ring, Too
Mike Tyson isn't the only heavyweight with problems outside of the ring these days.
Consider Michael Moorer.
On July 27, Moorer, a former World Boxing Organization light-heavyweight champion, knocked out Alex Stewart and established himself as a serious contender in the heavyweight division.
But that triumph has been clouded by a legal jam Moorer got into on Aug. 4 in his hometown of Monessen, Pa.


Electoral-Fraud Accusations Raising Tensions in Mexico
The two most prominent opposition candidates in last Sunday's mid-term elections urged their supporters into the streets today to protest what the candidates called blatant fraud in the governing party's sweeping victory.
Tonight, thousands of supporters of Vicente Fox, the conservative National Action Party's candidate for governor of Guanajuato state in central Mexico, were reported to have rallied in the city of Leon to demand official recognition that he had won the race.
Partial official returns showed the candidate of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI, with a comfortable lead.


A Long Night in Crown Heights
The violence following an auto accident in Crown Heights reminds all New Yorkers that the city's race relations remain dangerously strained despite the election of a Mayor who campaigned on his ability to ease such tensions.
Yet Mayor David Dinkins merits warm praise for prompt and reassuring leadership after the disturbances began on Monday night.
For years, blacks have coexisted uneasily with the Orthodox Jewish community of Hasidim in the Crown Heights neighborhood in Brooklyn.
The potential for broader trouble was clear when a car driven by Hasidic men jumped a curb and struck two black children, one of whom later died.


New York Post Workers Are Offered Reassurances
Peter S. Kalikow went to The New York Post yesterday afternoon to reassure employees that the operation of the paper, which he acquired in 1988, would not be affected by his filing for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
In his talk to The Post's employees yesterday, Mr.
Kalikow said that he did not plan to sell or close the paper.
Thus far, union leaders seem convinced that the paper is in no immediate jeopardy.


Review/Film; Yen Is Root Of All Evil, In Comedy From Japan
Japan's Age of Affluence is ridiculed with a good deal of wit in "The Yen Family," a rich and bitter satire about one suburban Tokyo family's efforts to acquire still more money, all of it in very small change.
The 1988 Japanese film is the work of Yojiri Takita, the director of a splendidly lethal sendup of television journalism, "Comic Magazine" (1986).
"The Yen Family" opens today at the Film Forum 1.


Milwaukee Journal; College Tries to Aid Its Neighborhood
In the past six years, five Marquette University students have been slain or have died in fires in the declining neighborhood that surrounds the campus here.
Once an enclave for middle-class families and those employed by the university, the neighborhood, a 30-block area just west of downtown, has deteriorated steadily since the 1960's.
It is now home to mostly low-income families living in frame houses that look very much their age.
Homeless people drawn to a soup kitchen near the campus often beg students for money.


From a Pollutant, a Cleaner Fuel
Despite recurring energy crises, the world has plenty of fuel.
The problem is, it is in the wrong place or the wrong form.
Coal does not run cars and trucks, and natural gas, because it is hard to ship, often runs nothing at all.
From time to time, desperate governments and venturesome capitalists try to produce diesel fuel and gasoline, the cream of the hydrocarbons, from natural gas or surplus coal.
But usually these efforts are uneconomical.


Markets Revive a Bit From Shock of the Coup
World financial markets rebounded slightly yesterday after a precipitous fall Monday following the ouster of Mikhail S. Gorbachev from the Soviet leadership.
The dollar also eased a little, another reflection of the stabilizing of the concern about the consequences of the takeover of the Soviet Government by a group of hard-liners.


Reports From the Republics Vary From Relative Calm to Threats of Military Action
While tension stalked the Soviet capital on the second day of the Communist coup, reports from around the country indicated that the military had made threatening movements in the Baltic republics, but that there was to relative calm across most of the rest of the nation.
The impression gleaned from telephone calls and correspondents throughout the Soviet Union was that for now at least, the efforts of the State Committee on the State of Emergency, which seized power from President Mikhail S. Gorbachev on Monday, seemed focused largely on Moscow and the Baltic republics, and specifically on Boris N. Yeltsin, the President of the Russian federated republic, who has defied the coup leaders.


Wine Talk
THE setting could be a Somerset Maugham story or a Lubitsch film or an Ivor Novello play.
A group of elegant people are at dinner and the conversation drifts around to wine.
One of the guests, a renowned wine expert, is challenged by another diner to guess what they are drinking.
The expert demurs at first, then accepts.
A hush falls on the table.
The great man swirls his glass, inhales the bouquet, essays a tentative sip.
Brow furrowed, he stares deep into his glass, as if to unlock its secrets by the very intensity of his gaze.
He sips again.
The tension is palpable.
Finally, he speaks:


RESISTANCE TO SOVIET TAKEOVER GROWS AS DEFIANT CROWDS RALLY FOR YELTSIN
The leaders of the Kremlin coup, facing increased opposition, responded on Tuesday with a curfew and fresh armored movements in Moscow that provoked clashes with angry civilians.
The midnight violence, in which at least three people were killed defying the military curfew, occurred after a long, anxious day in which large crowds sought to protect the headquarters of Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian republic.


A New Devils' Trial: No Word From Fetisov
Brendan Shanahan left last month and signed as a free agent with St.
Louis.
Troy Crowder, another valuable young player, is on the verge of departing, probably to Detroit.
Sean Burke, the towering goaltender who was supposed to be the backbone of the franchise, continues to want to be traded.
And Slava Fetisov is somewhere in the Soviet Union.
For the New Jersey Devils, it has been some summer.


U.S. Would Trade 96 Acres for 7 In Deal With New Jersey Builder
In a deal with a developer that is drawing criticism from environmentalists, the National Park Service plans to trade 96 acres of wooded recreation area for seven acres of private property along the Delaware River.
The park service maintains that the properties are of equal value, although it refuses to disclose their appraised values.


Gimme the Mustard and Another Plat du Jour
COMPARING the gastronomic wares at various papaya and hot dog stands around New York City is sort of like testing roller coasters at amusement parks: they all promise the same experience, but some leave you woozier than others.
On a recent Saturday afternoon I visited eight such tropical eating spots to sample the sundry drinks they sell as well as the plat du jour, the all-American hot dog.
If one thing is clear after an investigative tour it is that the two original papaya outlets -- the Papaya Kings on 86th Street and Third Avenue and 59th Street and Third Avenue -- are palpably superior to the clones I visited.
Here is a brief wrap-up.


BUSH SNUBS CHIEFS OF 'ILLEGAL COUP'
President Bush today told the leaders of Monday's coup in the Soviet Union that the United States would refuse to establish normal relations with them, and he telephoned Boris N. Yeltsin to offer support.
"We are not giving up on the restoration of constitutional government in the Soviet Union," the President declared as tanks maneuvered in the streets of Moscow, well before the first signs that the coup might have stalled.


Insurers Must Pay For Preventive Tests
To the Editor:
"Rules on Approved Uses of Drugs Could Bar Help for Some Patients" (front page, Aug. 11) is true and timely.
However, the larger issue is why these patients need these drugs.
It is usually because they had relatively advanced disease when first seen.


3 Ex-O.T.B. Employees File Race-Bias Claims
Three former employees of the New York City Off-Track Betting Corporation filed discrimination lawsuits yesterday against the corporation's president, Hazel Dukes, who is also president of the local N.A.A.C.P. chapter.
The two women and one man, all white, claimed they were dismissed because Ms.
Dukes favors black employees.


Personal Health
YOU may believe that anyone who exercises more than you do is exercising too much.
However, some fitness enthusiasts overdo it by anybody's standards.
Various terms have been applied to the phenomenon -- exercise dependency, exercise addiction and exercise bulimia, among them -- and to the people affected, who may be called fitaholics and exercise junkies.
For people caught in its grip, the problem hardly differs from addiction to nicotine, alcohol or gambling.
As in all forms of addiction, the activity controls the person, rather than the other way around.


Changed Agenda for Moscow Envoy
For Robert S. Strauss, the Democratic elder and millionaire lawyer, the political chaos in the Soviet Union makes his mission as Ambassador to Moscow far different from what he envisioned when he accepted the appointment two months ago.
When President Bush selected him, he was expected to work with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and help him pioneer a way to a free-market economy.
But now the coup by hard-liners has inspired questions of whether Mr.
Strauss, who knows little about the Soviet Union and has only a smattering of Russian, is equipped to handle the very different challenges posed by the current turn of events.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
Comptek Research Inc., Buffalo, a maker of command, control and communications equipment, said its Comptek Telecommunications Inc. subsidiary has completed the acquisition of the operations and assets of Communications Systems Consultants Inc., and Electric Information Ltd., both Buffalo-based companies that furnish integrated network services for data communications.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Frisch's Restaurants Inc., Cincinnati, an operator of Big Boy restaurants, has completed the sale and reorganization of its Big Boy restaurants in Florida, Kansas, Oklahoma and Texas.
Terms were not disclosed.


Apple Venture With Adobe
Healing a rift between the two companies, Apple Computer Inc. and Adobe Systems Inc. signed a letter of intent today that calls for Apple to include Adobe's computer font technology in a future version of System 7, Apple's new operating system for the Macintosh.
In May 1990, Apple announced that it would develop its own software to replace Adobe's Postscript, which controls the output of laser printers.
Apple backed away from that stand a year later, saying it would continue to license Postscript from Adobe, and today's agreement goes a step further.
Apple said it would develop the software necessary to support Adobe's Type 1 font technology within the Macintosh operating system.
Apple said it would also continue to support its own Truetype font formats.


Rudder Is Under Suspicion in Colorado Jet Crash
In their first suggestion that a mechanical flaw might have caused a fatal jetliner crash in Colorado five months ago, accident investigators today recommended inspections of the rudder controls on Boeing 737 and 727 jets.
Although the investigators, from the National Transportation Safety Board, said they still have not figured out why the 737 crashed in Colorado, they said they have detected a problem that could cause the rudder to move on its own, making the plane difficut to control.
The safety board also said that Boeing detected the same problem on three 737 planes in the mid-1980's and and as a result made a design change in 1986.


Airlines Speed Up Fare Cuts
The airline industry is cutting its lowest discount fares more widely, deeply and earlier than it normally does at the end of the summer, a time when travel usually falls off and the industry puts in some lower fares to attract passengers.
Yesterday American Airlines capped a series of cuts in domestic fares begun by USAir on Sunday and matched by other major carriers.
American reduced its lowest discount fares by as much as 28 percent on all domestic routes.


Long a Leader of the Avant-Garde
"I am not Joe Papp in a skirt and I don't want to be," proclaimed JoAnne Akalaitis during a recent interview at the Public Theater.
"If Joe had any doubts about me, I'd feel terrible, but because I am in power, it is a good feeling."
Ms.
Akalaitis, a founding member of the avant-garde theatrical troupe Mabou Mines, is perhaps best known in New York for her 1980 production of "Dead End Kids," which she wrote and directed and which was later made into a film.
She has also directed a number of plays by the German playwright Franz Xaver Kroetz, and last season directed "Henry IV, Parts 1 and 2" at the Shakespeare Festival, where they received mixed to negative reviews in the New York press.


Public &amp; Private; People Like Us
I went to the Soviet Union in 1987 with a group of American women.
A delegation from the Soviet Women's Committee waited to greet us at the airport, just beyond the security kiosks.
A guard noticed what I had not: that the dates of birth on my passport and my visa were different.
He looked from one to another and I, an American child raised on Godless Communism nightmares and Red Menace movies, wondered whether I was in deep trouble.
Suddenly one of the Soviet women, the one we would come to love for her sly cynicism about the system, stepped forward with her clutch of ceremonial red carnations and barked out several sentences.
The guard looked at my flawed papers one last time and then slowly handed them back.
I had officially arrived in Moscow.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press in Business Day yesterday about a bid for the Six Flags Corporation by Time Warner Inc. and two investment banking companies -- the Blackstone Group and Wertheim Schroder &amp; Company -- referred incorrectly to the companies' response to telephone calls requesting comment.
Spokesmen for both Blackstone and Wertheim returned the calls, but declined to comment.


Nissan Picks TBWA For British Campaign
The Nissan Motor Company has appointed TBWA/Holmes Knight Ritchie, London, to handle advertising for its new distribution company in Britain, Nissan Motor  [ GB ] .
The victory had immediate implications for TBWA Advertising, New York.
Nissan's account, which has estimated billings that exceed $40 million, was awarded to the agency without a review, said Daniel Ward, a company spokesman, because TBWA already was the agency of record for Nissan in other European markets.


Trying a 'Medical' Approach
An alternative approach to somatization is treating the problem as though it were medical, having a doctor proffer what is, in effect, psychotherapy.
A preliminary step is to help doctors identify somatizers as such, rather than taking their complaints at face value.
Dr.
David Goldberg, a british psychiatrist, has developed a symptom list for patients to check.
Unusually great numbers of symptoms with no medical explanations are a signal.


A Nation Hungers for Farm Stands And a Harvest Without Cellophane
LIKE steepled white clapboard churches, dusty Little League parks and weathered rail fences that cinch acres of corn, the roadside farm stand is part of the American landscape, a fixture in the national psyche.
The sight of a wood plank set between sawhorses at the side of the road, buckling under the weight of tomatoes and corn, is enough to set most drivers' brake feet atingle and triggers involuntary rubbernecking.
It's hard to resist vestiges of a shared past.


Twins Shift Pitchers
In a shift of pitchers, the Minnesota Twins optioned right-hander WILLIE BANKS to Portland and recalled ALLAN ANDERSON from the Class AAA affiliate yesterday.
Banks, a 22-year-old from Jersey City, was 1-1 with a 6.28 earned run average in four appearances since his recall from Portland on July 31.
He won his first major league start in a 7-4 victory Aug. 6 over California.


Birmingham Hopes To See Bo Play
Birmingham loves BO and the Class AA Barons hope JACKSON returns home to play for them before moving up to the White Sox, the general manager of the Chicago farm club said yesterday.
Jackson has been pronounced fit to return to baseball and will undergo minor league rehabilitation at a Chicago White Sox farm club to be announced today.
White Sox officials declined to comment yesterday on where Jackson will go.


Corn and Wheat Fall a Bit; News on Soviets Awaited
Prices of corn and wheat futures fell modestly and soybean futures rose yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade as traders awaited word on how the Soviet coup would affect United States grain sales to Moscow.
In the oil market the price of crude, which had jumped on Monday, fell back a bit.


Strangers' Generosity Steers Young to College
In the midst of starting a computer consulting business, renovating a kitchen and planning a spring wedding, Stuart Bogom and Dorel Shannon made a five-year commitment this year to act as mentors to an unknown teen-ager and to help pay his college tuition.
"Ever since I heard about Eugene Lang adopting a class of kids in New York and promising to send them to college, I've always wanted to do something like that," said Mr.
Bogom, who is 36 years old and taught sociology in college before turning to computers several years ago.


Symantec Is Set To Acquire DMA
The Symantec Corporation said today it will acquire Dynamic Microprocessor Associates Inc., known as DMA, in a stock swap valued at about $22 million.
Based in Huntington, L.I., Dynamic produces pc Anywhere, the leading remote control communications software product for linking remote PC's with networks.
Symantec is based in Cupertino, Calif.


Brady Raises Possibility Of More Bid Violations
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady suggested yesterday that other Wall Street dealers in Treasury securities, in addition to Salomon Brothers, might have violated the Government's rule against buying more than 35 percent of the bills, notes or bonds offered at each Treasury auction.
"I certainly hope there have not been other violations of the 35 percent rule, but I don't know," Mr.
Brady said in an interview.
He said the Salomon scandal had prompted an inquiry into the practices of other dealers to determine whether "any were involved in similar incidents."


People
*
Guy L. Smith 4th, vice president for corporate affairs at the Philip Morris Companies, New York, has been named chief operating officer for the New York unit of Hill &amp; Knowlton Inc. and senior vice president at Hill &amp; Knowlton U.S.A.
Mr.
Smith announced earlier this summer that he would be leaving Philip Morris in September.


New Smith Trial Judge Sought
The prosecution in the William K. Smith rape case filed a motion today demanding a new judge.
The motion asked Judge Mary Lupo of Palm Beach Circuit Court to step down on the grounds that she was biased and had personal and professional conflicts in the case.


Maxwell to Sell Stake in MTV
The Maxwell Group P.L.C. has agreed to sell its stake in MTV Europe to Viacom Inc., giving the American parent of MTV full ownership of the overseas music video channel.
Viacom will pay $60 million to $65 million in cash or in Viacom stock for Maxwell's 50.1 percent stake.
Maxwell, based in London, has been selling assets to reduce debt that accrued to pay for acquisitions in the 1980's.


3 Vital Votes May Break Connecticut Budget Impasse
The six-month state budget impasse may have been broken on Tuesday as three crucial votes in the State Senate swung over to support Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s budget overhaul and income-tax plan.
The Democratic-controlled Senate has been the main stumbling block to passing a budget that Mr.
Weicker will sign into law, and Tuesday's announcement was greeted at the Capitol with a wave of palpable relief but also wary caution from those who have seen hopes dashed before.


THE SOVIET CRISIS: Man in the News; Skillful Party Climber: Boris K. Pugo
When Boris K. Pugo was appointed head of the Interior Ministry in December, people in his home republic of Latvia responded with alarm.
Either Mikhail S. Gorbachev was charting a conservative course, they said, or he was being steered that way by forces beyond his control.
A career K.G.B. and Communist Party official, Mr.
Pugo, who is a key member of the coup leadership, is particularly despised in the Baltic republics, where his hard-line stance against independence movements is viewed as an unforgivable betrayal of his Latvian roots.


60-Minute Gourmet
SOMETIMES the ingenious dish can be the greatest challenge to a cook.
As a grandfather of six hungry children I am called upon to improvise recipes that capture their attention.
One such is this meatball and sausage casserole.
Meatballs do not have to be made from ground beef.
Ground turkey or chicken is a fine low-fat substitute.
Pork and veal also make excellent meatballs, or any combination of these meats and fowl.


Topics of The Times; Gary Hart's Luck
The Democrats are not as luckless as Mikhail Gorbachev; still, his fall deals them a special blow.
Though the primaries start in just six months, the only Democratic Presidential candidates in sight -- Tsongas, Clinton, Harkin -- are names most people's grandmothers have never heard of.
And now, just when Democrats were starting to make a case against President Bush for his indifference to domestic affairs, the Soviet coup snaps public attention back to foreign affairs.
"Right now the ball goes back in his court, where his strength is," says Gov.
Lawton Chiles of Florida.


Reports From the Republics Vary From Relative Calm to Threats of Military Action
While tension stalked the Soviet capital on the second day of the Communist coup, reports from around the country indicated that the military had made threatening movements in the Baltic republics, but that there was to relative calm across most of the rest of the nation.
The impression gleaned from telephone calls and correspondents throughout the Soviet Union was that for now at least, the efforts of the State Committee on the State of Emergency, which seized power from President Mikhail S. Gorbachev on Monday, seemed focused largely on Moscow and the Baltic republics, and specifically on Boris N. Yeltsin, the President of the Russian federated republic, who has defied the coup leaders.


Bare-Fisted Russians Make Their Stand
Inside the "war room" on the third floor of the Russian Parliament building, commanders of the republic's forces spent the afternoon poring over maps of Moscow and a floor plan of the 12-floor building, plotting how to stave off an anticipated attack by Soviet Army and Interior Ministry troops.
Their attire told the story of Russia's patchwork defense.
Two men wore Soviet Army uniforms, another the World War I uniform of the Don Cossacks.
Others, with pistols at their hips, were in camouflage suits, issued by a security firm called the Bells.


Louisiana Baffled by Vast Fish Kills
All across South Louisiana in this wettest of summers, the fish stories are depressingly the same: dead fish.
At last count, 750,000 fish had died: striped mullet, largemouth bass, yellow bass, freshwater drum, spotted gar, ladyfish, shad, buffalo, mosquito fish, carp, southern flounder, blue catfish and more.


Rep. Harley O. Staggers Sr., 84, Democrat Who Aided Railroads
Harley O. Staggers Sr., a West Virginia Congressman for 32 years who is credited with helping to revive the nation's rail system, died yesterday at Sacred Heart Hospital in Cumberland, Md.
He was 84 years old and lived in Keyser, W.Va.
Mr.
Staggers died of congestive heart failure and respiratory failure, a family spokesman said.


A Boy's Death Ignites Clashes in Crown Heights
Hasidim and blacks clashed in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn through the day and into the night yesterday as the two communities, separately and bitterly, each mourned a member killed, one in a traffic accident on Monday night and the other stabbed in the racial melee that followed.
Bottles, rocks and ethnic slurs were hurled as hundreds of police officers struggled to separate the screaming, taunting groups near the headquarters of the Lubavitcher sect, at 770 Eastern Parkway.


A Boy's Death Ignites Clashes in Crown Heights
Hasidim and blacks clashed in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn through the day and into the night yesterday as the two communities, separately and bitterly, each mourned a member killed, one in a traffic accident on Monday night and the other stabbed in the racial melee that followed.
Bottles, rocks and ethnic slurs were hurled as hundreds of police officers struggled to separate the screaming, taunting groups near the headquarters of the Lubavitcher sect, at 770 Eastern Parkway.


Marino Now N.F.L.'s Highest-Paid Player
The Miami Dolphins believe that quarterback Dan Marino is the best player in the National Football League.
Yesterday, they threw their wallet behind that belief, giving the eight-year veteran a five-year contract extension estimated to be worth $25 million, which will make him the highest-paid player in the league.
According to a report in The News-Press of Fort Myers, Fla., Marino will earn $4.6 million this year, based on his scheduled salary of $1.6 million plus a $3 million bonus for signing the extension.
Then he will receive an average of $4.4 million over the next five years.


Digital Offering New Computer
The Digital Equipment Corporation became the first major computer vendor to enter the "massively parallel" processing market by announcing plans yesterday to ship its first products in September.
The computers will be supplied by the Maspar Computer Corporation of Sunnyvale, Calif., as part of an agreement signed several months ago.
Maspar is run by Jeffrey Kalb, a former executive at Digital who left the company in 1987 with permission to develop technology that had been begun by Digital.
Massively parallel computers use thousands of standard integrated circuits running simultaneously to solve a problem.
They break down problems into smaller parts and process the parts in parallel at very high speed.


Lotus Is Shipping Windows Product
The Lotus Development Corporation finally began shipping Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows, a product analysts and customers had been waiting for for more than a year.
Jim P. Manzi, Lotus' president and chief executive, called the product "an important milestone," and industry observers echoed his sentiments.


New Look at Birth Control Choices
THERE has been a dramatic jump in the number of women using birth control pills, with more women staying on the pill longer and an increasing number remaining on the pill into their 40's, a new study has found.
Among the other surprising findings in the study, a large survey regarding the contraceptive choices of American women, was that those who rely on intrauterine devices, which can be difficult to obtain in the United States, report the highest level of satisfaction of any contraceptive users.


Hurricane Leaves a Ravaged Trail on Long Island


You Can Tell a Melon by Its Cover
MELONS are a mystery.
Knowing the condition of the flesh beneath the variously smooth, pebbled, monochrome, striated, mottled or ridged skins takes detective work, a keen eye for the right clues.
"You see people shaking melons, tapping them, smelling them and holding them up to their ears all the time," said Charles Balducci, the produce director for Balducci's in Greenwich Village.
"That's about as useful as kicking the tires when you buy a car. You judge a melon mostly by looking at it."


Hurricane Leaves Deaths, Flooding and Blackouts All Along the East Coast
Hurricane Bob fizzled out off the coast of Canada today, but its violent swing over the mainland left a ravaged trail of downed power lines, disconnected telephones, wrecked houses and flooded, debris-strewn neighborhoods up and down the East Coast.
At least a dozen people were killed in hurricane-related accidents as the storm made its way from North Carolina to Maine.
Thousands of people lost telephone service and at the worst point, 2.1 million homes and businesses were without power in Long Island, Connecticut, Rhode Island and Massachusetts.


A Study in Maturity at U.S. Amateur
When Eldrick (Tiger) Woods hit his opening tee shot at the 91st United States Amateur at 8:42 this morning, it was as the youngest player and the only black in the 312-man field -- and almost certainly as the sleepiest.
Woods, the 15-year-old United States junior champion from Cypress, Calif., had arrived in Tennessee only eight hours before, after a 10-hour journey via Dallas and Atlanta that had originated in Colorado Springs, where on Monday Woods had played in a junior tournament called the Canon Cup.


Russians on Ship Emotionally Adrift
On board the big Soviet ship Akademik Shirshov, a sailor wept, the captain poured consoling rounds of cognac, and a guitar player slipped on his last purchase from America -- a T-shirt that read "Don't worry, be happy."
They had sailed into Seattle a week ago, artists, scientists, businessmen and tourists, a cross section of the new Soviet society that Mikhail S. Gorbachev had encouraged.
They were looking to forge business ties with the West, to entertain and to talk history on the 250th anniversary of the first Russian explorers' landing in Alaska.


No. 1 Giant Quarterback (Drum Roll, Please) . . .
After five weeks of training camp and preseason games, Coach Ray Handley of the Giants said today he had decided on a starting quarterback.
He said he would announce his decision on Wednesday to the two candidates and the world.
Then he dropped a new possibility into the scenario.
He said he might try to find a way to play both quarterbacks in the same game.


Potent Office Weaves Web In China Arms
If Western leaders want to know what they face in trying to get China to restrain its weapons sales, they might drop by the secretive office of Poly Technologies on the 17th floor of the Citic Building in downtown Beijing.
The efficient, well-equipped office is at the core of a remarkable Chinese military-industrial complex.
Western complaints to China's Foreign Ministry about arms deals are unlikely to impress this company, which in some respects is more powerful than the Foreign Ministry itself.


Two Lawyers Named to Replace Disqualified Counsel at Gotti Trial
A prominent Miami lawyer, Albert J. Kreiger, was named yesterday as John Gotti's new lawyer, replacing Bruce Cutler, who was removed from the Gotti racketeering trial scheduled for next month.
The Gotti defense team also selected Benjamin Brafman, a highly regarded New York lawyer, to replace Gerald L. Shargel, who was disqualified from representing a co-defendant, Salvatore Gravano.


About New York
Jean Gross did not hear the gun go off when she shot her husband on Dec. 1, 1984.
She does remember how the man she "never really knew" in 13 years of marriage recoiled from the blast, and the hole in his head.
"I didn't cry until I got in Rikers Island," she said.
"It was like I was broken inside or something."


Entreaty To Troops By Yeltsin
Following is the text of a speech by Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian federated republic, broadcast yesterday afternoon by CNN and recorded by The New York Times.
The message was addressed to the Russian people, but it was not broadcast on Russian television because of press restrictions imposed by the coup leaders in Moscow.
To the soldiers and officers of the Army, the K.G.B. and the Ministry of the Interior troops.


Collagen and F.D.A. Agree
The Collagen Corporation said today that it had reached an agreement on labeling with the Food and Drug Administration that will allow the company to resume shipping its newly manufactured injectable collagen products on Monday.
Agency officials seized the company's finished inventory on Friday because it lacked inadequate warning labels on containers of collagen, which is a purified protein derived from cowhides that is used to smooth facial scars and wrinkles.
"The F.D.A.'s primary reason for the seizure was a labeling error that resulted in the dropping of a nine-word line of text in the printed product literature," said Howard D. Palefsky, Collagen's president and chief executive.
"Today's understanding is the first step toward securing a broader F.D.A. consent which would allow us to repackage and utilize the seized inventory."


The Dollar Declines Slightly While Gold Is Also Down
The dollar slipped against most major currencies in choppy dealings yesterday, as traders nervously tracked the rapidly changing developments in the Soviet Union.
Gold also fell, with gold for current delivery dropping $2.70 a troy ounce on the Commodity Exchange in New York, to a late bid of $355.90.
The Republic National Bank in New York quoted an after-hours bid of $356 an ounce, down $2.20 from late Monday.


Little League Mom
LISA PARKER is a big supporter of her son's Little League baseball team in Alderson, W. Va.
Yesterday, she received a national award.
Parker, one of four regional finalists, was named the 1991 Little League Baseball Mom of the Year.
She will receive her award tomorrow in Williamsport, Pa., during the Little League World Series.


Robert Herman, 66, Ex-Manager Of Greater Miami Opera Troupe
Robert Herman, the general manager of the Greater Miami Opera from 1973 to 1985 and an assistant to Sir Rudolf Bing at the Metropolitan Opera from 1953 to 1973, died on Monday at his home in Miami.
He was 66 years old.
He died of lung cancer, said Walter Naujoks, his friend and business partner.


Books of The Times; Dying World of the 'Last Leopard'
The Last Leopard A Life of Giuseppe di Lampedusa By David Gilmour Illustrated. 223 pages.
Pantheon Books. $22.
Readers who consider "The Leopard" one of the classics of 20th-century European literature, and who have yearned for something else resembling its elegant story, will welcome the biography of its author, Giuseppe di Lampedusa.
Although Lampedusa (1896-1957) based his historical novel on the life of his great-grandfather, the Prince of Lampedusa, it's evident from the biography that he was also writing about himself as the last survivor of an aristocratic Italian family.


Bush's 'Hot Line' to Yeltsin
When President Bush decided to call President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian Federation in his besieged Government building in Moscow today, his aides thought they were being handed a tall order.
In the end, they were surprised how easily it went.
"The first thing we did was make contact with a couple of his aides," an official said.
"Then we established a time for the President to call Yeltsin." The official said the Russian officials provided the White House with a telephone number.
"The operator dialed it, and the call went right through," he said.
"Everybody was surprised."


Cuba Seeks U.N. Debate on U.S. Trade Embargo
Calling the nearly 30-year-old United States economic embargo against Cuba illegal, unjust and a violation of the United Nations Charter, Cuba's mission to the United Nations said today that it had asked for a General Assembly debate on the issue.
Taking the matter before the General Assembly is seen as an attempt by Havana to help kill legislation pending in the United States Congress that would close one of the last and most lucrative loopholes allowing trade with Cuba.


CHRONICLE
HEDY LAMARR, the Austrian-born actress who appeared in European movies of the 1930's and American movies of the 1940's and 1950's, has pleaded not guilty to charges that she shoplifted items worth $21.48 from a Florida drugstore.
The plea from the 77-year-old former actress was received in the mail yesterday at the Seminole County Circuit Court in Casselberry, Fla., which is north of Orlando, about five miles from Altamonte Springs, where she lives.
After bit parts in several nondescript Austro-German films, Ms.
Lamarr attracted international attention when she appeared nude in a swimming scene in the 1932 Czech film "Ecstasy." Her Hollywood movies included "Algiers," "My Favorite Spy," "Samson and Delilah" and "Boom Town."


Excerpts From Bush's Talk: 'You Don't Set Back Democracy Very Easily'
Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conference this morning: BUSH'S STATEMENT
Well, events in the Soviet Union continue to deeply concern the whole world.
The unconstitutional seizure of power is an affront to the goals and aspirations that the Soviet peoples have been nurturing over the past years.
This action also puts the Soviet Union at odds with the world community and undermines the positive steps that had been undertaken to make the Soviet Union an integral and positive force in world affairs.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.44
5.54
7.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.12
5.17
7.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.15
5.23
7.48
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.58
7.62
8.72
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.08
8.10
8.93
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.08
9.08
9.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.98
6.98
7.54
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Garcia Marquez Looks At Life, Love and Death
For Gabriel Garcia Marquez, there are many signs of the gradual Latin American infiltration of the United States.
Spanish is more widely spoken than ever, the region's cooking more popular.
But above all he says that he is delighted by the spread "across this country of our Latin way of loving and of dying."
Love and death are of course intimately linked themes in the Colombian novelist's work.
The one is almost inconceivable without a suggestion of the other because love is an illness with severe symptoms and is also an utter surrender.
As the father of Florentino Ariza in the novel "Love in the Time of Cholera" remarks, "The only regret I will have in dying is if it is not for love."


Rooted in Slavery, Pogrom and Stereotypes, Crown Heights Is No Blend
For at least three decades, Crown Heights has been a community victimized and divided by greed, stereotype, lack of communication and the willingness of a few to take advantage of any hint of tension.
Like a volatile mixture poised for the spark, those forces reached flashpoint Monday night when a car driven by a Hasidic man jumped a sidewalk, killing a 7-year-old black boy.
As rumor fed on longstanding preconception, hundreds of blacks roamed the neighborhood until, in vengeance, a Jew was stabbed to death.


New President for Reader's Digest
The Reader's Digest Association Inc. yesterday named a soft-drink executive with broad international marketing experience, but no publishing background, to be its president and chief operating officer.
The new president, James P. Schadt, is a veteran of Pepsico, the Sara Lee Corporation and most recently Cadbury Schweppes P.L.C., where he was president and chief executive of the soft-drink business.
In September, he will be appointed to the Reader's Digest board.


BUSINESS DIGEST
COMPANIES
The investigation of Salomon Brothers widened, and the shaken firm began to see the first significant client loss as the California Public Employees' Retirement System suspended business with the Government trading desk.  [ Page D1. ]  Other dealers in Treasury securities might have violated the Government's rule against buying more than 35 percent of the bills, notes or bonds at auction, Brady suggested.  [ D2. ]
Peter S. Kalikow filed for personal bankruptcy protection and also put one of his property partnerships in bankruptcy.
The New York Post and many other properties are not directly named in the filing, but could wind up as collateral for bank loans.  [ D1. ]  Kalikow went to The Post to reassure employees that the operation of the paper would not be affected.  [ D6. ]


South Africa Thrown For a Temporary Loss
The International Amateur Athletic Federation today formally withdrew the provisional membership it granted South Africa last month, a move that would deny South Africa the right to compete in track and field at the Olympics next summer in Barcelona, Spain.
At the same time, however, representatives of more than 150 countries attending the federation's congress this week voted to allow South Africans to compete within Africa, an action designed to encourage South African track and field officials to continue their efforts toward creating a unified national federation.
The I.A.A.F. indicated that only when such a federation was in place and development programs were operating nationwide could South Africa expect to gain full membership for the first time since 1976.
That year, the international federation expelled South Africa for the Government's policies of apartheid.


What Banks Can Do That Nothing Else Can
To the Editor:
"Abolish Banks (Seriously)" by Jay G. Baris (Op-Ed, Aug. 6) was quite entertaining. (I hope that in referring to distributor of toasters as one the useful roles of banks, it was intended to be entertaining.)


Earnings Off For Dayton
The Dayton Hudson Corporation, the department store operator, said yesterday that second-quarter earnings skidded more than 32 percent amid the continuing slump in consumer spending.
The company said it earned $40 million, or 47 cents a share, in the quarter ended Aug. 3, down from $59 million, or 75 cents a share, in the comparable 1990 period.
Revenue totaled $3.56 billion, up 10 percent from $3.24 billion a year earlier.


NEWS SUMMARY
The Soviet Crisis A8-13
The leaders of the Kremlin coup, facing increased opposition, responded with a curfew, fresh tank movements in Moscow and renewed demands that the Russian President, Boris Yeltsin, cease his call for nationwide resistance.
Page A1


They Paved Way for Louis Armstrong
To the Editor:
David H. Ostwald's delightful and deserved tribute to Louis Armstrong ("Louis Armstrong, Civil Rights Pioneer," Op-Ed, Aug. 3) overstates the point made about the lyrics of the song "(What Did I Do to Be So) Black and Blue."


SPORADIC MUTINIES RACK SOVIET ARMY
The Soviet military has been shaken by sporadic mutinies in the wake of the coup here on Monday, with individual servicemen and some entire units defecting to defend anti-coup forces rallying around President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic.
The defections were apparently limited in number and left the coup committee with the overwhelming balance of power.


Development Not Even a Contender on Brooklyn's Waterfront
Three burned-out steel piers stand like eerily twisted skeletons in Upper New York Bay as teen-agers swim past the rusted shell of a half-submerged Chevy Cutlass off the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn.
Just to the north, beyond the stench of the Gowanus Canal and a huge, unused grain terminal, a short-lived Port Authority project called Fishport stands empty, and row upon row of scofflaws' cars fill an impoundment lot.
Further north are the little-used piers beneath the Brooklyn Heights Promenade, the subject of long, bitter debate, and the industrial waterfront in Williamsburg and Greenpoint, where a few factories and waste-processing plants operate, but much of the land remains a foreboding, fenced-off no-man's land.


The Pop Life
A New Sound
When Lisa Lisa (Lisa Velez) first appeared in 1986 with an album, "Lisa Lisa and Cult Jam," the word among some critics was that she couldn't hit a note with a machine gun.
Ms.
Velez was among the first female artists of the 1980's to be a real producer's item; everything on the album was written and produced by the production crew Full Force, which had discovered her in a downtown club.
Not only did Full Force write virtually all the material on her albums (and make up a group, Cult Jam, to surround Ms. Velez), but the crew also had the audacity to have its picture on an album.


Yeltsin Galvanizes Russians' Will And Taps Into Their Frustration
As army tanks were leaving the city today, a triumphant Boris N. Yeltsin appeared before the Russian Parliament to a standing ovation.
But in a calm and measured speech, the President of the Russian republic shifted credit for the derailment of the coup elsewhere, to the tens of thousands of Muscovites who rose to the defense of their elected government, ready to face tanks with sticks and stones if necessary.
The tribute was a mark of Mr.
Yeltsin's sure-footed political prowess.
Once again, he has shown the country and the world that he can summon the democratic yearnings of the Russian people, and put their political will into play.


Florida Lottery Account Faces Another Review
The $25 million Florida lottery account is up for grabs again, only three months after being assigned to Earle Palmer Brown, Tampa.
Marcia Mann, the lottery secretary, said yesterday that she had decided to hold another review, following a hearing officer's ruling last month that the initial assignment was based on faulty judging practices.


Voices of Experts: Moribund Communism Draws Its Last, Ragged Breaths; Experts Say Yeltsin's Stand Resurrected Hope of Reform From the Ashes
Elizabeth Teague
Research analyst, RFE/RL Research Institute, Munich
Gorbachev is finished as a political force.
I see him now as some kind of a lame-duck president.
He may reassert himself, but he's lost some stature because people who he trusted did him dirty.
As to the K.G.B., the Interior Ministry and the armed forces, whose leaders led the coup, I think there needs to be real legislation putting those institutions under the rule of law.
They have discredited themselves now.
Gorbachev's policy essentially has been a mistake.
He constantly adopted the centrist stance of playing one side against the other.
It'll be easier for Yeltsin to force through legislation and put these institutions under the rule of law.


Washington at Work; A Crusader Driven by Outrage
Jack A. Blum, for 25 years a Washington lawyer, Senate investigator and doggedly liberal Democratic muckraker, uncovered early signs of wrongdoing by the Bank of Credit and Commerce International in 1988.
He was serving a two-year stint as chief investigator for Senator John F. Kerry's Foreign Relations subcommittee.
Back at the subcommittee early this month, this time as a witness at televised hearings on fraud and corruption at B.C.C.I., Mr.
Blum unleashed an accusation that propelled him and the Massachusetts Democrat onto the evening news: the Bush Administration had soft-pedaled its criminal inquiry into B.C.C.I. despite abundant evidence of misdeeds by the bank.
More Recent Charges
Only recently, Mr.
Blum made virtually identical charges against Senator Kerry's chief patron, Senator Claiborne Pell, the Rhode Island Democrat who is chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee.


Officer Arrested Again in Another Rape in Queens
A New York City police officer, arrested two weeks ago in the abduction and rape of a woman in Queens, was charged yesterday with an earlier abduction and sexual assault, also at gunpoint.
The officer, Michael Perez, 30 years old, was arrested again Tuesday night and arraigned in court yesterday in the earlier attack, which occurred about 5 A.M. on June 16 in Rego Park.
His initial arrest, about 5:30 A.M. on Aug. 6, occurred shortly after a woman in Flushing was kidnapped and sexually assaulted.


Women Have the Right Stuff to Fly; Endangering the Race
To the Editor:
"America's Fighting Women" (editorial, Aug. 5), in support of women combat pilots, misses the point.
The issue is not whether they make as good fliers as men.
The commercial airlines have already agreed they do.
Every civilization since ancient Athens, however, has ultimately realized that to endanger women in combat places the race in peril.
The risks are too great to allow that monstrous event to occur.
WILLIAM J. REGAN New York, Aug. 6, 1991


Critic's Notebook; Arthur Kent Has a Tryout on 'Today'
A field test is under way of a new weapon in the campaign of NBC News, that laggard, to catch up with the competition.
Last week, Arthur Kent, whose boyish features and designer haircut brought fan mail when he was covering Iraqi Scud missile attacks from atop the Dhahran International Hotel in Saudi Arabia during the Persian Gulf war, sat in for Bryant Gumbel on the "Today" show. (He was also due to substitute for Tom Brokaw on the "NBC Nightly News" this week and next, but plans were changed by the attempted coup in Moscow.)
To judge by last week's tryout, Mr.
Kent is an adaptable performer.
The big story on his watch was the possible release of Western hostages being held in Lebanon, and his interviews with a former hostage, David Jacobsen, was in the feelie mode of morning television.
"How do you feel, looking back on your ordeal?" he asked Mr.
Jacobsen, who was there to plug his book, "Hostage: My Years in Beirut." Mr.
Kent also demonstrated that he had learned from other television interviewers to use the word "hopefully" to mean it is to be hoped.
Two days later, he was asking Maj.
Robin Higgins, the wife of Col.
William R. Higgins, a hostage who was apparently killed by his captors, how the release of two hostages made her feel.
Then he asked whether she thought of him and longed for him during the war in the gulf.
One wonders what answers he expected.


Rev. Carl J. Peter, 59, Theologian and Writer
The Rev.
Carl J. Peter, a prominent theologian who for the last 27 years was professor of systematic theology at Catholic University in Washington, died suddenly Tuesday at his campus residence.
He was 59 years old.
A university spokesman said the cause of death was apparently a heart attack.


Price Waterhouse Is Sued In Britain on B.C.C.I. Audit
An Omani depositor sued the auditor of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International today for misrepresentation and negligence in its duties for approving the troubled bank's financial statements.
The suit against Price Waterhouse in London -- the first such litigation since the bank was seized by international regulators last month -- is likely to focus increasing attention on the accounting firm's judgment in certifying the bank's books in April 1990 as a "true and fair" representation of B.C.C.I.'s financial position.


Uncovered Short Sales Are Up 2.4% on Big Board
The volume of open short sales on the New York Stock Exchange rose to the highest level since March, the Big Board reported yesterday.
The exchange said that 726.6 million shares had been sold short and not yet covered as of trades settled on Aug. 15, which reflects trades through Aug. 8.
That was an increase of 16.9 million shares, or 2.4 percent, from the previous mont.


Orion Appoints Financial Chief
The Orion Pictures Corporation, the struggling film studio, has named Lawrence Bernstein as its chief financial officer.
Mr.
Bernstein's appointment was effective Aug. 1 but was not announced until Monday.
He replaces Edwin L. Schwartz, who resigned to become chief operating officer and chief financial officer at the Putnam Berkley Group, the New York publishing company.
Mr.
Bernstein, who is 43 years old, had previously been senior vice president and chief accounting officer at Orion.
He joined the company in 1987 as vice president for finance.


Cuomo's Health Nominee Is Advised to Kepp Silent
Dr.
Mark R. Chassin, the California physician nominated to be New York State's next health commissioner, has emerged as the David Souter of gubernatorial appointees, a man with little public record on major health issues and little freedom to stake out his positions.
In a reflection of the growing political sensitivity of health policy, Dr.
Chassin has followed the instructions of the Cuomo administration to divulge little about his positions or agenda until his Senate confirmation hearings.
Dr.
Chassin was nominated by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo on Monday, and his confirmation hearings may not be held before November.


Enigmatic Commander: Mikhail Alekseyevich Moiseyev
Gen.
Mikhail A. Moiseyev, identified by Soviet television today as the acting head of the armed forces, has supported arms control agreements with the United States but in many ways remains an enigma to American officials.
General Moiseyev, the Soviet Chief of Staff, may have been lucky to be on vacation far from Moscow when hard-liners staged their ill-fated coup three days ago, according to American officials.
They also suggested that he might have planned to be away to avoid being blamed if the coup failed.


Taxing Private Golf Clubs Is a Way to Achieve Integration
To the Editor:
Re "In Golf, Integration Is More Than a 9-Iron Away" (Sports pages, Aug. 5): Since there is a need for change, and the powers that be in the United States Golf Association, the Professional Golfers' Association of America and the PGA Tour don't seem to want to make those changes, I have a suggestion: Instead of playing around with who has black members and who does not, and who has women members and who does not, why don't these organizations just schedule all tournaments at public courses?
It wouldn't be a big deal -- some tournaments these day are already played on public courses.


Sense of Vulnerability Chills Former Satellites
Eastern Europe's emerging democracies today greeted the failure of the Soviet coup with relief but with a renewed and heightened sense of their own vulnerability.
"It's very good news that the coup has collapsed in this way," said Bronislaw Geremek, chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee in the Polish Parliament.
"But the problem is the same as before. The Soviet Union is still in a very deep crisis which is first of all political, not economic. After all, the very reason for this coup was the new union treaty."


Elliott Signs, Then Sweats
Jumbo Elliott, the Giants' massive left tackle, became a millionaire today, but not without a good-natured lesson.
Elliott ended his absence from camp by signing a two-year deal worth an estimated $1.1 million.
The deal is believed to include salaries of $550,000 in 1991, $600,000 in 1992 and a $25,000 signing bonus.
But when he came onto the Giants Stadium turf about an hour into practice, he was greeted by jeers and cheers.
When practice was over, Coach Ray Handley barked to the players on the sidelines: "O.K., gassers. Big guys go first." A gasser is a sprint of more than 100 yards that is disliked by everyone, but especially the big guys.


Tartikoff Sidles Off the Sidelines at Paramount
In one of his first acts as chairman of Paramount Pictures, Brandon Tartikoff set Hollywood tittering last month when he gave the go-ahead for a film called "All I Want for Christmas," which with a modest budget of $12 million and a tight 30-day shooting schedule seemed more like a television movie for his former employer, NBC, than a major studio production.
But today, speaking to a small group of journalists for the first time since he moved from NBC to Paramount on July 1, Mr.
Tartikoff said that while he would not leave his televison roots behind as he put his own stamp on the studio, he was comfortable plunging into the high-stakes feature-film business.


Pepsi Taps Tracy-Locke For National Promotion
In a move that reflects the growing importance of promotion in the soft-drink market, the Pepsi-Cola Company yesterday named Tracy-Locke, Dallas, as its first agency for national marketing promotions.
"The direction the business is going," said Andrew Giangola, a Pepsi spokesman, "is to continually be out there with big, exciting promotions, anything to push the hot buttons of consumers."


West, of West Virginia
Contrary to what Thomas Wolfe said, JERRY WEST, the Los Angeles Lakers general manager, showed that you can go home again.
In a ceremony at the West Virginia Cultural Center in Charleston on Tuesday, the United States Postal Service unveiled a commemorative envelope bearing a drawing of West.
"People still kid me about where I came from and it's offensive to me," West said at the ceremony.
"I'm very proud to have grown up here. I think it's very important not to forget where I came from."


Money Funds Are Mixed; Tax-Exempt Yields Rise
Yields of money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended yesterday.
Tax-exempt funds struggled with supply, and taxable funds still showed the effects of the interest rate easing by the Federal Reserve in early August.
Tax-exempt money fund yields rose as supplies of new issues increased.
The seven-day compounded average yield rose 7 basis points, to 4.10 percent, with the simple yield up a similar amount, to 4.02 percent.
During the same period, the 30-day compounded yield rose 10 basis points, to 4.07 percent, and the simple yield was up similarly, to 3.99 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
MARY JAENSCH recalls the frustration her older son felt after show-and-tell sessions at his nursery school.
"He wanted to know why he didn't have what all the other kids brought in," said Ms.
Jaensch, who runs a marketing consulting company in Orange, Conn.
Jealousy is a recurring theme between her two sons, now 8 and 5 years old.
"If I travel and bring home gifts, I have to give my two boys exactly the same thing, or they spend endless hours pointing out why their brother's gift was superior or bragging that theirs is better," Ms.
Jaensch said.


Olympic Bound?
The United States Olympic basketball team has finally landed MICHAEL JORDAN, according to an Atlanta newspaper that identified eight National Basketball Association stars as the latest to accept invitations to play for Team USA in Barcelona.
LARRY BIRD, KARL MALONE, JOHN STOCKTON, DAVID ROBINSON, CHARLES BARKLEY, CHRIS MULLIN, and SCOTTIE PIPPEN will play with Jordan, The Atlanta Journal-Constitution reported yesterday.
The newspaper quoted sources close to Jordan as saying he had agreed to participate out of fear that failure to do so would create a backlash that would hurt his endorsements.
He also cited pressure from several colleagues, the newspaper said.


BRIEFS
Debt *
Chase Manhattan Corp. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $1 billion in debt securities and warrants, and in a separate filing, for up to $250 million in preferred stock.


U.S. Officials Weren't Convinced Coup Would Fail
During the three-day takeover in Moscow, the Bush Administration received critical intelligence signals that the military coup was seriously hobbled by defections and internal opposition, but the signals were never strong enough to convince officials in Washington that the power grab was doomed to fail, senior Administration officials said today.
For this reason, Mr.
Bush and his national security aides decided initially to hedge their long-term bets, while organizing an international campaign to undermine the legitimacy of the coup leaders and prevent any accommodation to the "emergency" government by Western countries.


UAL Offering 30-Year Debt
The UAL Corporation, which owns United Airlines, is offering $250 million in 30-year corporate debentures through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.


And You Don't Have One! Nyah-Nyah!
MOST children know that slumber bags are not just for sleeping.
The best way to watch a scary movie, of course, is lying in a slumber bag, so you can slip down into the bag when the monsters are ready to devour someone.
Slumber bags are also good for going to overnight parties, for sleeping on top of a bed instead of in it, and for feeling superior to younger siblings who don't have one.


Failed Dreams That Paved The Way
AMERICANS have longed for miracle houses for nearly two centuries.
Every few years, for a moment or two, those wishes seem to be granted.
A visionary proposes dwellings that are simple, handsome, cheap to construct, maintenance-free and likely to solve the nation's housing crisis, leave the environment relatively unscathed and inspire contented living.
Domestic prophets have included familiar names like Thomas A. Edison and Frank Lloyd Wright, and forgotten physiologists like Orson Squire Fowlar, who in the mid-19th century briefly became convinced that all houses should have eight sides and concrete walls.
Such dreamers have at least one thing in common: although the public rejected most of their ideas as too far-fetched or too rigid to live with, a few of their suggestions made it into the mainstream.


Nicotine Patch Marketing Deals
The Warner-Lambert Company said it would market a Swedish company's 16-hour nicotine patch in the United States and Canada, pending Government approval.
Meanwhile, the lederle Laboratories division of the American Cyanimid Company has picked up United States marketing rights to an Irish 24-hour nicotine patch that had been held by Warner-Lambert.


Bush Quotes Gorbachev: Leader 'Tells Me That Things Are Under Control'
Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conferences here today at 10:36 A.M. and 1:20 P.M.:
10:36 A.M.
OPENING STATEMENT
Well, I wanted to report to the American people on some of the latest developments related to the situation in the Soviet Union.
I spoke at length this morning to President Boris Yeltsin.
The call began at about 8:30, and I also talked to Ambassador Strauss, who is now in our embassy in Moscow, in position, and I also talked in the last, oh, 20 hours, to President Menem in Argentina, Prime Minister Mulroney, Prime Minister Major, and I will continue these kinds of consultative calls.
President Yeltsin was clearly encouraged by the fact that he had survived another night in the Russian Parliament building without a major assault by the forces supporting his coup.
He told me that tens of thousands of Muscovites had turned out to help guard the building from attack.
Yeltsin said he was encouraged by indications that more and more military units and their commanders were abandoning support of the coup.
. . .
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Q.
Mr.
President, with Boris Yeltsin anchoring democratic opposition to this coup, where does that leave him if things do in fact resolve themselves satisfactorily?
A.
It leaves the world looking at him as a very courageous individual, duly elected by the people, standing firmly and courageously for democracy and freedom, with enormous stature as a result of that.
U.S.-Yeltsin Ties
Q. Would that change the U.S. approach towards Mr. Yeltsin in any way?
A.
The U.S. approach towards Mr.
Yeltsin, as you know, is to be supportive of those who were elected.
Ever since he has been elected he has received total support and before he was elected he was received properly.
But I must say, in terms of the respect level, I will join others all around the world, not just politicians or elected leaders of countries, in saying that he has shown tremendous courage and the people appear to be rallying behind him.
And as I said earlier on, to some skepticism, 48 hours ago or more, that look, all these coups don't succeed and democracy, once unleashed, is a pretty powerful force.
So I think he will have a well-earned stature around the world that he might not have had -- he was on his way to having but might not have fully achieved before all this happened, provided it works out the way certainly the United States wants it to work out.
. . .
Gorbachev's Future
Q.
Assuming that President Gorbachev does recover his authority, how will this affect his ability to keep the Soviet Union on a stable path?
Will he be strengthened by it or weakened?
A.
I would say, a little hypothetical for me to get into, but given Yeltsin's support for him and given the respect with which he's held by leaders all around the world, and that has certainly not been diminished by this at all, he will still be a force to be reckoned with.
And again, they can sort out inside their own matters.
But what will be filtered away, should Gorbachev be reinstated, as we hope he will be, what will be filtered out will be the fear of a right-wing military takeover because the people will see that the power of the people to stand up against this illegality is pretty good, pretty strong.
. . .
Coup's Unraveling
Q.
Mr.
President, given the, quote, unquote, leader of the coup leaders, are you surprised they sort of went halfway with their coup and were -- the incredible, apparently disorganization of it?
A.
I think it's too early to decree how disorganized it is, but I think they underestimated the power of the people, they underestimated what a taste of democracy and freedom brings, and everyone recognizes that there were serious economic problems, and I think they felt we'll come in there, promise food on the shelves, and to solve these problems, and then they saw that overriding all of that was a commitment by many, many people in Russia and in the Soviet Union, entirely to democracy, for democracy.
So I think there, if this coup fails, that will be the serious miscalculation.
1:20 P.M.
OPENING STATEMENT
Well, I just wanted to report that at 12:19 I had a phone conversation with Mikhail Gorbachev, and lasted about -- what, 20 minutes, I think.
It was a good call.
Gorbachev is still in the Crimea.
He will return either tonight or tomorrow to Moscow.
He tells me that things are under control.
His first call, I believe, was with Boris Yeltsin.
He stated his sincere appreciation to the people of the United States and others around the world for their support for democracy and reform, and he sounded in good physical condition -- indeed, his voice was buoyant.
And Barbara was with me, and we both asked him to convey our respects to Raisa, which he -- and he, very kindly, made references to his friendship with Barbara and me on a personal basis.
But it was good, it was a good talk.
It's a good development.
And now he will be going back to Moscow, and hopefully working with the Presidents of the republic -- Nazarbayev and Kraychuk, the Ukraine leader, staying with him, there's a good basis now for all of this.
So we'll see what happens, but in his view, the constitutional authorities are back in power, and democracy and freedom and reform have prevailed.
And that's his assessment.
I hope it's not ahead of where things stand in Moscow.
I've not talked again to President Yeltsin, but he believes that Moiseyev has ordered the forces back from -- to their bases, and all in all it's a very, very positive development.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Q. Did he discuss the circumstances surrounding his confinement?
A. No, he didn't, except that his guards, he did say, stayed very loyal to him.
Q. Does that mean he was never under actual physical ----
A. I have no idea. I didn't go into all of that.
Q. Did you get any detail on the 10-plus-1 agreement today? What's the status of that?
A.
No, no.
We just got a detail on the fact that freedom and democracy have prevailed, and he's expressing his sincere appreciation to us.
Fate of Coup
Q.
Had he talked to people from the coup that assured him that the coup was over?
Have they given him ----
A.
I don't know, I don't know.
There are all kinds of wild rumors about what's happened to people involved in the coup, but I don't want to go into that.
Some of them may be accurate and some may not.
But he was anticipating some of them coming to see him.
He said that to me, but whether that proves to be the case or not, I don't know.
Gorbachev's Status
Q. Will he be the President again? What's his status?
A. He feels that way.
Q. And did he say what happened in the last couple of hours?
A.
No.
Just the fact that he was elated, and it sounded like for the last hour he was back fulfilling his duties and calling the shots.
Why Takeover Failed
Q. What do you consider the main factor in the failure of the coup?
A.
The fact that they underestimated democracy and freedom and that you can't put it back in a box.
These totalitarian systems, you can't have them come out and take over.
You can't put freedom and democracy back into a box and keep it contained.
And that's what happened, and as a matter of fact, that's one of the things Gorbachev said.
And certainly Yeltsin feels that way.
. . .
Gorbachev-Yeltsin Ties
Q. Does he intend to work with Mr. Yeltsin?
A. Well, I think he is working with Mr. Yeltsin. U.S.-Soviet Ties
Q. Does this significantly change the U.S.-Soviet relationship?
A.
I think it's a good day for U.S.-Soviet relationship because I don't think that the fears that some of us have had about -- many people have had, actually, about right-wing takeovers will no longer be as extant.
They tried and they failed.
And democracy prevailed and reform prevailed.
And that's what this is all about.
So I think that -- I expect the relationship to be, if anything, even better.
And we -- you know, you got to wait, you got to sort out some internal problems, but I explained to him, as I've told Yeltsin, that we're ready to talk to the leaders of the republic, and certainly we'll be ready to deal with the President of the Soviet Union itself.
Georgian's Comment
Q.
Mr.
President, just now on CNN's air, the President of Georgia said that this was all a plot by Gorbachev himself.
Now, whether that's true or not, what does that say to the state of the ----
A.
It says he needs to get a little work done on the kind of statements he's making.
I mean, that's ridiculous.
Here's a man who has been also swimming against the tide, it seems to me, a little bit.
And I don't want to go overboard on this, but he ought to get with it and understand what's happening around the world.
To suggest that this -- President Gorbachev would plot to put the people of the Soviet Union through this kind of trauma and the rest of the world through it just makes absolutely no sense at all.
Now, I haven't heard him say that, so I want to hedge it.
You've told me he said it, I haven't heard it -- so I've got to be very careful that I don't react to something that may not be true.
I learned that one a long time ago.
But if that's what the man said, I would just discount it one hundred percent.
So, anyway, I got to go to work.
Q. It's definitely over then, you're confident that the coup leaders ----
A.
I'm just telling you what I know here.
I've not talked with people in Moscow -- I did talk to Jim Baker, and he's very upbeat from the contacts he's had.
He had a long talk with Yakovlev a few minutes ago, who is confident that it's over.
But it's not up to us to decree whether it's over or not.
I'm telling you what these various leaders are saying about it, and it's a good day -- it's a very good day.


Clashes Persist in Crown Heights for 3d Night in Row
Black youths hurling rocks and bottles scuffled with the police in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn last night, even as Mayor David N. Dinkins tried to personally calm the racially troubled neighborhood after two nights of violence.
Mayor Dinkins's efforts swiftly turned sour as he was booed and jeered by hundreds of blacks as he tried to speak, and then was trapped inside the apartment of the family whose child died, as a black crowd outside pelted the building with rocks and bottles and pounded on the cars in the Mayor's entourage.


Corrections
Two picture captions yesterday about demonstrations in the Soviet Union referred incorrectly in some editions to the role of the Winter Palace in the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917.
Members of a provisional government and their defense forces surrendered the palace to the Bolsheviks; it was not stormed by Bolshevik troops.


BASEBALL: Notebook; Resurgent Twins Are Hurdling Tests That Count
As the season shrinks and the distance between the Oakland Athletics and first place expands, the vultures circle lower and cluck their beaks over the imminent demise of the three-time American League pennant winners.
"I'll take three in a row, then let them take snide shots at me," Andy MacPhail said.
"I hope I get that experience."


Tass on Decision To Recall Troops
Following is a statement distributed this afternoon by the English-language service of Tass, the Soviet press agency:
The Collegium of the Soviet Union Defense Ministry has decided to withdraw army formations and units from the areas that were covered by emergency regulations to their permanent bases, it was announced at a news conference here today.


Macy's to Join Outlet Trend
Joining the ranks of retailers with stores devoted to selling excess inventory at bargain- basement prices, R. H. Macy &amp; Company announced yesterday that it would open five clearance stores in outlet malls or free-standing locations around the country.
A company spokesman said Macy's had based its decision on the success of its six warehouse clearance centers.
But unlike those clearance centers, which are typically adjacent to or near Macy's regular stores, the new close-out stores will be located in outlet malls, which have been gaining popularity among shoppers.


Couples Who Tread 225-Mile Tightrope
WHEN Sally Shelton-Colby was a weekend commuter aboard the New York-Washington shuttle, she was not surprised by the sight of another passenger boarding a jet one Monday morning at National Airport carrying a vacuum cleaner instead of a briefcase.
Like Ms.
Shelton-Colby, a former United States Ambassador to Barbados, the man was a member of a hardy band that struggles to maintain weekend marriages in one of the two cities and weekday jobs in the other.
The vacuum cleaner, she concluded, was being transferred for duty in the man's New York apartment from his home in the capital.


Our Unemployment System Needs Reworking
To the Editor:
To a Florida Congressman, the recession might be about to end, but an out-of-work New Yorker pounding the pavement in search of a job has a very different perception ("Let Unemployment Benefits Run Out," Op-Ed, Aug. 6).
E.
Clay Shaw Jr.'s Pollyanna view of a rebounding economy underscores a fundamental flaw in the unemployment insurance system, and he even points out -- unintentionally -- why it needs to be reformed: all recessions are not equal, especially region by region.


CHRONICLE
It was with a special sense of fulfillment that British writers including JOHN LE CARRE, MARGARET DRABBLE, SALMAN RUSHDIE, Lady ANTONIA FRASER and HAROLD PINTER heard of the collapse of the coup in the Soviet Union yesterday.
The day before, they and scores of others had taken to the pages of The Guardian to promote such ideals as freedom and self-determination.
In a letter published on Tuesday and initiated by ANTHONY BARNETT, a former editor of the weekly journal New Statesman, the signers voiced "our support for free elections, free speech and the right to self-determination of all the peoples of the republics of the Soviet Union" and urged "those currently occupying the Kremlin to desist from the use of force."


The Rise and Fall of Soviet Communism: A Party's Record Over 75 Years; From Revolution, Through War and Terror, to Reconstruction and Decay


A Life in the Theater
JoAnne Akalaitis, the new head of the New York Shakespeare Festival and Joseph Papp's longtime associate, says of herself: "I'm not Joe Papp in a skirt and I don't want to be." The statement is wise on two counts.
There's nobody, male or female, in the American theater who's quite like Joe Papp.
Nor is there going to be.
Joe Papp, who created the New York Shakespeare Festival 35 years ago, was the right person in the right place at the right time.
What Joseph Papp has given to New York City is more than a fair return for what he's gotten from it.
He grew up in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn, the son of a man who sold peanuts from a pushcart, and he never went to college.
The Goldman Band concerts in Prospect Park introduced him to music; he introduced himself to William Shakespeare.


Beene Opens Showroom for His Designs
Geoffrey Beene has a new showroom for for what he calls "deluxe ready to wear," at 37 West 57th Street in Manhattan.
A series of reflective planes -- marble, lacquer, silver leaf -- it is an appropriate background for the designer's clothes.
It also includes prototypes for a line of furniture by Mr.
Beene that is now under negotiation.
The space, which was completed in January, is a homage to the Wiener Werkstatte, the Austrian craft studio founded in 1903, and a laboratory for geometric objects in black, white and silver.


Miscellany
*
The Publishers Information Bureau, New York, reported that magazine advertising pages for July continued their recent decline, falling 6.9 percent from July 1990.
In the year through July, ad pages were down 10.4 percent. *
The Wolf Group, Toronto, has opened a New York office, Wolf, Bolling, Goldstein Advertising.
Norman Goldstein, a former executive vice president and marketing director at Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, New York, has been named managing partner.


In Brighton Beach, Eyes on Dominoes and Kremlin
Surprised and relieved, scores of Soviet emigres in the Brighton Beach section of Brooklyn returned to their domino games, boardwalk strolls and other summer pastimes yesterday after the restoration to power of the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
But many of them expressed uncertainty about the future of the Soviet Union, particularly its independence-seeking republics.
Some also feared that a new power struggle might emerge between Mr.
Gorbachev and the president of the Russian federated republic, Boris N. Yeltsin, who led the resistance to the junta.


The Coup That Failed
Gorbachev Back at the Helm
Power Takeover Collapses: The seizure of power by hard-line military and K.G.B. leaders collapsed as quickly as it began, and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev declared that he was once again in command.
Page A1.
Three Days that Shook a Country: The bungled takeover of the Soviet Government left the incumbents of the Communist past discredited and hastened the demise of the old guard.
News Analysis, page A1.
Coup Leaders Flee: A beige Volga limousine carried members of the Kremlin junta to Vnukovo Airport, where they fled to an unknown sanctuary.
Page A1.
A Triumphant Rival: President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian federation appeared before his Parliament to a standing ovation.
Page A1.
In Touch Once Again
U.S.
Is Connected: President Bush recounts a 12-minute conversation with President Gorbachev and declares the collapse of the Soviet coup to be a "very fine day" for democracy.
Page A15.
View from the White House: The end of the coup will require a comprehensive recalibration of American policy toward Moscow, and will confront President Bush with major challenges.
News Analysis, page A1.
Action and Reaction
Gunfire in Lithuania: Lithuanian security guards and Soviet troops exchanged gunfire at a checkpoint near the Baltic replublic's Parliament building and two people were reported wounded.
Page A14.
Relief and Vulnerability: Eastern Europe's fledgling democracies today greeted the failure of the coup with relief but with a renewed and heightened sense of their own vulnerability.
Page A17.
Appeals for Aid: Germany reacted to the restoration of Mr.
Gorbachev with renewed appeals for other Western nations to increase their aid to the Soviet Union.
Page A17.
The Financial World
Markets Soar: World financial markets did an about-face yesterday, rallying strongly as word spread of the Gorbachev return to power.
Business Day, page D1.
Calls to Moscow: The Federal Communications Commission authorized two long-distance companies to use a Soviet satellite, thus easing a bottleneck that has kept many Americans from completing calls to the Soviet Union.
Business Day, page D21.


Graf Goes Full Tilt In 2-Hour Practice
STEFFI GRAF mopped up the grandstand court yesterday morning at the National Tennis Center until her sneakers could hold firm.
Then, the top-ranked female player in the world flung forehands at her coach, PAVEL SLOZIL.
By the time their simulated set and two-hour practice were done, Graf was screaming at herself over a few minor flaws and Slozil was all smiles.
Graf's injured shoulder was clearly healed.
Barring an 11th-hour return of the tendinitis that sidelined Graf at last month's Federation Cup, the United States Open will have its first seed when the official draw is held this morning at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Manhattan.


Russians View Mice That Roar With Little Awe
Of all the reasons for the failure of the Kremlin coup today, none was more basic than the fact that the Soviet public remained disbelieving rather than fearful at the junta's resorting to the trappings of terror.
Tanks rumbled through the streets of the city with the alacrity of the the emergency decrees that the eight-member committee kept signing to supersede most laws of the land, just the way their predecessors at Communist dictatorship used to do.


James MacLachlan, 57, Professor Who Helped TV Compress Action
James M. MacLachlan, a marketing and electronics specialist who developed a technique of "time compression" into a tool widely used in radio and television, died on Sunday at St.
Peter's Hospital in Albany.
He was 57 years old and lived in South Delmar, N.Y.
He died of lymphoma, said a spokesman for the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in Troy, N.Y., where Mr.
MacLachlan was an associate professor of management.


Market Place; Will MCI Always Play David?
THE Federal Government gave the MCI Communications Corporation a valuable breathing spell earlier this month.
It delayed action on a potentially expensive increase in the costliest item in a long-distance call for MCI and other long-distance carriers.
The item, known as "access fees," makes up nearly half the cost of a long-distance call.
The Federal Communications Commission said on Aug. 1 that it would study the situation further instead of allowing current fees to lapse, as scheduled, on Sept. 1.
But the Government's lack of action did little to answer the question still bedeviling Wall Street analysts: Has MCI, about one-fourth the size of A.T.&amp; T., gotten as big as it can get?


Crayoning To Save The World
JENNIFER LEY had the idea for "Crayon Power," a coloring book about the rain forest, after she attended an environmental activism workshop last spring.
"I wanted to give children the means to reach the powerful adults who make ecological policy decisions," she said.
And what power brokers they could become, coloring illustrations by Ms.
Ley and other artists.


INSIDE
More Racial Turmoil  On Brooklyn Streets
Turmoil between blacks and Jews in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn continued.
Black youths marched on a Hasidic headquarters.
Police officers were hit with shotgun pellets.
There were scores of injuries and arrests.
Mayor David N. Dinkins was jeered and trapped in a building as a black crowd stoned it.
Page B1.
Cubans Seize U.S.
Prison
Seeking to halt deportations, Cubans detained at a Federal prison in Alabama seized part of it and held 11 people hostage.
Page A23.
Another Democrat Says No
Citing his family responsibilities, Senator Al Gore added his name to a growing list of Democrats who have decided not to challenge President Bush next year.
Page A20.
Giants Pull a Reverse
In the season's first upset, Jeff Hostetler, the longtime backup, was named starting quarterback over the veteran Phil Simms.
Page B15.


Court Upsets Fine Over Waste Disposal
A Federal appeals court yesterday reversed a contempt order and a $1 million fine against Westchester County for failing to come up with a long-term solid-waste disposal plan.
The United States Circuit Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled in Manhattan that Judge Constance Baker Motley of Federal District Court was wrong in finding the county in violation of a 1975 settlement requiring the county to "devise long-range plans for solid-waste disposal."


It Wasn't Harrelson Dropping the Ball
The chorus of boos grew louder each time Bud Harrelson appeared on the field during the opening game at Shea Stadium last night, but what did he do to deserve the crescendo of salutes?
Did he drop the ball twice at shortstop after fielding routine ground balls?


A Team New Yorkers Can Be Proud Of
In a 200-foot park near the banks of the Susquehanna River, New York baseball is alive and well.
August may have brought an end to meaningful games in Flushing and the Bronx, but there remain championship possibilities for the city here, in a town where they would rather see boys (and girls) playing a boys' game.
The Little League World Series, the event of the season in these parts, is down to four teams, and a spunky group of 12-year-olds from the South Shore of Staten Island represents one of them.


CHRONICLE
ERMA BOMBECK, the columnist whose views on the insanities and inanities of domesticity appear in more than 700 newspapers, has been named the 1991 Woman of the Year by the American Legion Auxiliary.
The award, which cites her ability "to see humor in real-life situations and for providing American women with an example of grace and good will in stressful situations," is to be presented at the auxiliary's 71st annual convention, to run from Aug. 31 to Sept. 5 at the Phoenix Civic Center Plaza.
The auxiliary was founded in 1919 to support the American Legion's work on behalf of veterans.


Could Ewing Have a Place With Suns? Colangelo Asks Knicks
Jerry Colangelo, the president and owner of the Phoenix Suns, said yesterday that he had had an exploratory talk with the Knicks about a possible deal for Patrick Ewing, and that he was ready to continue talking about a trade if the Knicks are interested.
Colangelo said he had talked once with Dave Checketts, the Knicks' president, and that he would be happy to talk to him again.
"We think we have a roster that is very deep, and have enough flexibility there that could result in making a deal," Colangelo said.
"At the same time we're not ready to break up our team. We have no reason to."


Yank Pitchers Struggle But Can't Hold Line Against the Royals
All the signs were in place for the Yankees to crumble tonight at Royals Stadium.
They had thrown two players out at third and another at home before the game reached the fourth inning.
Still, they trailed by a run and were hanging by a thread.
The thread was snapped and the crumbling began in the sixth inning as Lee Guetterman was blitzed for three runs and four hits.
After Pascual Perez had danced through danger for the first five innings, Guetterman replaced him, lost his footing and helped send the Royals to a 7-4 victory over New York.


The Envelope, Please: It's Hostetler in an Upset
Ray Handley, the mathematics whiz from Stanford who coaches the Giants, went against conventional wisdom and tradition today, naming Jeff Hostetler as his quarterback over Phil Simms.
After considering all the X's and O's and statistics, ending months of speculation that had consumed followers of the Super Bowl champions, Handley cited this nonscientific reason:


Elegant New Life For Gaudy Canna
THE stately canna -- pride of gas stations, municipal buildings and (horror of horrors) Victorian planting beds -- has long languished under its stereotyped image.
For half a century, and then some, these towering tropical plants, with their bold, paddle-shaped leaves, have been disdained by the taste makers of the garden world.
But suddenly -- or so it seems -- the vulgar duckling is now an elegant swan.
Extensive hybridizing has yielded plants with heights from one and a half to over seven feet, flowers in every conceivable color (with freckles and splotches too) and foliage streaked with yellow, silver-blue or maroon.


Queens Man Held in Rape of Brooklyn Prosecutor
A partial handprint found on an iron fence led to the arrest of a Queens man yesterday in the rape of an assistant district attorney in her Brooklyn Heights apartment last week, the police said.
The suspect, 33-year-old Victor Hardy, has a record of at least 40 arrests, none of them for sex crimes, the authorities said.


A Firmer Stance, But a Belated One
Under fire for moving slowly to demand reversal of the Soviet coup, President Francois Mitterrand tonight warmly welcomed Mikhail S. Gorbachev's return to power and called on Western countries to step up economic aid to Moscow.
The French leader said he had unsuccessfully sought a major aid package for the Soviet Union at last month's meeting of the leaders of seven industrialized democracies in London.
"Now we have to make a bigger effort than we have made so far," he said.


Bush Quotes Gorbachev: Leader 'Tells Me That Things Are Under Control'
Following are excerpts from President Bush's news conferences here today at 10:36 A.M. and 1:20 P.M.:
10:36 A.M.
OPENING STATEMENT
Well, I wanted to report to the American people on some of the latest developments related to the situation in the Soviet Union.
I spoke at length this morning to President Boris Yeltsin.
The call began at about 8:30, and I also talked to Ambassador Strauss, who is now in our embassy in Moscow, in position, and I also talked in the last, oh, 20 hours, to President Menem in Argentina, Prime Minister Mulroney, Prime Minister Major, and I will continue these kinds of consultative calls.
President Yeltsin was clearly encouraged by the fact that he had survived another night in the Russian Parliament building without a major assault by the forces supporting his coup.
He told me that tens of thousands of Muscovites had turned out to help guard the building from attack.
Yeltsin said he was encouraged by indications that more and more military units and their commanders were abandoning support of the coup.
. . .
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Q.
Mr.
President, with Boris Yeltsin anchoring democratic opposition to this coup, where does that leave him if things do in fact resolve themselves satisfactorily?
A.
It leaves the world looking at him as a very courageous individual, duly elected by the people, standing firmly and courageously for democracy and freedom, with enormous stature as a result of that.
U.S.-Yeltsin Ties
Q. Would that change the U.S. approach towards Mr. Yeltsin in any way?
A.
The U.S. approach towards Mr.
Yeltsin, as you know, is to be supportive of those who were elected.
Ever since he has been elected he has received total support and before he was elected he was received properly.
But I must say, in terms of the respect level, I will join others all around the world, not just politicians or elected leaders of countries, in saying that he has shown tremendous courage and the people appear to be rallying behind him.
And as I said earlier on, to some skepticism, 48 hours ago or more, that look, all these coups don't succeed and democracy, once unleashed, is a pretty powerful force.
So I think he will have a well-earned stature around the world that he might not have had -- he was on his way to having but might not have fully achieved before all this happened, provided it works out the way certainly the United States wants it to work out.
. . .
Gorbachev's Future
Q.
Assuming that President Gorbachev does recover his authority, how will this affect his ability to keep the Soviet Union on a stable path?
Will he be strengthened by it or weakened?
A.
I would say, a little hypothetical for me to get into, but given Yeltsin's support for him and given the respect with which he's held by leaders all around the world, and that has certainly not been diminished by this at all, he will still be a force to be reckoned with.
And again, they can sort out inside their own matters.
But what will be filtered away, should Gorbachev be reinstated, as we hope he will be, what will be filtered out will be the fear of a right-wing military takeover because the people will see that the power of the people to stand up against this illegality is pretty good, pretty strong.
. . .
Coup's Unraveling
Q.
Mr.
President, given the, quote, unquote, leader of the coup leaders, are you surprised they sort of went halfway with their coup and were -- the incredible, apparently disorganization of it?
A.
I think it's too early to decree how disorganized it is, but I think they underestimated the power of the people, they underestimated what a taste of democracy and freedom brings, and everyone recognizes that there were serious economic problems, and I think they felt we'll come in there, promise food on the shelves, and to solve these problems, and then they saw that overriding all of that was a commitment by many, many people in Russia and in the Soviet Union, entirely to democracy, for democracy.
So I think there, if this coup fails, that will be the serious miscalculation.
1:20 P.M.
OPENING STATEMENT
Well, I just wanted to report that at 12:19 I had a phone conversation with Mikhail Gorbachev, and lasted about -- what, 20 minutes, I think.
It was a good call.
Gorbachev is still in the Crimea.
He will return either tonight or tomorrow to Moscow.
He tells me that things are under control.
His first call, I believe, was with Boris Yeltsin.
He stated his sincere appreciation to the people of the United States and others around the world for their support for democracy and reform, and he sounded in good physical condition -- indeed, his voice was buoyant.
And Barbara was with me, and we both asked him to convey our respects to Raisa, which he -- and he, very kindly, made references to his friendship with Barbara and me on a personal basis.
But it was good, it was a good talk.
It's a good development.
And now he will be going back to Moscow, and hopefully working with the Presidents of the republic -- Nazarbayev and Kraychuk, the Ukraine leader, staying with him, there's a good basis now for all of this.
So we'll see what happens, but in his view, the constitutional authorities are back in power, and democracy and freedom and reform have prevailed.
And that's his assessment.
I hope it's not ahead of where things stand in Moscow.
I've not talked again to President Yeltsin, but he believes that Moiseyev has ordered the forces back from -- to their bases, and all in all it's a very, very positive development.
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Q. Did he discuss the circumstances surrounding his confinement?
A. No, he didn't, except that his guards, he did say, stayed very loyal to him.
Q. Does that mean he was never under actual physical ----
A. I have no idea. I didn't go into all of that.
Q. Did you get any detail on the 10-plus-1 agreement today? What's the status of that?
A.
No, no.
We just got a detail on the fact that freedom and democracy have prevailed, and he's expressing his sincere appreciation to us.
Fate of Coup
Q.
Had he talked to people from the coup that assured him that the coup was over?
Have they given him ----
A.
I don't know, I don't know.
There are all kinds of wild rumors about what's happened to people involved in the coup, but I don't want to go into that.
Some of them may be accurate and some may not.
But he was anticipating some of them coming to see him.
He said that to me, but whether that proves to be the case or not, I don't know.
Gorbachev's Status
Q. Will he be the President again? What's his status?
A. He feels that way.
Q. And did he say what happened in the last couple of hours?
A.
No.
Just the fact that he was elated, and it sounded like for the last hour he was back fulfilling his duties and calling the shots.
Why Takeover Failed
Q. What do you consider the main factor in the failure of the coup?
A.
The fact that they underestimated democracy and freedom and that you can't put it back in a box.
These totalitarian systems, you can't have them come out and take over.
You can't put freedom and democracy back into a box and keep it contained.
And that's what happened, and as a matter of fact, that's one of the things Gorbachev said.
And certainly Yeltsin feels that way.
. . .
Gorbachev-Yeltsin Ties
Q. Does he intend to work with Mr. Yeltsin?
A. Well, I think he is working with Mr. Yeltsin. U.S.-Soviet Ties
Q. Does this significantly change the U.S.-Soviet relationship?
A.
I think it's a good day for U.S.-Soviet relationship because I don't think that the fears that some of us have had about -- many people have had, actually, about right-wing takeovers will no longer be as extant.
They tried and they failed.
And democracy prevailed and reform prevailed.
And that's what this is all about.
So I think that -- I expect the relationship to be, if anything, even better.
And we -- you know, you got to wait, you got to sort out some internal problems, but I explained to him, as I've told Yeltsin, that we're ready to talk to the leaders of the republic, and certainly we'll be ready to deal with the President of the Soviet Union itself.
Georgian's Comment
Q.
Mr.
President, just now on CNN's air, the President of Georgia said that this was all a plot by Gorbachev himself.
Now, whether that's true or not, what does that say to the state of the ----
A.
It says he needs to get a little work done on the kind of statements he's making.
I mean, that's ridiculous.
Here's a man who has been also swimming against the tide, it seems to me, a little bit.
And I don't want to go overboard on this, but he ought to get with it and understand what's happening around the world.
To suggest that this -- President Gorbachev would plot to put the people of the Soviet Union through this kind of trauma and the rest of the world through it just makes absolutely no sense at all.
Now, I haven't heard him say that, so I want to hedge it.
You've told me he said it, I haven't heard it -- so I've got to be very careful that I don't react to something that may not be true.
I learned that one a long time ago.
But if that's what the man said, I would just discount it one hundred percent.
So, anyway, I got to go to work.
Q. It's definitely over then, you're confident that the coup leaders ----
A.
I'm just telling you what I know here.
I've not talked with people in Moscow -- I did talk to Jim Baker, and he's very upbeat from the contacts he's had.
He had a long talk with Yakovlev a few minutes ago, who is confident that it's over.
But it's not up to us to decree whether it's over or not.
I'm telling you what these various leaders are saying about it, and it's a good day -- it's a very good day.


Case Weighed In Car Accident That Killed Boy
Black protesters are demanding the arrest of the Hasidic driver of a car that killed a black boy in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn on Monday.
But despite reports that the driver, Yoseph Lisef, 22 years old, ran a red light, the authorities have delayed legal action pending a grand jury inquiry.
Asked what might end the racial and ethnic violence, Colin Moore, a lawyer, said, "When the Hasidic Jew is arrested."


Wolfgang Hildesheimer, 74, Dies; Novelist and Mozart Biographer
Wolfgang Hildesheimer, a novelist, playwright and painter whose 1977 biography of Mozart became an international best seller, died on Wednesday.
He was 74 years old.
He died of a heart attack at his home, his family said.


CUBAN DETAINEES SEIZE PRISON WING
Cuban inmates seized control of a medium-security section of a Federal prison and took 11 hostages today, a day before some of the Cubans were to be deported.
Prison officials said 121 Cuban inmates took over the unit about 10 A.M.
A 12th hostage, a guard who received a minor neck injury in the takeover, was released later in the day.


Market Surges, but Military Stocks Drop
The stock market soared yesterday on news that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had returned to power in the Soviet Union after the coup by Communist hard-liners failed.
The Dow Jones industrial average more than recovered its loss of Monday by skyrocketing 88.10 points to surpass the 3,000 level again, closing at 3,001.79.


In the Nation; A Hard-Line Failure
The idea of a hard-line takeover in Moscow, perhaps even a return to the cold war, is no longer valid.
The discontented hard-line apparatchiks of the old Soviet Union, the inflexible Communists, the disgruntled military men -- all who resented external retreat and resisted internal change -- gathered their strength, tried to seize power, and were rebuffed.
Their coup d'etat was rejected partly owing to their own mistakes and miscalculations, but primarily because the Soviet people, having tasted freedom and found it to their liking, refused to go back to the old system of control from the top.
And that popular determination is the most significant fact to have emerged from three dramatic days of life-and-death struggle.


Greeting for a Drop-In Guest: 'Drop Dead'
THESE are the last few weeks for a species that flourishes during the summer months in the semi-bucolic retreats enjoyed by New Yorkers.
This species, known as drop-ins, is made up of friends and acquaintances who pop in unexpectedly, tossing off remarks like, "We were just driving by."
That the men and women subjected to such inanities do not reply, "So why didn't you?" is often a combination of extraordinary restraint and impeccable manners.
But it may account for a homily often seen on needlework pillows in country houses: "We're at home but we're not in."


Street Heroism Paints The Images of a Coup
For three days the tube was awash with Soviet experts, Moscow correspondents, Washington officials and news anchors whose schedules and vacations had been disturbed.
But once again, it was the pictures that told the story: the tanks on the move in Moscow and then on the move out; Boris Yeltsin atop a tank calling for defiance and then before the Russian Parliament calling for punishment of the men who had planned the coup; the coup masters submitting to a news conference that would have made for a "Saturday Night Live" skit if so much had not been at stake.


Vietnam, the Way It Might Have Been
Before the start of a recent concert of Vietnamese pop music here in the community known as Little Saigon, schoolchildren in smart blue uniforms marched onto the stage of a school auditorium carrying the yellow and red flag of South Vietnam, a country that ceased to exist 16 years ago.
The audience, like a roomful of ghosts, rose and joined the singing of that country's national anthem.
Then the performers in their extravagant outfits, mostly aging refugees themselves, sang the familiar ballads of two decades past, of love and loneliness and of weariness with a war that is long since over.


Bill Signed Limiting After-School Work
Teen-agers' working hours will be strictly curtailed during the coming school year under legislation signed yesterday by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The legislation is intended to encourage high school students to pay more attention to their schoolwork by limiting the time they can spend in the workplace.


Bush and Gorbachev Talk
President Bush was not expecting his call to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev to go through today.
After all, he had tried twice before and could not reach the Soviet leader.
So Mr.
Bush decided to go for a ride in his speedboat, Fidelity, late this morning after asking his national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, to try raising Mr.
Gorbachev once again, White House officials said.


On Long Island, Many Regain Electric Service
Two days ago, Denise Ross and her family in Mattituck, L.I., survived Hurricane Bob just fine, but they lost their telephone service and their water.
Electricity?
That went too, when a tree crashed onto Mrs.
Ross's son's Chevrolet (purchased last week) and took down the power lines.
Whatever immediate novelty the Rosses might have derived from their enforced ascetism was wearing thin yesterday, as the family faced a third day of life by candlelight, in a leaking house surrounded by broken trees.
No showers either.


British Air Chooses Boeing And Orders G.E. Engines (Boeing)
British Airways chose the Boeing Company today as its supplier for aircraft worth $6.85 billion.
The decision was a strong confirmation of Boeing's new mid-size jet, the 777, and was a victory for the American company over the competing European Airbus Industrie consortium.
Airline industry analysts were not surprised, however, because British Airways has usually bought from Boeing.
The surprising aspect of the decision was that British Airways, which has consistently flown its Boeing aircraft with Rolls-Royce engines, said it would power its 777's with a new engine from the General Electric Company.


Women Have the Right Stuff to Fly; Infiltrators for Peace
To the Editor:
Congress's decision to allow women as combat pilots is a hopeful sign for genuine peace ("Women in the Wild Blue Yonder," Op-Ed, Aug. 7).
We know that 100 years ago, waiters, secretaries and salespeople in stores were all men.
As soon as women were allowed in, men left in droves.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
World financial markets did an about-face, rallying strongly as word spread from the Soviet Union that the coup had collapsed.
In Europe, stock and bond markets rallied, but did not regain all the lost ground, in part because they closed too early.  [ D1. ]


F.T.C. Accord On Volvo Ads
The controversy surrounding the "Bear Foot" advertising campaign that wreaked havoc on a row of cars -- as well as on the reputation of Volvo and its former agency -- is almost over.
The Federal Trade Commission announced yesterday that it has reached an agreement with Volvo Cars of North America and Scali, McCabe, Sloves, New York, over television and print ads showing a Volvo withstanding the impact of a giant-tired "monster truck" named Bear Foot that flattened the rest of a long line of cars.
It was later revealed that the ads were faked; the Volvo's roof had been reinforced, while some of the other vehicles' supports had been weakened.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lendl and Connors Gain Ivan Lendl and Jimmy Connors, two former No. 1 players, won matches at the Norstar Bank Hamlet Challenge Cup yesterday in Commack, L.I.
The second-seeded Lendl, who this week fell to fifth in the world, reached the quarterfinals by beating Eric Jelen of Germany, 6-2, 6-0, in 57 minutes.
Connors, just 12 days shy of his 39th birthday and many years removed from his No. 1 ranking, defeated Todd Martin, 6-3, 6-4, at the Hamlet Golf and Country Club.


Gaza Journal; The Veiled Look: It's Enforced With a Vengeance
About 30 teen-age boys were spread up and down a busy street in small, distinct patrols, all nervously watching the women who passed.
Some fingered little bags of black paint.
Egging each other on, they began reprimanding girls, young women, mothers and daughters.
Their mission was clear: warn, and if necessary punish, women and girls who dared appear in public without their veils.


Bush Looks Ahead to Accelerated Soviet Reforms and Greater Stature for Yeltsin
Declaring today a "very fine day" for democracy, President Bush began looking ahead to a changed Soviet Union in which he expects democratic reform to leap forward and President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic to enjoy an "enormous" new stature in his own country and around the world.
Recounting his 12-minute conversation with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, which he said had begun at 12:19 P.M.
Eastern time, Mr.
Bush said, "In his view the constitutional authorities are back in power and democracy and freedom have prevailed."


Three Harrowing Days That Shook the World, Hour by Hour
All times are given in approximate Moscow time. MONDAY, AUG. 19
6 A.M. -- Sudden announcement by Tass that Mikhail S. Gorbachev has been ousted as President of the Soviet Union by military and K.G.B. authorities while on vacation in the Crimea.
The news agency cites his "inability for health reasons" to perform his duties.
Vice President Gennadi I. Yanayev takes power under a new entity, the State Committee for the State of Emergency.
Leaders of the nation's 15 republics had been scheduled to begin signing a new union treaty on Tuesday, shifting considerable power away from the Kremlin.


O'Brien Is a Perennial Diplomat
For the last two seasons, Ken O'Brien has been the Jets' go-to quarterback.
They go to him to start the regular season, but only after they have exhausted all the other possibilities in training camp.
The Jets claimed New England quarterback Tony Eason off waivers late in the 1989 season, then set up a competition between O'Brien and Eason, who are friends, in camp heading into the 1990 season.
O'Brien won the job in the last exhibition game.


Three Harrowing Days That Shook the World, Hour by Hour
All times are given in approximate Moscow time. MONDAY, AUG. 19
6 A.M. -- Sudden announcement by Tass that Mikhail S. Gorbachev has been ousted as President of the Soviet Union by military and K.G.B. authorities while on vacation in the Crimea.
The news agency cites his "inability for health reasons" to perform his duties.
Vice President Gennadi I. Yanayev takes power under a new entity, the State Committee for the State of Emergency.
Leaders of the nation's 15 republics had been scheduled to begin signing a new union treaty on Tuesday, shifting considerable power away from the Kremlin.


Cleaning Up Salomon's Mess
Warren Buffett, the new head of Salomon Brothers, has vowed to change the scandal-ridden investment firm's culture of greed, its contempt for Government regulations, its sneering attitude toward ethics or any other impediment to earning a buck.
Mr.
Buffett pledged immediately to fire anyone flirting with impropriety.
These are welcome declarations.
The problem is not a few corrupt employees but a way of doing business that celebrated clever evasion of rules and trampled anyone standing in the way of profit.


AFTER THE COUP: Bush Looks Ahead to Accelerated Soviet Reforms and Greater Stature for Yeltsin; NATO Expresses Concern
NATO foreign ministers, meeting here today, warned that even a failed coup in the Soviet Union "raises serious questions" about Moscow's relations with the world.
The foreign ministers, meeting as early reports of the collapse of the coup began to circulate, expressed concern about insuring the "subordination of the military authorities to the democratic process" in the Soviet Union.


Precious Bunny Is Favored
Precious Bunny was made the overwhelming favorite yesterday in the post-position draw for the $523,190 Cane Pace at Yonkers Raceway on Saturday night.
Precious Bunny, who has 13 victories in 16 starts this season, was made the 3-5 favorite for the first leg of pacing's triple crown despite drawing the No. 9 post.
He will be the only horse to leave from the second tier in the field of nine.


General Cinema Nears Higher Bid for Harcourt
The General Cinema Corporation is expected to sweeten its offer for Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, the distinguished but debt-ridden publisher, and to give more money to the Harcourt bondholders who rejected the company's earlier bid, people close to the negotiations said yesterday.
They said General Cinema, a movie theater and retailing concern, would probably raise its offer to about $1.5 billion from $1.4 billion.
Of this money, more would go to bondholders, and less to shareholders, than under the initial General Cinema bid made in January.
A comparable amount to what was offered previously would still be used for general operating purposes.


68 in Race For Council Get $892,000
In a move that will have a profound effect on several City Council races, the City Campaign Finance Board disbursed $892,000 in public funds yesterday to 68 candidates in the September primary.
Praised by good-government groups as an antidote to the influence of big money in local elections, New York City's campaign financing program faces perhaps its greatest test in this year's Council races, in which it is believed campaign money will play a larger role than usual because of the shortened campaign and the field of more than 300 candidates.


Aid in Happy Land Case Is Eluding Victims' Kin
For relatives of the 87 people killed in the Happy Land social club fire, the mass murder conviction of Julio Gonzalez on Monday has not ended the case.
Most are still waiting for financial aid from the State Crime Victims Board.
And many are involved in a pending $5 billion lawsuit against the city, the landlords and the leaseholders of the club.


Books of The Times; The Dark Fate of Africa's Elephants
African Silences By Peter Matthiessen 225 pages. Random House. $21.
Well into "African Silences," Peter Matthiessen tells about sighting elephants of intriguingly different sizes at a forest glade in a remote corner of the Central African Republic five years ago.


For China, a Summer of Diplomatic Triumphs
During a visit to Beijing two months ago, a senior American official warned that any transfer of Chinese M-9 or M-11 missiles to other nations "would have the most profound consequences for our bilateral relations."
China appears to have ignored that warning and transferred the missiles to Pakistan and possibly to Syria as well.
Yet there have been no consequences either profound or minor since Reginald Bartholomew, Undersecretary of State for International Security Affairs, issued his warning in June.


CHRONICLE
After one season with the financially struggling Buffalo Philharmonic, MITCH MILLER has quit as its principal pops conductor in a dispute over rehearsals and lighting.
While Mr.
Miller had wanted two rehearsals for each concert, he was limited to one, a spokeswoman for the orchestra, LYNN OSMOND, said yesterday.
Another issue was the cancellation of special lighting for 9 of the 12 yearly pops concerts Mr.
Miller conducted in addition to a Christmas program.
The lighting cost $35,000 last year, of which Mr.
Miller paid $15,000 because he felt so strongly about the aura it created.


Bear, Stearns Sues Proxy Firm, Saying Deceit Was Used to Obtain Secrets
Bear, Stearns &amp; Company filed suit yesterday against one of Wall Street's largest proxy solicitors, charging that employees of D. F. King &amp; Company illegally obtained confidential information about the securities transactions of some of the brokerage's wealthiest clients.
The suit says King employees used the confidential information in the company's proxy business and sold it to some clients.
The information was said to include the names of Bear, Stearns clients and the number of shares they held in specific stocks and other securities.
Such information could be useful to companies that want to find out who is accumulating their stock or who owns securities that would need to be tendered in a corporate reorganization.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about the sculptor Herbert Ferber described his career in dentistry incorrectly.
He indeed practiced, for many years.
He was also on the faculty of the Columbia University School of Dental and Oral Surgery from 1930 to the early 1970's, specializing in periodontics and publishing a number of scientific papers in the field.


Earle Palmer Brown Appealing U.S. Ruling
Earle Palmer Brown Advertising has appealed the Federal Government's denial of its protest that charged the Marine Corps with unfair judging when the Marines awarded a five-year advertising account to J. Walter Thompson Atlanta.
"The Government has mismanaged this and done a terrible job," said Mark D. Goldstein, president of Earle Palmer Brown.
The appeal, called a request for reconsideration, was filed yesterday in Washington with the General Accounting Office.


Grains and Soybeans Climb While Oil Prices Plunge
Grain and soybean futures prices soared yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade, reflecting ideas that the collapsed Kremlin coup could result in increased grain exports to the Soviet Union.
Commodity markets in general responded positively to reports that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union had reclaimed power after a 63-hour coup.


Rivals to Allow Yugoslav Government to Function
Gunfights erupted in the Yugoslav Republic of Croatia again today as the country's leaders agreed for the first time to provide temporarily for the survival of the federal Government.
Rebel Serbs, reportedly with Yugoslav Army support, occupied the eastern Croatian panhandle town of Beli Manastir, Croatian and Serbian news broadcasts said tonight.
Fierce fighting has been reported almost daily near the mostly Croatian and ethnic Hungarian town for weeks.


As Nicklaus Watches, Nicklaus Ties Record
Jack Nicklaus may have been passed over to play in the upcoming Ryder Cup matches, but he will have the pleasure of watching his son Gary play in the match-play portion of the 91st United States Amateur.
With his famous father in the gallery, the younger Nicklaus shot a four-under-par 68 today to tie the competitive course record at the rigorous Honors Course.
It gave him a 36-hole qualifying total of 140, easily enough to assure him a spot among the low 64 players who will begin match play on Thursday.


Planned School Occupation Near Johannesburg Is Halted
An attempt by black schoolchildren to occupy three empty white schools around Johannesburg collapsed today when the police stopped many of the children from leaving the black townships where they live and study.


All Those Doggies, Here, Here And There
DESPITE never having approached an art class herself, Susan Teoh has illuminated drab school walls and brightened placid bedrooms with her large, bouncy paintings of cartoon characters.
"I always loved watching cartoons," said Ms.
Teoh, who is 32 years old and refers to herself as a "homebody."


Price Tag: Cooking Lessons
Comparative costs of learning to cook at schools geared to nonprofessionals.
Selected schools represent the borad range of instruction available, from basic kitchen skills to specialized gourmet cuisine.
Self-instruction, with a cookbook at home, is also represented.
Unless otherwise indicated, the cost of food and supplies is included.


NEWS SUMMARY
AFTER THE COUP A10-18
The Soviet coup abruptly collapsed, and President Gorbachev returned to Moscow to reassert control.
The coup seemed simply to fizzle under the disdain of the masses who rallied to the summons of Boris Yeltsin, and the irresolution of the plotters, who failed to garner support.
Page A1
Boris Yeltsin was hailed with a standing ovation in the Russian Parliament.
During the crisis, he was able to swing together the elements that helped reverse the coup without large-scale bloodshed.
A1
News analysis: The bungled takeover left the incumbents of the Soviet past discredited.
It also legitimized the claim of post-Communist reformers that they are the rightful heirs to power, and invigorated them for the mammoth task of civilizing their country.
A1
The Kremlin junta fled from Moscow, and people there were free once more to wonder about their longer-running crises and not have to suffer the inconvenience of snaking their food-store lines around tanks and boyish-looking riot troops.A1
Lithuanians clash with Soviet force A14
General's activities during the coup still a mystery A13
U.S. officials weren't convinced coup would fail A16
President Bush began looking ahead to a changed Soviet Union in which he expects democratic reform to leap forward and Boris Yeltsin to enjoy an "enormous" new stature in his own country and around the world.
A15
News analysis: United States policy toward Moscow will require a comprehensive recalibration after the coup's collapse, even as President Bush savors a personal triumph and a triumph for democracy.
A1
Two Russians reach new heights in U.S. poll A18
World financial markets rallied as word spread from the Soviet Union that Monday's coup had collapsed and that President Gorbachev would be restored to power.
D1
Eastern Europe: Former satellites taste vulnerability A17
Soviet emigres in Brooklyn express surprise and relief A18
TV critic's notebook: The images of heroism A18 INTERNATIONAL A3-9, A19
Economic sanctions against Iraq should be lifted for the good of the Iraqi people, said President Mubarak, who had been chief among Arab leaders aligned against Saddam Hussein in the Persian Gulf crisis.
A3
Prime Minister Shamir's plans to attend a Middle East peace conference sponsored by the United States and the Soviet Union have not changed, he said, though he indicated that the failed coup may delay the gathering.
A3 Gaza Journal: The veiled looked is enforced with a vengeance A4
President Salinas of Mexico challenged opposition leaders to prove their claims of voter fraud, calling his party's big victory an endorsement of changes he has carried out.
A7
Rivals to allow Yugoslav Government to function A5
Churches to mediate in Madagascar A8
For China, a summer of diplomatic triumphs A19 NATIONAL A20-24, B10-12
Senator Al Gore will not run in the 1992 Democratic primary for President, he announced, adding his name to a growing list of Democrats who have elected not to challenge President Bush next year.
A20
The impact on Salomon Brothers of the growing Treasury markets scandal spread, as more clients suspended doing business with the firm, and a state treasury announced it would stop purchasing the short-term debt the firm issues to finance itself.
D1
The F.D.A. has begun a crackdown on the use by pharmaceutical companies of video news releases and says it plans to tighten its scrutiny of written news releases as well.
D1
Washington at Work: A crusader driven by outrage D1
Lung cancer passes heart ills as smokers' main killer B10
Cuban inmates seized control of a medium-security section of a Federal prison in Alabama and took 11 hostages, a day before some of the Cubans were to be deported.
A23
Vietnamese refugee communities throughout the United States are still struggling to balance the ways and pace of life here with their longings for the life of pre-war Vietnam.
A20
Oregon's first woman governor, Barbara Roberts, won the seat as an underdog, and faces the challenge of carrying out the state's highly praised education and health care programs on a tight budget.
B11
Judge is held biased and barred from trial of officers in beating A20
Three anti-abortion protest leaders are jailed A22
Serial killer may have slain 16 in California B12
Nurse in Georgia is called a killer B12 REGIONAL B1-9
Black youths scuffled with the police in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, even as Mayor Dinkins tried to personally calm the racially troubled neighborhood after two nights of violence.
B1
Dinkins, seeking peace, finds menacing crowd B2
Charges in accident are studied B3
Reporter's notebook: Fear, anger and loss in Crown Heights B3
Public campaign funds were disbursed by the City Campaign Finance Board to 68 candidates for City Council.
The move is expected to have a profound effect on several races.
B1
The nominee for health chief of New York State, Dr.
Mark Chassin, is emerging as the David Souter of gubernatorial appointees, a man with little public record on major health issues and little freedom to stake out his positions.
B1
The Connecticut budget quagmire persisted, as lawmakers found themselves in a thicket of details and fine print that seemed almost as perilous as previous budget battles.
B1
On Long Island, many regain electric service B9
U.S. inquiry in St. John's case said to be rejected B5
Queens man held in rape of Brooklyn prosecutor B4
Aid in Happy Land case is eluding victims' kin B9
Inwood Journal: Of changing enclaves and changing ways B8
Is a Fifth Avenue rose wilting?  D1 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 The Home Section
Failed dreams that paved the way in home design C1
Elegant new life for the "gaudy" canna C1
Couples who tread a 225-mile tightrope C1
Parent &amp; Child C2
Beene opens a showroom for his designs C5
Lobbyist by day, hobbyist in wood by night C12 Arts/Entertainment
Sculptor's ordeal with steel C13
Brandon Tartikoff on Paramount C13
Dance: Martine van Hamel C13
Word and Image: "African Silences" by Peter Matthiessen C18 Obituaries D22
Wolfgang Hildesheimer, novelist, playwright and painter
Sydney Gittler, coat retailer
James MacLachlan, professor Sports B14-20
Baseball: Strawberry goes on a tear B16
Why boo Harrelson?  B17
Basketball: Suns' owner explores Ewing deal B15
Column: Berkow on umpires and lawsuits B15
Football: Hostetler picked over Simms B15
New Giant coach makes mark B19
Tennis: Road to the U.S. Open: A qualifier's life B20 Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A26
Now, finish the revolution
Cleaning up Salomon's mess
A life in the theater


Price Tag: Cooking Lessons
Comparative costs of learning to cook at schools geared to nonprofessionals.
Selected schools represent the borad range of instruction available, from basic kitchen skills to specialized gourmet cuisine.
Self-instruction, with a cookbook at home, is also represented.
Unless otherwise indicated, the cost of food and supplies is included.


Losses Rise in Aetna's Real Estate Portfolio
In a sharply rising stock market, shares of the Aetna Life and Casualty Company fell $1.25 yesterday to close at $36.75 on the New York Stock Exchange, as investors focused on a filing by Aetna that indicated it was experiencing growing difficulties in its large portfolio of real estate and real estate loans.
In interviews, Aetna officials have insisted that Aetna continues to do well over all, paced by strong results in many of its insurance lines.
But the filing, a quarterly profit report made with the Securities and Exchange Commission, showed that the company continued to have significant problems in its portfolio of loans and real estate holdings in the second quarter.


Pop in Review
Orquesta Broadway
S.O.B.'s
Among the stranger musical cross-fertilizations to have occurred in the new world has been the charanga orchestra, developed in Cuba.
With a string section floating over percussionists, it mixes, but doesn't really blend, African and European elements.
And it works: charanga orchestras have produced some of the better dance music of the century.


Shamir Repeats His Willingness to Attend Talks
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir restated his qualified agreement today to attend a Middle East peace conference sponsored by the United States and the Soviet Union but said it was "hard to know" whether the failed coup in Moscow would delay the meeting, tentatively planned for October.
Throughout the crisis in Moscow, Israelis and Palestinians and other Arabs have been held in thrall by events that bear directly on two issues of profound concern to all of them -- the immigration of Soviet Jews to Israel and the prospects for the talks.


Now, Finish the Revolution; What Mr. Gorbachev Owes His Defenders
The global village sighed with relief yesterday morning just as suddenly as it had gasped with shock Sunday night.
People around the world who still find it hard to believe that the Persian Gulf war ended in 100 hours are gratefully incredulous that a power grab in the Soviet Union could be undone at all, let alone in 60 hours.
How could it happen?
President Bush gave one explanation at his morning news conference yesterday when Peter Maer of Mutual-NBC Radio asked what message he had for Mikhail Gorbachev.
"Stay with your principles, stay with your reforms," the President said -- and "stand shoulder to shoulder" with Boris Yeltsin, the president of Russia.


New Troubles for Salomon: Suits Grow, Clients Defect
Salomon Brothers Inc. suffered several new blows yesterday in the growing Treasury markets scandal, as more clients suspended doing business with the firm, a state treasury announced it would stop buying the short-term debt the firm issues to finance itself, and more investors queued up to sue the firm.
The World Bank, one of the most valuable and blue-chip customers in the securities industry, also announced yesterday that it was suspending all business activities with Salomon through Sept. 30.


Is a Fifth Avenue Rose Wilting?
Like a haughty Park Avenue matron whose credit has been challenged at the local supermarket, Saks Fifth Avenue is defending its blue-blooded reputation these days amid rumors of big losses and late payments to suppliers.
Saks denies it has any financial troubles, and industry analysts note that it has been one of the most profitable companies in the business.
Competitors have long envied Saks's knack for finding and selling some of the most innovative, and priciest, lines of high-fashion merchandise.


S.&amp; P. May Downgrade I.B.M.'s Rating
The International Business Machines Corporation, struggling through a long slump in the computer business, suffered a blow yesterday when a major bond rating agency indicated it might lower the company's top-flight, triple-A credit rating.
The Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation changed its outlook on the huge computer maker to "negative" from "stable," reflecting its concern over "the general deterioration of the market environment in the computer industry coupled with I.B.M.'s decline in profitabliity from the high levels of the mid-1980's."


Corrections
An article yesterday about development in Charlottesville, Va., misstated the relationship between Jessica Lange and Sam Shepard in some copies.
They are not married.


Nashville Agency Revenue Bonds
A $71.8 million tax-exempt bond issue by the Nashville Metropolitan Airport Authority was priced yesterday with a maximum yield of 6.85 percent for an issue of revenue bonds due in 2011.
Underwriters led by Prudential Securities said the financing included a series of bonds that for some investors might be subject to the Federal alternative minimum tax.


Connecticut Senate Takes Up Income-Tax Plan
The state Senate pushed early this morning toward approval of a state income tax, with a majority apparently holding firm and ready to shatter Connecticut's long tradition against such a levy.
The proposal, which would still require approval by the House of Representatives, would impose a 4.5 percent flat-rate income tax on residents and would also overhaul much of the rest of the tax system.
The state's 8 percent sales tax would be lowered to 6 percent, and the corporate tax rate would be lowered as well.


Auditor Finds 'Disarray' In F.D.I.C. Asset Sales
The Government's chief auditor said today that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's program to sell the assets of failed banks might be imperiled by the agency's inability to obtain information about the loans it had acquired.
The warning accompanied a finding that the asset-disposal program of the F.D.I.C.'s Denver office appeared to be "in a state of neglect and disarray." The F.D.I.C.'s Inspector General found similar problems at eight other offices in 1990 and 1991.


Corrections
A headline in some editions of Business Day yesterday about Salomon Brothers referred incorrectly to an action taken by the California Public Employees Retirement System, a pension fund that is a Salomon client.
As the article noted, the pension fund suspended business with Salomon's government bond desk, but is doing business with other parts of the firm.


Corrections
A film review yesterday about "Barton Fink" misidentified the director of the film "Eraserhead." He is David Lynch.


Corporate Bonds Status Stays Intact for Salomon
While controversy swirls around Salomon Brothers' bidding for Treasury securities, and it is barred from submitting bids for customers at future auctions, the firm has become even more prominent in the corporate bond market.
Salomon's strength in distributing new securities to investors was recognized yesterday when it joined Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in managing a $602 million issue of taxable bonds issued by the State of California.


TENSION IN BROOKLYN: Reporter's Notebook; Fear, Loss And Rage Tear Area
In the hazy morning light yesterday, Sang Han looked around what was left of his year-old store, the Sneaker King, at 298 Utica Avenue in Crown Heights.
It had been looted in the night by angry black youths.
"This is very sad," he said as workers swept up the debris.
"I didn't know anything had happened until I received a call from my alarm company. When I got here, I looked around. Everything was gone." He said he did not have insurance.


A.T.&amp;T., IDB to Use Soviet Satellite
The Federal Communications Commission authorized two long-distance companies today to use a Soviet satellite, helping to ease somewhat a bottleneck that since Monday's coup has kept Americans from completing even one in 100 calls there.
The F.C.C. also announced that starting in 1993 it would crack down on the high international charges by foreign telephone companies that have added an estimated $3 billion to the United States annual trade deficit and forced Americans to pay more for their overseas calls.


Sculptor's Ordeal With Steel: It's Pretty but Temperamental
When William Tarr, a sculptor, installed his work "Morningside Heights" in front of Public School 36 in 1967, he and the New York City Board of Education, which had commissioned it, assumed that the sculpture would last at least as long as the school.
But on Tuesday, the 40-foot-high steel piece will be carted off from P.S. 36, at 123d Street and Amsterdam Avenue, to the Springs, L.I., where Mr.
Tarr lives.
The Board of Education has determined that the sculpture, a victim of rust, is unrepairable and, with pieces falling off, a safety hazard.
The fate of the work is uncertain, but Mr.
Tarr said he hoped to raise money to replicate it.


Lonrho Chairman Quits After Move to Oust Him
Sir Edward du Cann announced yesterday that he was stepping down as chairman and a board member of Lonrho P.L.C., the British mining and industrial conglomerate, after a decision by the Department of Trade and Industry to take legal action to remove him from office.
The action stems from the 1989 collapse of Homes Assured Corporation P.L.C., a small mortgage company.
The company was not connected with Lonrho, but Sir Edward was on its board as a director.
The company collapsed owing $15 million.
Sir Edward resigned his position there shortly before the company failed.


GORBACHEV BACK AS COUP FAILS, BUT YELTSIN GAINS NEW POWER
A coup by hard-line Communists collapsed on Wednesday as abruptly as it began, and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev returned to Moscow early this morning to reassert control.
Mr.
Gorbachev landed at Vnukovo Airport on his return from his summer retreat in the Crimea, where he had been placed under house arrest early Monday at the start of the short-lived putsch.


Oregon's New Governor Is Tested by State's Split Personality
When Oregon voters went to the polls last fall, they sent a curious mixed message in this state known for its maverick politicians and pioneering laws.
On one hand, they elected Barbara Roberts, a Democrat, as the state's first female governor, who promised change and new social programs.
On the other hand, voters zippered the state pocketbook by passing an initiative that slashed property taxes and forced the state to cut its budget by nearly 15 percent.


Bus to Rikers Island Flips, Injuring 15
A bus carrying 13 inmates from the Brooklyn courts to Rikers Island crashed into a sand barrier in Queens yesterday and flipped over after its steering mechanism froze, the Correction Department said.
The inmates and the two correction officers aboard the bus suffered minor injuries and were taken to local hospitals for treatment, said Tom Antenen, a department spokesman.


Mets Gain Split on Shutout to End Slide
The losing streak that was difficult to conceive ended with a triumph that was not entirely easy to believe.
It was, after all, full of shutout pitching, a handful of home runs and genuine emotion, enough to spark a brief brawl on the field.
The Mets, through the efforts of their least reliable starting pitcher and several of their most notorious offensive underachievers, last night defeated the Cardinals 8-0 in the second game of a doubleheader.


U.S. Inquiry in St. John's Case Said to Be Rejected
The Justice Department has rejected a request that it prosecute a group of white St.
John's University students on charges that they violated the civil rights of a black woman who says the group sexually attacked her, a Congressman's aide said yesterday.
The Congressman, Representative Charles B. Rangel, a Manhattan Democrat, had requested that the Justice Department prosecute the men after three of them were acquitted of state sodomy charges last month by a jury in Queens, where the woman says the assault occurred in a house near the St.
John's campus in March 1990.Mr.
Rangel contended after the acquittals that the verdict was like the acquittals of whites in the old South.
Two of the jurors in the St.
John's trial were black.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
7.00
5.56
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.29
5.12
7.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.28
5.15
7.52
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.58
7.58
8.80
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.05
8.08
9.04
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.05
9.08
10.05
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.97
6.98
7.60
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Giants' New Coach Makes Mark
In naming Jeff Hostetler his starting quarterback over Phil Simms today, Ray Handley made the biggest call of his brief career running the Super Bowl champion Giants, and he made it his own.
There was no nod to Bill Parcells, the coach whom Handley replaced and who had been such a dominating presence over the team.
Simms was the incumbent, an 11-year veteran who represented the seasons, mostly successful, under Parcells.
By choosing Hostetler, Handley let it be known there is a new group running the team.


Pop in Review
James Newton  and David Murray
Brooklyn Museum
Sunday afternoon's show, featuring the saxophonist David Murray and the flutist James Newton, made a lot of sense on paper.
Part of a series defining the relationship between gospel music and jazz, the show was meant to draw on Mr.
Murray's long association with both the church (he comes from a religious family in California) and with Mr.
Newton, with whom he's been performing, off and on, for nearly 20 years.


Laura Vila-Geis Is Married


Bo Heading for Florida
BO JACKSON was assigned to the Chicago White Sox' Class A farm team in Sarasota, Fla., yesterday to continue his rehabilitation from a hip injury and will be the designated hitter for the Sarasota White Sox in games on Saturday and Sunday against Charlotte, N.C.
The White Sox said that if Jackson's rehabilitation continues to progress, he would play Monday for the Class AA Barons in Birmingham, Ala. (AP)


Sports of The Times; Dumb Versus Dishonest
YOU may, if the spirit moves, call an umpire "stupid," you may call him "blind," and under normal circumstances you may even threaten his life -- "Kill the Umpire!" is a call as American as "What's for dinner, Mom?" -- but you may not call an umpire "dishonest."
At least, you may not according to the Major League Umpires Assocation, which, along with one of its members, Gary Darling, recently filed a defamation suit against Lou Piniella, the manager of the Cincinnati Reds, for, as they contend, going beyond traditional criticism.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 22


Home Video
Truth in Labeling
Warning labels on products never please the people who sell them, and that includes video distributors faced with the possibility of having to add a cautionary notice to their packaging.
Under provisions of a bill introduced in the United States House of Representatives, movies that are altered for television and video would have to carry a statement that they are not the original versions filmed for the big screen.


Oregon's New Governor Is Tested by State's Split Personality
When Oregon voters went to the polls last fall, they sent a curious mixed message in this state known for its maverick politicians and pioneering laws.
On one hand, they elected Barbara Roberts, a Democrat, as the state's first female governor, who promised change and new social programs.
On the other hand, voters zippered the state pocketbook by passing an initiative that slashed property taxes and forced the state to cut its budget by nearly 15 percent.


Griffin Bacal Is Diversifying With New Marketing Unit
SEEKING to broaden its client base beyond consumer advertising, Griffin Bacal Inc. is creating an agency within the agency, headed by two executives experienced in business-to-business and high-technology accounts.
In keeping with the industry's increasingly popular practice of providing clients a full range of services, known as integrated marketing communications, the new group offers everything from print and broadcast ads to in-store displays to sales brochures.
Called the Business Marketing Communications Group, the new unit operates as a separate subsidiary of Griffin Bacal, a New York shop with $180 million in billings from clients in markets like consumer electronics and toys.


Mud Slides in the Philippines Kill 24 People


Gore Won't Run for President in 1992
Senator Al Gore announced yesterday that he would not seek the 1992 Democratic nomination for President, adding his name to a growing list of Democrats who have decided not to challenge President Bush next year.
The 43-year-old Senator from Tennessee said he would prefer spending more time with his wife, Tipper, and their four children to undertaking the grueling stretch of campaigning that would have been necessary to win his party's nomination and mount a serious Presidential bid.


Review/Opera; The Return of a Refurbished 'Vixen'
The New York City Opera's production of Janacek's "Cunning Little Vixen" was one of the hits of the company's season when it opened 10 years ago.
But its life was unnaturally short.
It remained in repertory for two more seasons and had a national telecast on "Live From Lincoln Center" in 1983.
Two years later, its intricate animal costumes, designed by the children's book illustrator Maurice Sendak, were destroyed in a warehouse fire.
Beverly Sills listed "Vixen" among the productions that she hoped to see restored, and Christopher Keene, a Janacek champion since the early days of his conducting career, included a complete Janacek cycle on his agenda for the company when he succeeded Miss Sills as general manager in 1989.
The company raised $100,000 to restore the costumes, and on Tuesday evening the refurbished production returned to the New York State Theater.


Communism as a Political Force Is Dead, And the Reformers Gain Strong Legitimacy
The bungled takeover of the Soviet Government left the incumbents of the Communist past discredited, and hastened the demise of the old guard that had long been whispering caution in the ear of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Communism as an ideology was already so moribund that even the conspirators did not wave the Marxist-Leninist flag, claiming instead stability as their cause.


Bridge
Teams representing the United States and Canada matched blows in the early stages of the World Junior Team Championship at the University of Michigan campus here today, but neither could establish a clear advantage.
The competition is being organized by the American Contract Bridge League under the auspices of the World Bridge Federation, and is sponsored by N.E.C., the Japanese electronics corporation.
Canada began the day with lead of 7 imps, based on qualifying round performance, and led by 6 after 32 deals, one-third of the scheduled total.


Who Speaks for Real Change in South Africa?
To the Editor:
While I know "moderate" is a sacred word in your pages, you really outdid yourself in citing the views of "many white South Africans" who view The Weekly Mail's aggressive reporting on Pretoria's secret support of the political movement Inkatha as "trying to sabotage their best hope for moderate change" (Johannesburg Journal, Aug. 8).


MEXICAN SAYS VOTE VINDICATES CHANGE
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari challenged opposition leaders today to prove their claims of fraud in mid-term elections, calling his party's overwhelming victory a clear endorsement of the changes he has brought to Mexico.
In his first public comments since the vote on Sunday, Mr.
Salinas scorned the reports of irregularities that have led opposition candidates to call a series of demonstrations, including one that drew an estimated 20,000 protesters on Tuesday night.


Our Unemployment System Needs Reworking; Extend Benefits
To the Editor:
E.
Clay Shaw Jr.'s argument that unemployment benefits should not be extended because of the imminent demise of a mild recession (Op-Ed, Aug. 6) belies the situation in Massachusetts and probably much of the Northeast.
The last published unemployment rate for this state was 9.1 percent, down from 9.7 percent.
This does not include those who no longer qualify for benefits, those who have given up or who have taken part-time or marginal jobs just to keep afloat.


At the End of the Day, a Lobbyist Turns Into a Woodworker
It is hard to believe that Randall Robinson does not think of himself as a public person.
After all, Mr.
Robinson and his TransAfrica lobby have most visibly kept the issue of South Africa and apartheid on the American political agenda for nearly a decade.
It was Mr.
Robinson and a handful of other black activists who ignited the Free South Africa Movement on Nov. 21, 1984, by getting themselves arrested in the South African embassy here.


I.A.A.F. Cracks Down On Use of Steroids
The International Amateur Athletic Federation today adopted the strongest penalty in the world against athletes found using anabolic steroids or other performance-enhancing drugs.
The measure, which passed overwhelmingly in the I.A.A.F. congress despite strong opposition by the federation's medical commission, establishes a minimum suspension of four years, an increase of two years over the previous term and a penalty widely regarded as long enough to effectively end an athlete's career.
The suspension would be extended to include the same event from which the athlete was disqualified, which means if a violation occurred in the Olympics and the succeeding Games were scheduled more than four years later, the suspension would remain in effect until the subsequent Olympics ended.


Dinkins, Seeking Peace, Finds Menacing Crowd
Mayor David N. Dinkins went to Crown Heights last night because he felt he had to try and calm the racial anger there.
But he could not manage to part the waters.
At one point, his bodyguards had their hands full just parting a bitter crowd of black protesters to get him safely back to his car.


Sydney Gittler, 85, Coat Retailer Who Reproduced European Styles
Sydney Gittler, a retail executive known for offering the finest line-for-line copies of European couture coats and suits during the 1950's, 60's and 70's, died Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said his brother Dr. Robert Gittler.


Judge Jails 3 Abortion Protest Leaders in Wichita
A Federal judge today ordered three leaders of a militant anti-abortion group jailed indefinitely as dozens of abortion oppenents tried to block the gates of a clinic during the sixth straight week of protests and mass arrests in this city on the Kansas prairie.
The leaders were jailed for failing to sign a $100,000 peace bond on Aug. 6.
A peace bond is sometimes imposed when a group's activities could lead to disorder or property damage.


Quotation of the Day
"They underestimated the resolution of the Soviet people not to live the way they had lived for 70 years. They simply did not know the mood of the people. That was their major miscalculation." -- Oleg Kalugin, a member of the
Russian parliament.  [ A11:3. ]


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Activated Kurt Stillwell, shortstop, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Sean Berry, infielder, to Omaha of the American Association.


Corrections
An article yesterday about City Council endorsements by the Majority Coalition for a
New
New York misidentified the district where Pauline Chu is running and the incumbent she is opposing.
Ms.
Chu is campaigning in the 20th District in Queens, against Julia Harrison.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
The Dr Pepper Company sold a total of $250 million in securities yesterday in three separate transactions.
In a fixed-rate debt offering, the soft-drink company priced $150 million in five-year notes through underwriters led by BT Securities.


Bush Must Reassess U.S.-Soviet Relations
The collapse of the Soviet coup, a breathtakingly rapid realization of what had seemed but a frail hope to the Bush Administration only 48 hours earlier, will require a comprehensive recalibration of American policy toward Moscow.
It will confront President Bush with major challenges, even as he savors a personal victory and a triumph for democracy.
It also constitutes one of the most vivid demonstrations to date of the power of global communications to help shape contemporary history.


Georgia Nurse, a Focus in 16 Deaths, Is Charged With One Killing
A former nurse under investigation in connection with 16 suspicious deaths at hospitals in Alabama and Georgia was charged today with murdering a patient last spring at a Birmingham hospital.
The nurse, Joseph Dewey Akin of Marietta, Ga., is charged in the death of Robert J. Price, 32 years old, who died March 27 at Cooper Green Hospital.
Mr.
Akin, 35, was working as a nurse at the Alabama hospital at the time.


A President and Chief Is Named at Transco
John P. DesBarres has been named president and chief executive of the Transco Energy Company, based in Houston, replacing George S. Slocum, who resigned both posts in March.
Mr.
Slocum remains a director of Transco, which transports and sells natural gas through its pipeline systems and gas service companies, primarily in the Eastern and Midwestern states.
It also explores for and produces gas and oil in the Gulf of Mexico; mines and markets coal, and develops energy-related technologies.
Since 1988, Mr.
DesBarres (pronounced day-BARZ) has been chairman, president and chief executive of Santa Fe Pacific Pipelines Inc., based in Los Angeles.
His new appointment is effective Oct. 1.


Part of Soviet Team Arrives
Despite the disturbances in the Soviet Union, three of its leading track and field athletes arrived here this morning on a scheduled Aeroflot flight from Moscow.
The rest of the Soviet delegation, which includes about 100 athletes and 50 coaches and officials, was expected to arrive on Thursday by a chartered aircraft from Vladivostok.
Those arriving today were Sergei Bubka, the pole-vaulter; Yuri Sedykhy, a hammer thrower, and Natalya Lisovskaya, a shot-putter.
All three are world-record holders.


MORE ON THE COUP
Gorbachev's return -- A10 Why the coup failed and the damage it did -- A11


Swiss Police Arrest Suspect In Assassination of Iranians
The Swiss police announced today that they had arrested one of three Iranians suspected of taking part in the assassination of a former Prime Minister of Iran, Shahpur Bakhtiar, and his chief aide in Paris two weeks ago.
The arrest came as police in France and Switzerland were facing strong criticism from French newspapers and opposition parties for having allowed the three fugitive suspects to escape arrest on several occasions.


When Suicide Is Not a Choice
Just when you thought there wasn't any more space in the self-help section of your local bookstore, along comes Derek Humphry's "Final Exit," the best-selling step-by-step guide to suicide.
But while Mr.
Humphry and the other members of the Hemlock Society add up their big sales numbers, they ought to consider a few things.
Suicide is not an equal-opportunity way to die.
It isn't like getting hit by lightning or run over by a bus; it chooses its targets carefully.
In three of four cases, it is people with depression who commit suicide.


A Hideaway (For Hiding From Parents)
ONE morning two years ago, Dina and Steve Furniss were sitting on their front porch in Kneeland, Calif., drinking coffee with Mrs.
Furniss's brother, David Burley, when Mr.
Burley suggested that they make a fort for their children.
"We thought we could get it done that weekend," said Mrs.
Furniss, a social worker.
"It was finished eight months of Saturdays and Sundays later."


Holding Back Aid Is 'Foolish Policy
Germany responded to the return of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev with renewed appeals for Western nations to increase their aid to the Soviet Union.
"The most foolish possible policy now," Chancellor Helmut Kohl told a television audience, "would be for us simply to sit back as interested onlookers and say, 'So, what are they up to in Moscow?' "


Calendar: Shrubbery And Herbs
New York Natives
New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern B
oulevard, Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (212) 220-8777.
The native plant garden, which features a wildflower meadow, fern glen and woodland area growing flora native to the eastern United States, will be the site of informal talks and guided tours from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. on Saturday and Sunday.


Plea by Former Broker
A former stockbroker pleaded guilty today to using $450,000 in clients' money to buy drugs and to gamble.
Michael Varano, 34 years old, of Wayne,N.J., admitted to federal District Judge Dickinson Debevoise that he had misused the money that was intended to buy Ohio Turnpike bonds.
He faces up to five years in prison and a $900,000 fine when he is sentenced Oct. 15.
He pleaded guilty to one count of wire fraud.
Mr.
Varano was a senior account executive at Moore &amp; Schley in Hoboken, N.J., at the time of the crime, between August 1985 and October 1987.


Soviet Radio Reflects Shift
Following is an excerpt from a broadcast today as the coup collapsed, as monitored and translated by the BBC from Radio Mayak, a Soviet radio station:
After the bloody events of last night in Moscow, the journalists of Mayak decided not to fulfill the instructions of the illegal and anti-constitutional so-called Council on the State of Emergency.
From the very beginning of the coup we were deprived of the chance to transmit honest and objective information about the tragic events taking place in the country.
An hour ago at a meeting of the journalistic work force, we were joined by other departments of radio and TV and representatives of the technical services.
We shall try to inform you fully and accurately.
We hope that our desire to remove the current discredited heads of radio and television broadcasting concords with yours.


BRIEFS
*
Everex Systems Inc., Fremont, Calif., a maker of personal computer products, and Hayes Microcomputers Inc. have reached a patent-litigation settlement under which Everex will pay Hayes $2.5 million. *
Goal Systems International Inc., Columbus, Ohio, a provider of software, has acquired most of the assets of Training America Inc., White Plains, a producer of software products, for $650,000.


Our Unemployment System Needs Reworking; Illegal 'Subcontracting'
To the Editor:
"New Rows to Hoe in the 'Harvest of Shame' " (Week in Review, July 28) attributes many of the problems afflicting migrant farm workers to "the growing practice of defining migrant laborers as independent subcontractors, rather than employees."


New Heights for 2 Russians in U.S. Poll
The coup in the Kremlin improved the standing among the American public of both the Soviet President, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian federated republic, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The poll, conducted on Tuesday evening before concrete reports yesterday that the coup had collapsed, found that 66 percent of 605 Americans interviewed had posititve opinions of Mr.
Gorbachev, while only 5 percent expressed an unfavorable view.
That represented a surge in Mr.
Gorbachev's standing among Americans compared with a Times/ CBS News Poll in June, when opinion was 40 percent favorable and 10 pecent unfavorable.
Although fewer Americans knew enough about Mr.
Yeltsin to offer an opinion, the expressed sentiment was favorable by nearly 3 to 1: 28 percent had a favorable opinion of Mr.
Yeltsin, while 10 percent had an unfavorable view.
This was the first time opinions about Mr.
Yeltsin were measured by The Times and CBS News.
In July an NBC News/Wall Street Journal Poll, using a differently worded question, found 12 percent of registered voters had "positive" feelings toward Mr.
Yeltsin and 8 percent "negative."
The new nationwide telephone poll, conducted two days after the beginning of the Kremlin coup, had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points, although polls completed in just one day can be subject to additional error.
President Bush's overall job approval rating continued to be high: 73 percent of Americans approved of the way he is handling his job as President.
Seventy-four percent also expressed "confidence in George Bush's ability to deal wisely with a difficult international crisis."
The American public indicated a high level of attention to the events in the Soviet Union.
Thirty-five percent of respondents said they were following news about the Soviet Union "very closely" and another 43 percent said "somewhat closely."


G.E. Sued on Nuclear Plant
The owners of a four-year-old nuclear plant near Cleveland yesterday sued the General Electric Company, the builder, complaining that design errors had caused construction delays, adding "hundreds ofmillions of dollars" to the cost.
The Perry plant cost $5.4 billion.
The five utilities that own the plant said G.E. knew when the contract was negotiated that part of the containment system was faulty, and that the company committed misrepresentation and fraud.


Women Have the Right Stuff to Fly
To the Editor:
In "Women in the Wild Blue Yonder" (Op-Ed, Aug. 7), Elaine Tyler May shows a fundamental misunderstanding of the importance of the physiological factor in flying high-performance aircraft.


Vaughn Shoemaker; Created John Q. Public
Vaughn Shoemaker, an editorial cartoonist who created the character John Q. Public and won two Pulitzer Prizes, died Sunday at the Windsor Park Manor Medical Center in Carol Stream, Ill.
He was 89 years old and lived in Carol Stream, a Chicago suburb.
He died of cancer, said his physician, Dr. Maurice Birt.


Talking Deals; 2 Airlines' Search For Global Status
AS the nation's four largest carriers -- United, American, Delta and Northwest -- expand abroad in an effort to become global carriers, the two airlines right behind them, Continental and USAir, have so far been left out in the cold.
Analysts say these two carriers will have to start making deals to remain competitive.
What form might such deals take?
USAir, the nation's sixth-largest carrier last year as measured by miles flown by paying passengers, said this week that it had reached a preliminary agreement for an alliance with Air Canada under which both carriers would help each other in marketing and operations.


New Leaves for Tables
Joseph Biunno
129 West 29th Street, New York, N.Y. 10001; (212) 629-5630.
Almost no one ever loses a dining room table.
But table leaves are another matter.
They languish in attics, sit forgotten in closets and are easily misplaced during a move.


Review/Dance; Defying The Odds At Jacob's Pillow
Martine van Hamel has proved herself as a prima ballerina of exceptional intelligence and taste during her years with American Ballet Theater and as an international guest star.
And so it was no surprise that the program presented by her New Amsterdam Ballet company here on Tuesday night, at the start of a weeklong engagement at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival, was a model of intelligent planning and consistently high artistic standards.
What was unexpected were the revelations the evening offered about its choreography and its dancers, all but one of them currently or formerly associated with Ballet Theater and the Washington Ballet.
Two of those revelations were the program's premieres, by Christian Holder, a freelance choreographer, and Kevin McKenzie, a company member.
On the face of it, Mr.
Holder's "Coup d'Estoc," set to a Mozart score performed by members of L'Ensemble, an Albany-based chamber music group, ought not to have been a successful ballet.


A Thick Russian Porridge, 'Not the Way to Do a Coup'
The Kremlin junta's sense of cliche was unfailing to the end.
Facing defeat, the anxious men of the sagging coup d'etat reportedly fled for the airport to seek sanctuary elsewhere.
One report said some went to the warmth of distant Kirghizia, while others hastened to the Crimea and the uncertain mercies of the man the junta had made their captive, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.


Dollar Falls as Coup Fizzles; Gold Prices Up in New York
The dollar plunged against most major currencies yesterday as the currency returned to more normal levels after the failed three-day coup attempt in the Soviet Union.
Gold prices finished higher.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold for current delivery rose $1 an ounce, to a late bid of $356.90.
The Republic National Bank in New York quoted an after-hours bid of $356.85, up 85 cents from late Tuesday.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
MOST homeowners leave plumbing repairs to licensed plumbers, but working with copper pipe, which is found in most houses, is not too difficult.
By learning a few basic skills, an amateur can undertake projects like replacing or rerouting short runs of pipe and installing valves and other fittings.
Plumbing codes specify the type and size of pipe to be used for every major application.
Before starting a plumbing project, consult a local building inspector for particulars, including whether a permit or inspection is necessary.


Go to Sleep or No More Italian Decor
AH, bedtime.
Parents cajole, with Mickey Mouse cavorting on bedsheets, readings of "Goodnight Moon," and promises of trips to the zoo.
How about a canopy bed from Italy to lure and lull all those princes and beauties to sleep?


Inwood Journal; Of Changing Enclaves And Unchanging Ways
Like a lot of taverns in the Inwood section of Manhattan, Bakersfield has Irish flags draped on the wall and Irish beer on tap.
When Representative Joseph P. Kennedy, son of the late Senator Robert F. Kennedy, spoke at a conference on Irish-American affairs in the neighborhood earlier this year, he had breakfast at Bakersfield.
It is a neighborhood that clings proudly to its turf and its Irish roots.
But as a swiftly growing Dominican population squeezes Inwood's Irish residents into tighter quarters, mostly north of 207th Street and west of Broadway, some Irish-American merchants have decided, in small measure at least, to adapt.


Remarks by Gorbachev on His Return to Moscow
Following are excerpts from remarks by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev upon arriving at the Vnukovo airport, as aired on a Soviet morning television program and broadcast and translated simultaneously by the ABC news program Nightline:
The most important thing is that everything that we've done after 1985 has already given its realistic fruits, it is bearing fruit.
Our society, people, have become different and this has been the primary obstacle on the path of that adventure which a group of persons has embarked upon. . .


F.D.A. to Scrutinize Drug Makers' Videos
The Food and Drug Administration has begun a crackdown on the use by pharmaceutical companies of video news releases and says it plans to tighten its scrutiny of written news releases as well.
Such releases, produced for broadcast and cable news programs, often mimic the look and style of television news reports.
They have grown increasingly popular in the last decade, as the nation's largest drug makers, like Glaxo, Merck and Hoffmann-La Roche, have sought alternatives to paid advertising for getting product information to physicians and the public.


TENNIS: A Long Fight Back From Grief; The Late-Blooming Cacopardo Now Says, 'I've Got a Shot'
Marco Cacopardo grew up on Yellowstone Boulevard in Forest Hills, a five-minute stroll along shaded walkways from the old grounds of the United States Open tennis championships.
But yesterday at the National Tennis Center in Queens, Cacopardo was even closer than that.
After he defeated William Bull of Myrtle Beach, S.C., 6-3, 7-6 (8-6), Cacopardo was just two victories from earning a spot in the main draw of his country's most prestigious tournament.
Two more successes in the qualifying draw, and this big-serving giant would become a real New York City tennis story.


Miss Garcez Wed To C. J. Blair 2d
Maria de Lurdes Garcez, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fernando Cardoso Garcez of Rio de Janeiro, was married last evening to Charles Jackson Blair 2d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Jackson Blair of Southport, Conn.
The Rev.
Dr.
William R. Shiflet, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at Trinity Baptist Church in Fairfield, Conn., assisted by the Rev.
David DeVries, the Trinity's pastor.
The couple met at Warnborough College in Oxford, England, where he was studying philosophy and she was studying English.
The bride, 22 years old, is a chemical engineering student at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.
Her father is a director of Banco Sterling in Rio de Janeiro.


Pop in Review
Merchants of Venus
Wetlands Preserve
California rock is a matter of style, not geography.
The Merchants of Venus, a five-piece band that performedon Tuesday night, just about eliminates any need for compilations of California rock from the 1960's and 70's.


Coup's End Lifts Short-Term Rates
The abrupt end to the Soviet coup yesterday pushed short-term interest rates back up as quickly as they had fallen earlier in the week.
Treasury bond prices also rose on the news.
The steep climb in short-term rates left traders scrambling to get out of positions established earlier in the week, when the Soviet crisis made it seem clear that foreign capital, particularly from Europe, would pour into safe dollar-denominated assets, and that short-term interest rates would therefore continue to fall.


Dr. Roberto Tomas Agosin, Psychiatrist, 43
Roberto Tomas Agosin, associate director of residency training at the Bronx Psychiatric Center, died on Sunday at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester, Mass.
He was 43 years old and lived in Great Neck, L.I.
He died of a pulmonary embolism while on vacation, said Dr.
Joel Feiner, a faculty colleague.


A Refurbished "Cunning Little Vixen" Returns to New York


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Boston Co., Boston, a financial services subsidiary of the American Express Co. unit Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., named Barbara E. Casey senior vice president and director of marketing of its private banking group. *
Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc., Culver City, Calif., a Sony Corp. subsidiary, appointed Alan Krieger senior vice president-business affairs.


Dow Soars In Rebound Of Markets
World financial markets did an about-face yesterday, rallying strongly as word spread from the Soviet Union that Monday's coup had collapsed and that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev would be restored to power.
In the United States, the Dow Jones industrial average jumped 88.10 points, up 3 percent, to close at 3,001.79, the largest one-day rise since the beginning of the allied bombing of Iraq in January.
Together with Tuesday's 15-point rise, this surge more than wiped out Monday's 69-point plunge.  [ Page D8. ]


Dow Gains 5.99 as World Rally Continues
Stock prices kept heading upward yesterday after a big lift on Wednesday from the collapse of the Soviet coup.
While the Dow Jones industrial average added only slightly to its previous gains, two other indexes posted record highs.
Earlier, in Europe, markets rallied strongly, picking up the momentum from Wednesday, when many markets closed before the final reports of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's return to power.


BRIEFS
DEBT *
CBS Inc. has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a $400 million shelf offering. *
Mellon Financial Co. is offering $100 million in 9 1/4 percent subordinated notes due 2001 at 100 through Lehman Brothers.
Noncallable, the issue is rated Baa-2 by Moody's and BBB by S.&amp; P.


Dr. Joseph Goldman, Retired Professor, 87
Dr.
Joseph Lawrence Goldman, a retired professor and chairman of the ear, nose and throat department of Mount Sinai Medical Center, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 87 years old.
He died suddenly of a heart attack, his son, James, said.


Judge's Ruling on Keating
The District Attorney's office said today that it might appeal a judge's instruction to jurors that would make it more difficult to convict the financier Charles H. Keating Jr. of securities fraud.
The judge said Wednesday that Mr.
Keating, the former owner of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association, could not be convicted of fraud in the sale of junk bonds by the institution unless it could be proved that he knew of fraudulent actions and took part in deceptions.


Jets Give McMillan a Jolt: He's Not Starting
The Jets waited until after practice was over today to leave another wake-up call for Erik McMillan, the fourth-year safety who the Jets apparently fear is slipping into a slumber.
They announced that Lonnie Young, not McMillan, would start at free safety in Saturday night's final exhibition game, against the Washington Redskins in Columbia, S.C.
Coach Bruce Coslet, when asked earlier in the week to evaluate McMillan's play against the Giants last Saturday, said, "He could have played better." It was a blunt nonendorsement of a player who made the Pro Bowl in his first two seasons with the Jets and has been one of the few bright spots for the team in recent years.


Palestinians Again Supported The Wrong Side, Israelis Say
The Israeli authorities, pursuing their campaign to discredit the Palestine Liberation Organization, poured scorn on Palestinian attitudes toward the failed Soviet coup today and summoned two leading Palestinians for questioning about contacts with P.L.O. officials.
In the occupied territories, a mood of hope kindled by Mikhail S. Gorbachev's brief ouster returned to despondency.


Restaurants
The bar is mobbed with junior executives and decorous young businesswomen slurping down margaritas with the gusto of football players at the half-time water cooler.
Off in one corner waiters sing happy birthday to a blushing woman.
A Mexican trio warbles from the stairs.
And in the middle of this fiesta is Zarela Martinez, unflappable and graciously efficient, directing the mirthmakers upstairs to their tables.
Yes, every night is a party at Zarela's.
And better yet, the hostess turns out some of the most authentic and spirited Mexican food around.


More Charges Filed in Milwaukee Serial Killing Case


CHINESE RELIEVED THAT COUP IS OVER
China's official People's Daily carried a brief report today on the return to power by the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, while many of the Chinese people seemed to breathe a sigh of relief at the collapse of the coup in the Soviet Union.
Many Chinese had feared that a sustained victory by the coup leaders could have buoyed the prestige of the hard-liners in China.
But there is no indication that the coup's failure will give more influence in the near future to those in the Government who favor greater liberalization.


Allegheny County
A $67.2 million tax-exempt bond issue by Allegheny County, Pa., was priced yesterday with a maximum yield of 6.6 percent for the issue due in 2005.
Underwriters led by RRZ Public Markets Inc. in Pittsburgh priced the short-term serial bonds to yield 4.9 percent in 1993, 5.6 percent in 1996, 6.2 percent in 2001 and 6.5 percent in 2010.
The bonds are insured by the Ambac Indemnity and rated Aaa by Moody's and AAA by S.&amp; P.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Mickelson Survives
The defending champion, Phil Mickelson, survived a first-round match that went into sudden death yesterday to advance in the 91st United States Amateur in Chattanooga, Tenn.


Review/Art; Folk-Style Evocations of a Life and a Culture
When Harry Lieberman boarded the liner Pretoria in 1906, bound from Hamburg, Germany, for New York City, he inexplicably entered his occupation on the passenger list as painter.
But it was actually another half-century before Lieberman picked up a brush.
By then he was 76 years old, a former wholesale confectioner on the Lower East Side who turned to art only as a hobby to relieve the tedium of his retirement in Great Neck, L.I.
For the next 27 years, until his death in 1983 at the age of 103, Lieberman turned out scores of paintings in what is sometimes called a primitive style.
These works increasingly won the admiration of serious collectors and curators.
Larry Rivers was one of the first to own a work.
Lieberman once took a class with Mr.
Rivers and complained about the lack of comment on his efforts.
"The pictures I paint you couldn't paint," Mr.
Rivers responded.
"But the pictures you paint I couldn't paint. So how could I correct you?"


Public TV Must Let In the Voices of the World
To the Editor:
John J. O'Connor's discussion of the lack of "balance" in Public Broadcasting Service programming (Critic's Notebook, Aug. 6) explains how that charge has become a code word for media bashing by right-wingers with a political agenda.
The issue has little to do with fairness or, as one self-appointed purification squad puts it, "media integrity."


Diner's Journal
The Kobe Beef
When I cut into a steak recently at the Old Homestead, it oozed moisture like an overripe peach and had a remarkably silken consistency.
Upon tasting it, I thought if this piece of meat were any richer, it could be spread on toast for breakfast.


EXECUTIVES
*
Children's Television Workshop, New York, a producer of educational programs, named J. Baxter Urist senior vice president for its international television group. *
Jostens Inc., Minneapolis, which makes apparel and accessories for students, appointed Bruce Pratt senior vice president.


Gorbachev Recounts Telling Plotters: 'To Hell With You'
Pausing again and again as he recalled the emotions of three days in captivity, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today described a dacha isolation spent in rebuffing Kremlin conspirators by belittling their coup, anticipating the worst and preparing a bootleg videotape to offer the world.
Waving a snippet of the tape as a souvenir of his deliverance, the Soviet leader summarized the message he sent back to the Kremlin junta: "To hell with you."


Salomon to Lose Head Of Its Real Estate Unit
Salomon Brothers announced yesterday that the longtime head of its real estate investment banking group, J. Steven Manolis, would resign at the end of the year.
Mr.
Manolis, 43, is one of the country's best-known real estate bankers.
He joined Salomon in 1973 and worked as a sales manager for the firm's mortgage and real estate department before being named head of the real estate department in 1985.


Appeal to Free Baltics
The Bush Administration and a number of other Western governments renewed their call to the Soviets to permit the full independence of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.
But they stopped short of demanding immediated freedom or granting separate recognition.
Article, page A9.


Review/Film; A Lawyer, Her Client And a Porn Film Studio
When the main character of a movie is a female lawyer, you can be sure she has dangerously bad taste in men.
In the slick, efficient thriller "Defenseless," the lawyer is Barbara Hershey, and the client she is fooling around with owns a building where pornographic movies are made.
Steven (J. T. Walsh) claims to be innocent of any crime and ignorant of the fact that he was renting space to the creators of such films as "Nudes on the Moon." This raises the old question that drives films like "Jagged Edge": is her client really a creep?
The trick of "Defenseless" is to stick almost exclusively to the perspective of Ms.
Hershey's character, whose improbable name is T. K. Katwuller.
Her love affair sours fast.
She knew that Steven was married, but she didn't know that his wife was her old college roommate Ellie (Mary Beth Hurt).
When Ellie runs into T. K. -- we're left to wonder whether it's by chance or design -- she insists that the lawyer come to dinner.


Watching a Distant Storm, Americans Feel for Russia
On Monday morning after she heard the first news of the Soviet coup, 72-year-old Mary Murphy went into the garden of her Northwest Texas farm, picked a bushel of green beans and then sat in front of a television, snapping the ends.
As she watched the people of Moscow defy the tanks for the next three days, she felt a growing bond with them.
"I realized that they live, they love, they bleed, they die the same as anyone else," she said today, "even though for years we had been taught different."


Moscow Crowds Vent Anger on Communists
The statue of Feliks Dzerzhinsky, founder of the Soviet secret police, was lifted off its pedestal in front of the headquarters of the K.G.B. tonight, a victim of an anti-Communist fever that swept this city as thousands of jubilant Muscovites savored their triumph over the coup this week.
Starting with a mass demonstration in front of the Russian federated republic's government building, where they cheered their beaming President, Boris N. Yeltsin, a crowd of almost 50,000 people drifted through the center of the city, waving the republic's newly adopted white, blue and red flag, and enjoying the first sunlight of the week.


Foreign Radio Stations Credited by Gorbachev
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev credited foreign radio stations such as BBC, Voice of America and Radio Liberty yesterday with keeping him informed on what was happening during the three days that he and his family were held incommunicado at his Crimean villa.
At his news conference yesterday, he said that after all the phones in the house went dead, members of his personal staff found some radio receivers in the servants' quarters and hooked up antennas.


Colleen Dewhurst, an Imposing Actress, Dies at 67
Colleen Dewhurst, one of America's foremost actresses whose career on stage, screen and television spanned 40 years and earned her two Tony Awards and three Emmys, died last night at her home in South Salem, N.Y., The Associated Press reported.
She was 67 years old.
Ms.
Dewhurst was pronounced dead by her personal physician, said Jan Stutts, a spokeswoman for the Westchester County Medical Examiner's Office.
The cause of death was not immediately available.


Discount Corp. of New York Appoints a Vice Chairman
The Discount Corporation of New York, an old-line government securities firm and the only primary dealer in the Treasury market not affiliated with a larger parent company, yesterday named Denis P. Coleman Jr. as vice chairman.
The announcement comes as the Treasury securities business is being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission in the wake of the Salomon Brothers scandal.
There are calls in Washington for tighter oversight of Treasury securities firms than is now provided by the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.


Leadership of Soviet Military Facing Shuffle and Reduced Independence
The Soviet military and security forces, major portions of which balked at enforcing a hard-liners' coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, may be headed for a period of restructuring, according to Bush Administration officials and experts on Soviet military affairs.
These experts say the swift appointment by Mr.
Gorbachev of General Mikhail A. Moiseyev to the post of acting Defense Minister may merely be a transitional move that presages a review of "the overall loyalty," of major components of the armed forces, said one senior Administration official, who spoke on condition of anonymity.  'Constitutional Authority'
This official, briefing reporters at President Bush's vacation home in Maine, said Mr.
Gorbachev needs to forcefully re-establish the tradition of civilian control over the Soviet military and security forces, which broke down during the three-day coup in a way that has only accentuated the strains the Soviet military has suffered from the retrenchment policies of the post-Cold War period.


Group Rejects Thomas Over Women's Rights
The National Women's Law Center is opposing Judge Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court, saying his record "shows no commitment to core constitutional or statutory protections for women."
In announcing the center's position on Tuesday, Marcia Greenberger, its co-president, told reporters, "As far as we're concerned, Judge Thomas is not the best person or even the best man for the job."


Correction
An article yesterday about a lawsuit filed on behalf of survivors and families of victims in the Happy Land social club fire referred incorrectly to Alex DiLorenzo 3d, the building's owner, and to Jay Weiss and Morris Jaffe, the building's leaseholders.
They are defendants in the case, not plaintiffs.


At the Bar; Norman Rockwell didn't draw lawyers; but lawyers draw on him. Call it a cover story.
Lawyers may be woven into the warp and woof of America, but in at least one way they remain outcasts: Never in his long career did Norman Rockwell ever draw one.
He once depicted a law student, and Abraham Lincoln, another of his subjects, once practiced law.
But apparently none of Rockwell's 3,600-odd images were of generic lawyers.
Perhaps they simply had no place in his neighborly, noncombative world.
But recently, the American Bar Association, an institution whose self-image is every bit as wholesome as anything Rockwell ever painted for The Saturday Evening Post, found itself tangling with the artist's representatives.
They accuse the bar group of acting lawlessley by expropriating and vulgarizing one of Rockwell's most beloved images without permission for its in-house magazine, The American Bar Association Journal.


New Theory: Salt Tainting Lady Liberty's Complexion
Why does the Statue of Liberty have skin problems?
For the last 10 years or so, scientists have theorized that the blemishes on Miss Liberty's face were caused by acid rain.
Now comes a scientist who asserts that acid rain has gotten a bad rap.


At the Movies
Tinseltown Satire
Robert Altman has been spending the summer doing something he hasn't done in a long time: working in Hollywood.
In fact, said Mr.
Altman, a nonconformist whose credits include "Nashville," "McCabe and Mrs. Miller" and "M*A*S*H," "It's very difficult for me to get studios to put money in the kind of films I make."


LOCKHEED TO PAY IN WATER CLEANUP
The Lockheed Corporation has agreed to spend $60 million to clean underground water contaminated over four decades by operations at its aircraft manufacturing plant in Burbank, Calif., Federal officials said today.
Officials of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Justice Department said they had approved a settlement negotiated over the last two years by the Federal Government, the City of Burbank, Lockheed and Weber Aircraft, a small company adjacent to Lockheed at the edge of the Burbank Airport.


Latvians Outlast Communist Party and Seek Arrest of Its Leader for Backing the Coup
The Latvian and Lithuanian Parliaments outlawed the Communist Party today, and the Latvian government said it was seeking the arrest of the hard-line Latvian party leader for his support for the short-lived coup against Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
The moves, among the most aggressive by any of the three Baltic republics in their drive for independence from Moscow, came as Latvians expressed fears that Interior Ministry troops were planning a crackdown.


The Spoken Word
WALKING TOUR AND LECTURE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Streets Where We Lived" walking tour, Sunday at noon, followed at 2 P.M. by "House of Heritage," a lecture on the history of the museum's tenement building.
Walking tour fee, $12 ($11 for the elderly, $6 for students); lecture: $7 ($6 for the elderly, $5 for students).
Information: (212) 431-0233.


BRIEFS
*
Bioplasty Inc., St.
Paul, a supplier of plastic surgery and wound-care products, will acquire Biomanufacturing Inc. in an exchange of stock.
Biomanufacturing shareholders will be issued one share of Bioplasty common stock in exchange for each 10 shares of Biomanufacturing stock. *
Boeing Co., Seattle, said the Boeing Commercial Airplanes operating division would spend $11 million to expand its composites-fabrication plant in Spokane.


Salomon Starts to Carry Out Contingency Finance Plan
Salomon Brothers Inc. has begun using a contingency financing plan the firm had developed to deal with periods of crisis, executives at the investment firm said yesterday.
As the firm moved to steady its finances, details of the Justice Department's criminal investigation into the Salomon scandal began to emerge.
People involved in the case said prosecutors were considering antitrust charges against some traders at Salomon and other Wall Street firms.


Review/Film; Dancing the Argentine Nights Away
"Naked Tango," the first film to be directed as well as written by Leonard Schrader, attempts to illustrate and make dramatic the gaudy background of the dance that came out of the multi-ethnic Buenos Aires underworld in the 1920's.
It's about the obsessive sadomasochistic love of Stephanie (Mathilda May), the pampered French wife of a much older Argentine judge (Fernando Rey), and Cholo (Vincent D'Onofrio), the handsome young gangster who makes her his dance slave.


A Breakthrough in Connecticut
Gov.
Lowell Weicker's perseverance finally paid off yesterday.
The Connecticut legislature, ending a bitter standoff, approved a state income tax.
That's a striking advance, bringing an element of fairness to the state's obsolete tax structure and offering hope for a crippled economy.
Before the vote, Connecticut was one of only 10 states without a personal income tax.
The state depended for revenue on an 8 percent sales tax -- the nation's highest -- which burdened the poor, as well as on exceptionally high taxes on dividends, interest and capital gains, which was calculated to drive out business and wealth.


TV Weekend; All in the Family, Updated and Black
"Roc," the latest entry in the black working-class stakes, is set mainly in the home of a garbage man named Roc Emerson.
Predictions are treacherous, but the show could clean up.
"Roc," which will have its premiere on Fox at 7:30 P.M. on Sunday, will then join the regular Sunday schedule at 8:30 P.M., following and doubtless benefiting from the hit sitcom "In Living Color." The characters are likably quirky; the performances good.
And although the situations are setups, they allow for funny cracks along the way.
The foreseeable problem is that the running jokes may soon run out of steam.
Roc Emerson (Charles Dutton) works days, and his wife, Eleanor (Ella Joyce), works nights at a hospital, which, you guessed it, leads to conversation about their sex schedule.
Roc's father (Carl Gordon) is a black Archie Bunker who hangs pictures of Malcolm X all over the house and maintains that no white can move fast enough to be a good basketball player. (He announces that Larry Bird's real name is Abdul Mustafa.)


Topics of The Times; Upside Down in the Eye
Just before Hurricane Bob hit the mainland at Rhode Island it passed right over Block Island, a bit of land small enough to fit easily into Bob's eye.
The visiting shore birds that usually cluster at beaches and open spaces huddled on sheltered inland ponds against the 100-mile-an-hour gusts.
The visiting vacationers who also cluster on the beaches huddled in the classrooms and hallways of a local school, sheltered against winds that tore up trees outside.
Everything was safe but a little askew.
Children spurned their lunches and refused to take naps.
Grown-ups willingly ate the rejected peanut butter and jelly and nodded over the books they had brought along.
Parents lost endless card games to their restless children, and the hands of wall clocks seemed unwilling to move.
Radios seemed stuck, like old-fashioned phonograph needles, on repetitions of where the hurricane was headed and how plotters were attempting to take over the Soviet Union.


Sounds Around Town
Al Grey's Trombone
Al Grey, Birdland, 2745 Broadway, at 105th Street, Manhattan, (212) 749-2228.
One of the living masters of the trombone (and a veteran of the great late-1950's Count Basie orchestra), Al Grey can produce just about any sound possible with the instrument.
Using mutes and plungers, he can make the trombone talk, and his shows recently have been exceptional, showing off his textural virtuosity and his sense of humor.
Shows tonight and tomorrow are at 9, 10;30 and midnight; there is a $10 admission and a $10 minimum.
Herman Foster's Pianism


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.56
6.24
8.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.30
5.29
7.53
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.31
5.28
7.51
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.57
7.58
8.85
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.04
8.05
9.11
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.03
9.05
10.09
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.97
6.97
7.71
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Ruth Ellen Church, 81, Food Critic and Author
Ruth Ellen Church, an author of books on cooking and wine who was a longtime food critic for The Chicago Tribune, was found slain Tuesday in her Chicago home.
She was 81 years old.
The police said Ms. Church had been strangled, apparently by a burglar.


Fannie Mae Notes
The Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, which buys mortgages from issuers, yesterday priced $150 million in medium-term notes due in 1996 through Salomon Brothers.
Noncallable by Fannie Mae for a year, the notes have a 7.41 percent coupon and are priced at 100, to yield about 18 basis points more than the when-issued five-year Treasury note.


Platinum Prices Plummet On Fear of Soviet Dumping
Platinum futures prices fell sharply yesterday on the New York Mercantile Exchange, as Japanese selling and fears of Soviet dumping pressed the market to 5 1/2-year lows.
Gold and silver futures also fell, but many other commodity prices rose, including grains and soybeans and oil.


Croatia Angrily Sets Deadline on Truce
The President of the Croatian republic warned Yugoslavia's federal presidency tonight that his Government would treat the national army as an occupying force if its units and Serb rebels in Croatia did not honor a cease-fire, or if the rebels failed to srrender their weapons by Aug. 31.
The ultimatum, presented in a letter to the Yugoslav presidency by Franjo Tudjman, the Croatian leader, repeated his earlier warnings but for the first time set a deadline.
"If the demands in the letter do not halt these actions, then Croatia will Order a total mobilization of all its forces," Mr.
Tudjman said in a statement.
"If these demands are not satisfied, the republic of Croatia will consider Yugoslavia's presidency directly responsible for the aggression on Croatia's territory and the Yugoslav national army an occupying force." 'All Necessary Steps'
"We will undertake all necessary steps to defend our territorial integrity and sovereignty," said the statement, which was read on national television.
Mr.
Tudjman demanded that all who had joined the uprising "honor the cease-fire agreement and surrender their weapons to Croatian authorities or the Yugoslav Army."
The federal presidency is scheduled to discuss the Yugoslav Army's operations in a meeting on Friday.
It is likely that the ultimatum will have little impact on the presidency or the army, since Serbia, Yugoslavia's largest and historically dominant republic, has control over four of the presidency's eight members and can block any action that it might take against the interests of ethnic Serbs in Croatia.
Croatia's military and police units are decisively outgunned by the national army's superior fire power.
Even if Croatia ordered a mobilization across its territory, it would not greatly alter the balance of military power. 19 More Reported Killed
Reports today indicated that at least 19 people were killed in violence in Croatia.
Croatian television said that three Croatian national guardsmen were killed today near the village of Komarevo and another near the town of Vinkovci.
Belgrade television said tonight that eight Serbs were killed in a Croatian attack on the village of Kinjacka, another person was killed near Osijek and six unidentified corpses were found floating in the Danube in the region east of Osijek.
Croatian television showed footage of Yugoslav Air Force planes reportedly firing rockets at Croatian national guard positions today in the village of Sarvas, the second air attack on the village in as many days.
Violence in the last six days has made a shambles of a cease-fire declared on Aug. 7.
About 300 people have died in the fighting in Croatia, Yugoslavia's second most prosperous republic, since it declared its independence from the country on June 25.
Croatia has demanded for more than a year that the Yugoslav federation of six republics be turned into a looser confederation of independent states.
Many of Croatia's Serbs, who account for about 12 percent of the republic's population, do not wish to be separated from Serbia by international borders.
Rebel Serbs began their uprising in Croatia last August, but violence has increased significantly since the republic's independence proclamation.


Hopeful: Putting the Youngsters to the Test
"Horses are like people," Virginia Kraft Payson was saying, standing outside her picture-postcard barn, watching her horses being groomed and fed like people.
"But each horse is different from every other, at the mental level, at the physical level, at every level. And 2-year-old horses are babies"
"It's not that 2-year-olds are unpredictable," she said.
"Their bones are unpredictable."


Milton Perry, 65; Ran Truman Library
Milton Perry, the former curator of the Harry Truman Library and Museum, died Tuesday at Washoe Medical Center in Reno.
He was 65 years old and lived in Lake Tahoe, Nev.
He died following a heart attack, said a son-in-law, Bill Sherriff of Kansas City, Mo.


On My Mind; From Baltics to Beijing
The world rejoices about what happened in Moscow, and nobody more than Li Lu, who lies starving on a street in Washington, outside the Embassy of China.
Mr.
Li was one of the thousands of young people at Tiananmen Square who went without food day after day, trying to shake the Communist rulers into surrendering a morsel of freedom.


Regrouping After a Trauma
Gorbachev and Yeltsin at Work BOON FOR DEMOCRACY Mikhail S. Gorbachev said his rescue from the failed coup has taught him that he must join more closely with "democratic forces" and speed the pace of reform.
Page A1.


New Continental Chief Keeps Out of Spotlight
After Robert R. Ferguson 3d was appointed vice chairman and chief executive of Continental Airlines late Wednesday, some middle-level executives at the airline began calling their colleagues to find out what kind of man they were going to deal with.
"I honestly can't tell you much about him," said one Continental executive, who spoke on the condition that he remain anonymous.
He recalled that he had met Mr.
Ferguson and talked to him, as other executives had, but that few people except those at the higher levels had ever worked directly with him.


Radio Talk About TV Anchor's Disability Stirs Ire in Los Angeles
A Los Angeles talk show host has angered advocates for the disabled by discussing on the radio the pregnancy of a local television news anchor and suggesting that she was irresponsible in taking the genetic risk of passing along a physical abnormality to her child.
Groups representing the disabled are demanding an apology and are planning protests at the radio station.
The Western Law Center for the Handicapped, a public interest law firm affiliated with Loyola University Law School, is preparing a complaint to the Federal Communications Commission, said Paul Steven Miller, the group's director of litigation.


Pocone Journal; An Exaltation of Alligators, in a Swamp of Trouble
Crocodiles slither off river banks.
Marsh deer crash through the brush.
At sunset, trees fill with a primeval profusion of tropical birds.
Flooding an area nearly the size of Britain, the Pantanal (the name means great swamp) is the world's largest wetland.
Ever since 16th-century colonists introduced cattle with rot-resistant hooves, the Pantanal has been the isolated preserve of a few hundred cowboys maintaining herds of cattle in balance with nature.
But now new forces of change are gnawing destructively at the edges of this vast wilderness in the heart of South America.
About 80 percent of the Pantanal is in Brazil, with the remainder in Bolivia and Paraguay.


Judge Is Barred From Trial of Officers in Beating
A state appeals court on Wednesday removed a judge from presiding over the trial of four white police officers in the beating of a black motorist.
The appeals panel found that Superior Court Judge Bernard Kamins had abandoned judicial neutrality and became personally caught up the case.


Paul Miller, 84, Former Chairman Of Gannett and the A.P., Is Dead
Paul Miller, who presided over the Gannett Co. for 16 years as it grew into the nation's largest newspaper group, died Wednesday at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 84 years old.
Mr.
Miller, who had homes in Palm Beach and Pittsford, N.Y., outside of Rochester, died of pneumonia, according to The Assocated Press, which Mr.
Miller also headed during his tenure as president and chairman of Gannett.


Morrow Rejoining Islanders as a Coach
KEN MORROW, a defenseman during the glory days of the Islanders, was named an assistant coach of the team yesterday.
Morrow, 32 years old, retired as a player in 1989 and spent the next two seasons coaching in the minor leagues.
"I'm really going to get right back into the swing of things," said Morrow of reacquainting himself with the National Hockey League.
"I don't think the style of play has changed much since I was a player."


There are 8 Million Coaches, and Handley Hears From Them
This was the first full day of Jeff Hostetler's reign as the Giants' starting quarterback.
And everyone seemed to have an opinion as to whether Hostetler or Phil Simms should have been chosen for the job.
There were opinions, or at least a vote of appreciation, from the 1,400 people who packed the ballroom of the New York Hilton today for the annual Kickoff Luncheon honoring the Giants.
There were opinions from JoAnne Handley's family and co-workers.
There were opinions from the many people who telephoned the Giants' offices here.


CHRONICLE
POLLY ALLEN MELLEN , a longtime Vogue editor, will join Allure, the new Conde Nast beauty magazine, next month, it was announced yesterday.
She was named the creative editor, replacing FREDDIE LEIBA , who is leaving the magazine.
Ms.
Mellen is one of the most influential American fashion editors, known for her silver-white hair and flamboyant reactions at fashion shows.
She worked at Harper's Bazaar under Diana Vreeland and followed Ms.
Vreeland to Vogue in 1966.
She became Vogue's fashion director in 1979, and recently has been the special projects editor for fashion.


Precious Bunny Scratched
Precious Bunny, the overwhelming favorite in the $523,190 Cane Pace, the first leg of pacing's triple crown, at Yonkers Raceway Saturday, was scratched from the race yesterday when he coughed up blood after training.
Bill Robinson, the trainer for Precious Bunny, said arthroscopic surgery had shown that the horse had fluid in his lungs.
The scratching of Precious Bunny, who was the 3-5 favorite, makes the Cane Pace more of an open race now.
Nuclear Siren, who was the second choice at 4-1, is now the favorite at 9-5 in the field of eight remaining in the race.


Agencies, Start Engines For New Mazda Race
With Mazda Motor of America, Irvine, Calif., confirming this week the speculation that it will introduce a luxury line of automobiles in the United States, the race for the car maker's estimated $50 million account is on.
Amati, as the new division is called, is in discussions with about a dozen agencies on a preliminary basis, Richard Colliver, group vice president and general manager, said during a visit to New York this week.
While he said he hoped to narrow the list of agencies under consideration by around October, he added that he did not have a timetable to name either finalists or a winner.
The first two Amati models, which will be sedans, are scheduled to make their debut in spring 1994.


Sounds Around Town
Bloom and Lights
Luka Bloom and Tiny Lights, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, Manhattan, (212) 219-3055.
The Irish singer and songwriter Luka Bloom is a kind of contemporary folkie: he talks about love less as youthful passion than as the mature reward that comes after youthful passions are spent.
If he's at times overly earnest, his voice is so rich and confident that you're almost always tempted to believe what he's saying.
The group Tiny Lights, from Hoboken, N.J., mixes James Brown-style funk, art-rock arrangements, violin and the occasional trumpet or saxophone into a festival of earthy grooves.
The Tiny Lights performance is tomorrow night at 9; tickets are $10.
Mr.
Bloom performs at midnight tomorrow with a $12 admission.
Widespread Panic


Bridge
After a topsy-turvy day, the United States defeated Canada this afternoon at the University of Michigan Union here in the final of the World Junior Team Championship.
The contest, which began a week ago with 12 countries competing, was organized by the American Contract Bridge League under the auspices of the World Bridge Federation, and sponsored by NEC, the Japanese electronics corporation.
The day began with the Americans leading by 36 imps and 32 deals remaining to be played.
The lead evaporated when one American pulled out the wrong card in a game contract losing 13, and another made a disastrous lead against a grand slam.
With 13 deals remaining, which proved to be packed with drama, Canada led by 17.
But the tide turned: A powerful stretch drive gave the Americans victory by 40 imps.


Review/Dance; Baryshnikov Dances Mark Morris Works on Tour
The White Oak Dance Project, a touring company founded last year by Mikhail Baryshnikov, is unusual on a number of levels.
The company has given a ballet pyrotechnist and star, Mr.
Baryshnikov, the chance to explore an entirely different dance form.
It has given Mark Morris, whose work the troupe performs, a new instrument for the choreography that has made him a leading American modern dance artist.
The project makes use of some of the best -- and most seasoned -- dancers in the country.
And it has brought to new mass audiences at summer festival auditoriums around the nation choreography that makes no concession to those audiences.
Mr.
Baryshnikov may be the big draw, as he clearly was in a White Oaks performance tonight at the Mann Music Center.
But he was not performing the star vehicles one might expect on a summer tour.
In fact, the five early and recent dances on the program had a style, wit and musicality that were wholly their own, neither mainstream nor self-consciously iconoclastic.
And the audience responded with appreciative laughter, murmurs and applause.


Summary of His Statement and Remarks
In a dramatic but often disjointed news conference, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev recounted details of his grueling ordeal, his evaluation of the plotters and the democratic forces that put them to flight, the future of the country and the Communist Party.
Here is a summary of Mr.
Gorbachev's remarks.
The Ordeal in the Crimea
At 4:50 in the afternoon on Sunday, the head of the president's guard detail informed him that an unexpected delegation had arrived.
Simultananeously he discovered that all his telephones were dead.
He called his family together and told them he would not yield to blackmail.
(Section II)


Guilty Plea In Military Bid Case
A former top Air Force official admitted yesterday that he had accepted bribes from military contractors in return for his help in steering contracts and confidential bidding information to them.
The official, Victor D. Cohen, pleaded guilty in Federal court in Alexandria, Va., to one count of bribery and to one count of conspiracy to defraud the Government.
Mr.
Cohen resigned from his civilian Air Force job on Tuesday after holding high-level procurement positions at the Pentagon for a decade.
He could receive up to 20 years in prison and a fine of up to $500,000.


Dinkins Vows Tough Tactics In Race Strife
The police vowed to crack down on protesters in the racially torn Crown Heights section of Brooklyn yesterday as city officials scrambled to soothe the tensions of three straight nights of violence.
"The Police Department will enforce the law, and they are going to enforce it evenhandedly," Mayor David N. Dinkins said in Crown Heights, standing on Eastern Parkway.
Around him were hubcaps and other debris from a skirmish on Wednesday night, as well as a gathering of local politicians, a few Hasidic leaders and black youths rounded up by his aides.


Salvador Army Says Missiles Were in Arms Cache
Military authorities have displayed what they said were two recently discovered guerrilla arms caches, one of which included six surface-to-air missiles, and asserted that they were signs of guerrilla plans to mount a new offensive against the Salvadoran capital.
On Wednesday night, an army spokesman led journalists on a tour of a tire warehouse where the missiles and an estimated 200,000 rounds of ammunition and dozens of rifles and pistols could be seen among rows of used tires.
This morning, military authorities announced a second arms discovery in another tire warehouse in Santa Tecla on the outskirts of the city.
News photographers who went to the second site said they did not see any missiles there.


Treasury Issues in Moderate Rise
Prices of Treasury securities posted modest gains in fairly active trading yesterday, as the tension of the last few days drained out of the credit markets.
"The Salomon scandal and the Soviet crisis have sort of prevented people from really focusing on the market for the last week or so," one government bond trader said.
"But now people are feeling more comfortable, and getting involved in the market for fundamental reasons."


Issue by GTE Unit Is $102.48 Million
A $102.48 million bond issue by GTE North Inc. was priced yesterday through Salomon Brothers.
The company is a subsidiary of the GTE Corporation.
Underwriters gave the telephone facility bonds, which are due in 2022, a 9.19 percent coupon and are offering them to investors at a price of par, to yield 113 basis points more than the 30-year Treasury issue.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Reporter's Notebook; By Dawn's Early Light, a New Tax
Ringed by his staff, by legislators, by his family, by television cameras, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. looked up this afternoon from the bill before him, a historic budget balanced by a tax on wages, and said, "The question I think you're all asking is, 'Will he sign it?' "
For the first time in the 53 days since the state began its fiscal year without a budget, there was no doubt about what someone in the Capitol would do, and so people were able to laugh.
The mood was far different from less than eight hours before, when the Governor's supporters had miscounted their votes and seen that same budget defeated in the House, 81 to 69.


Offering a Piano Recital
The Soviet emigre Alexander Toradze is to give a piano recital at 8:30 P.M. today at the Southampton Campus of Long Island University, 239 Montauk Highway.
On the program are works by Haydn, Ravel, Liszt and Prokofiev.
The concert is part of the Hampton Summerfest.
Tickets are $25 and $35.
Information: (212) 517-4726.


Topics of The Times; Stopping the Bogus Bills
New Yorkers owe the Dinkins administration a big thank-you for its effort to thwart an annoying ad campaign that has littered city streets.
Responding to a citizen's tip, officials in the Department of Sanitation did a little detective work and found that someone was deliberately dumping fake paper money -- ads for phone sex lines -- on city streets.
The bogus bills are designed to look like money so people will pick them up and see the X-rated ads on the other side.
Savvy New Yorkers don't pick them up; they've become quite a refuse problem.


The Gorbachev Account: A Coup 'Against the People, Against Democracy'
Following is a transcript of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's account yesterday of his detention during the Kremlin coup, as broadcast and translated by CNN and transcribed by Reuters.
Chapter headings in the opening statement and topic headings in the answers were provided by The New York Times for reference.
The questions have been abridged by The Times.
GORBACHEV STATEMENT I. A Nation's Trial
Dear ladies and gentlemen.
In the six years as the President -- as the General Secretary and then the President of this country, I've had a lot of meetings with you, and other representatives of the press.
There are several press conferences that I remember from my entire life.
One of them was the press conference after our meeting in Reykjavik.


Xerox Creating Software Unit
The Xerox Corporation said yesterday that it would create a new organization to focus on software products, and it named Dennis W. Andrews to head the operation.
The division will be called XSoft -- the Xerox Software Group -- and will be based in Sunnyvale, Calif.
The unit will develop and market software products for use on networked personal computers and work stations.


You Want Ewing? We Can Talk, Knicks Say
Line up. Have your best offer ready. Patrick Ewing is available.
For the first time since last June, when Ewing challenged the Knicks in arbitration in a salary dispute, the Knicks said publicly yesterday that they are considering trading their All-Star center.


Baltic Freedom in a New Light
The failure of the hard-line coup in Moscow will have many consequences; none would be more welcome than a speedy end to Soviet captivity of the Baltic States.
President Bush spoke for much of the world yesterday when he said the faster that independence is granted, the better.
The peoples of Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia have earned the freedom their parliaments have proclaimed.
They have endured, among other things, cruel badgering in recent months and now a thuggish crackdown by the coup plotters.


Bush Restores Some Aid to Soviets but Holds Back on Big Projects
In a day of deliberately mixed signals, President Bush today reinstated the limited assistance to the Soviet Union that he suspended during the Kremlin coup but said he was still not prepared to support major financial aid until President Mikhail S. Gorbachev enacts significant economic reforms.
The White House's somewhat tentative approach seemed intended to buy time for Mr.
Bush and his aides to assess developments in the Soviet Union, particularly whether the failed coup has signficantly shifted the balance of power between Mr.
Gorbachev and Mr.
Yeltsin.


NEWS SUMMARY
After the Coup A8-15
President Gorbachev said his rescue from the failed coup had taught him that he must join more closely with "democratic forces" and speed the pace of reform.
Meanwhile, one of the coup leaders killed himself.
Page A1


Books of The Times; A Lawyer Amid Old and New Torments
Closing Arguments By Frederick Busch 288 pages. Ticknor &amp; Fields. $19.95.
Love and estrangement between fathers and sons, husbands and wives and lovers: this has been a theme that Frederick Busch has returned to again and again in a dozen novels and short-story collections.
His latest novel, "Closing Arguments," is no exception.


Star Vehicle For Taylor: A Scent Spot
IF you plan to catch Elizabeth Taylor's new film, don't buy a very big bag of popcorn; it runs only two minutes and 45 seconds.
The film is a commercial for White Diamonds, the second fragrance that the Elizabeth Arden division of Parfums International is introducing with the collaboration of the actress.
The spot, shot in Acapulco in black and white and styled to resemble a theatrical movie, will be shown at department stores' fragrance counters; a 60-second version will be broadcast on television.


Bullpen a Garden Spot For Yankees' Habyan
John Habyan has such an unassuming demeanor in the Yankees' bullpen that his fellow relief pitchers nicknamed him flower pot.
He always sits in the same place and says little.
When Habyan is summoned into a game, he warms up with the same blank stare, stalks to the mound and retires hitters without expression.
Night after night.
Just like a dependable reliever should.


Nurse Surrenders in Alabama
A critical-care nurse charged in one patient's death here and under investigation in 17 similar cases in Georgia surrendered to the authorities today.
Joe Akin, 34 years old, of Marietta, Ga., went to the Jefferson County jail with his lawyer, Pete Short, to surrender.
Mr.
Akin was charged Wednesday with murder in the death of Robert J. Price, 32, at Cooper Green Hospital in Birmingham on March 27.


Examining Legal Issues in Crash
A Brooklyn grand jury began hearing testimony yesterday about the car accident that touched off the disturbances in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn.
Black protesters have been demanding the arrest of the 22-year-old driver, Yoseph Lisef.
Courts have ruled that for a vehicular case to result in criminal charges, the degree of negligence must be greater than in a civil negligence case.
Criminal negligence, said Lawrence Crocker, an assistant professor at the New York University School of Law, is defined as failing to perceive a substantial risk of death.
The next degree of negligence requires recklessness -- failing to perceive a substantial risk of death, and ignoring the risk.


Canadian High Court Narrows Rape Shield Law
The Supreme Court of Canada ruled yesterday that the sexual history of rape victims may be offered as evidence in court at the trial judge's discretion.
The 7-to-2 decision struck down part of a 1983 law shielding rape victims from intrusive questioning about their past sexual behavior.


New Faces Of New Era At Kremlin
Leonid V. Shebarshin Acting Chairman of K.G.B.
56 years old . . .
Veteran K.G.B. officer and chief of foreign spying . . .
Associate of previous K.G.B. chief, Vladimir A. Kryuchkov, who was member of eight-man junta . . .
At 21, went to work for Foreign Ministry, specializing in South Asia . . .
Served in Pakistan from 1958 to 1962 and 1966 to 1968 . . .
Joined K.G.B. in 1960's . . .
Posted to India in 1970's . . .
In 1979, after fall of Shah of Iran, became top K.G.B. officer in Teheran until expulsion in 1983 . . .
In April 1990, told Pravda that K.G.B. was focusing on trade . . .
In October 1990, said Baltic republics would "remain in the fold of the Soviet federation." Added that if they seceded, Soviets would "keep an eye on them, but I doubt they will be of great interest to us" . . .
Shelves filled with books about K.G.B. published in West.
Lieut.
Gen.
Vasily P. Trushin
Acting Interior Minister
56 years old . . .
Replaces Boris K. Pugo, who committed suicide after coup failed . . .
Since 1990, First Deputy Minister at Interior Ministry, state's principal police organ . . .
Known as conservative opponent of Boris N. Yeltsin . . .
In early 1960's, joined Moscow Communist Party Committee, where he was protege of Viktor V. Grishin, former party chief . . .
Rose through ranks of Russian security apparatus, becoming head of Russian Interior Ministry in late 1980's . . .
Removed from post after Yeltsin was elected leader of Russian Parliament in 1990 . . .
In May, denied that his Ministry had role in bloody attacks on Baltic customs posts.
Col.
Gen.
Boris Y. Pyankov
Acting Deputy Defense Minister and chief of Civil Defense Directorate
56 years old . . .
Ethnic Russian . . .
Replaces Gen.
Vladimir L. Govorov, first official dismissed by Mikhail S. Gorbachev on return to Moscow . . .
Was commander of Siberian military district . . .
Joined army in 1954 and graduated from General Staff Academy . . .
Member of Communist Party since 1960 . . .
Served in Afghanistan . . .
Member of Congress of People's Deputies since 1990 . . .
Backed Gorbachev and criticized hard-liners.


BALTICS' CAMPAIGN IS GAINING IN WEST
The Bush Administration and a number of other Western governments renewed calls today for the Soviet Union to permit the full independence of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.
But they stopped short of demanding immediate freedom or of granting separate diplomatic recognition to the three Baltic republics.
The governments indicated that it was still up to the Soviet Union to take the steps required to give sovereignty to the Baltics.


CREDIT MARKETS;
The Massachusetts Health and Educational Facilities Authority entered the tax-exempt market yesterday with a $69.2 million issue of revenue bonds through Morgan Stanley &amp; Company as senior manager.
Underwriters tentatively priced the bonds, which are for the Fallon Health Care System, with a maximum yield of 7.075 percent for an issue due 2020.


Sports of The Times; That Quarterback Bombshell
"DID you hear the news?"
"What news?"


My Brilliant Career: No Autographs, Please
This may be as good as it gets.
I'm up against a side wall near the bar in Mickey Mantle's restaurant, eating a free hot dog and drinking a free beer after having seen a baseball movie.
Free.
Almost too close for comfort, a famous nonlocal pro Quarterback (Q.) is trying to score with a famous swimsuit Model (M.).
As hard as I try not to eavesdrop, his signals are audible.
"So, is he," asks Q., canting his remarkable neck toward a handsome young man who seems to be hanging onto M.'s waist-length blonde hair, "your husband?"


Stolichnaya Celebrates Gorbachev's Return
Reports of the demise of advertising with glasnost themes seem to have been as premature as those of the demise of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's presidency.
Stolichnaya vodka, which is imported from the Soviet Union, is running an advertisement today, in four newspapers, celebrating Mr.
Gorbachev's return to power.
The ad, created by Calet, Hirsch &amp; Spector, New York, shows an Associated Press photograph, taken Tuesday in Leningrad, of a pro-democracy demonstration.
The headline: "We're prouder than ever to be Russian."


The Bitterness Flows in 2 Directions
At dusk every Friday, the piercing wail of a siren reverberates through the streets of Crown Heights.
For the Hasidic Jews who live there, the blasts herald the coming of the Sabbath, a day of rest, family reunions and joyous gathering in the synagogues.
For blacks, it is the noisy beginning of a weekend in which their lives are disrupted by the blocking of streets for throngs of followers of Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson, haughty Hasidim who trample their lawns.
The strikingly different perceptions attest to the gaping chasm between blacks and Jews who share the same Brooklyn streets but live in different worlds.
The tensions, which have always percolated just below a patina of strained coexistence, erupted Monday night when a car driven by a Hasidic man careered out of control and killed one black child and seriously injured another.
In apparent retaliation, the police say a young Hasidic man was stabbed to death hours later by a group of black teen-agers.


Review/Film; Branagh's 'Dead Again,' Homage to 40's Fiction
KENNETH BRANAGH is a young man in a hurry.
The 30-year-old Englishman, who directed and starred in the astonishingly fine screen adaptation of "Henry V" two years ago, now makes his American film debut with the aptly titled "Dead Again."
The new film, which accepts reincarnation as a fact of this life and others, is a big, convoluted, entertainingly dizzy romantic mystery melodrama.
It's also another coup de cinema for Mr.
Branagh, who directed it and stars in two roles, playing opposite Emma Thompson, his wife, who has two roles to match his.


He's the Mayor, Not a Magician
The angry reception that Mayor David Dinkins got from blacks in the riot-torn Brooklyn community of Crown Heights gives all New Yorkers something to ponder.
Mr.
Dinkins hoped that his presence would head off a third consecutive night of rioting.
It didn't.
Instead a black mob jeered and threw bottles at the city's first black Mayor, and he was fortunate to escape unharmed.
The rioting resumed.
The episode sends a vital message.
Mr.
Dinkins's black skin is no magical antidote to racial tensions, either between the blacks and Hasidim of Crown Heights or among other warring groups in this racially divided city.


Review/Film; A British Comedian Abroad, in 'True Identity'
"True Identity" is a mild comedy that works best as a showcase for Lenny Henry, the English comedian who is a huge star in his country and looking for a foothold here.
A master of accents, Mr.
Henry is perfectly at home as a struggling New York actor named Miles Pope, a black man whose dream is to play Othello but whose luck is usually limited to playing a raisin in a television commercial.
On a plane that is about to crash, Miles gets a confession from the man sitting next to him, an urbane businessman named Leland Carver (Frank Langella).
He is really the underworld boss Frank Luchino, long thought to be dead.
The plane, of course, doesn't crash, and Luchino puts out a contract on Miles.
Now we know why Miles is an actor; Mr.
Henry gets to disguise himself as several different personalities.


Broad Channel Battles On For Its Identity and Wins
The Rev.
Kieran Martin likes to say he lives in Venice.
There are canals behind the houses, and when the Jamaica Bay tide comes in some of the roads flood.
Houses are still built on stilts in the marshlands.
There may be 2,500 people on this slender island called Broad Channel, which takes its name from the water on its eastern side, but there is no bank, no pharmacy, no supermarket and only one restaurant, serving Chinese food.
On the side streets some of the houses are little more than weathered bungalows.
At night the children go jacking for crabs.
Some people fish from their back porches and twice a day watch the supersonic Concorde thunder off from Kennedy International Airport less than a mile away.


Public TV Must Let In the Voices of the World; The Feel-Good Tube
To the Editor:
" 'Sesame Street' for Budding Scientists" (editorial, Aug. 8) acknowledges that American students score comparatively badly on international math and science tests.
You then describe a program integrating television into classrooms and cite the results: "80 percent of the teachers agreed that 'students were more engaged and learned more when video was integrated into the lesson.' "


U.S. Ban on Mexico Tuna Is Overruled
In a setback for the world environmental movement, an international trade panel has ruled that environmental concerns about a foreign industry cannot be a factor in barring imports.
A panel of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ruled that the United States may not ban imports of tuna caught by Mexican boats, which kill more dolphins than the United States tuna fleet, Administration officials and environmentalists said.


Art in Review
Hunt Diederich
Whitney Museum of American Art  945 Madison Avenue (at 75th Street)  Through Sept. 29
This exhibition in the museum's lobby gallery brings together more than 50 works by an artist who has been remembered most, if not best, for his pro-German stance during both world wars and for his anti-Semitic sentiments.
Hunt Diederich (1882-1953) was the son of a Prussian cavalry officer and a descendent of the Hunt family of Boston.
He came to the United States from Hungary as a child, worked as a cowboy in Arizona and New Mexico, and enrolled in 1906 at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts in Philadelphia.
He was dismissed two years later for "improper language used by him in a class composed of men and women." He then traveled throughout Europe and Africa, studied with Emmanuel Fremiet, one of the pre-eminent animal sculptors, and began exhibiting his work in Paris in the 1910 spring salon.
He was an almost immediate success.
He returned to the United States after the start of World War I.


At End of a Long Road, Cuban Inmates Revolt
The anxiety and fear driving 121 Cuban detainees holding a Federal prison unit and 10 hostages here are rooted not just in the stark prospect of imminent deportation, their lawyers and advocates say.
The inmates are also frustrated with the complicated legal process that has brought them to this fate.
The process was altered after the 1987 riots of Cubans at Federal jails in Atlanta and Oakdale, La.
The changes, intended to make the hearing process over possible deportation fairer, helped some detainees obtain the freedom to live in the United States.
But the detainees holding the prison here have exhausted their appeals and are facing deportation.


Russian Flag Is New Look At Old Design
The hammer and sickle went the way of the junta today as President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian Republic restored the white, blue and red banner of prerevolutionary Russia as the republic's new flag.
Across the city, the flag fluttered above the demonstrations as a repudiation of seven decades of Communism.


MORE ON THE COUP
A new start: who's in charge and what's ahead A8  Change and cheering in Moscow and beyond A9


Paul Rubin Wed To Miss Ascher
Pia Ascher, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Ascher of New York, was married yesterday to Paul Rubin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gene L. Rubin of Baltimore.
Rabbi Boruch Leizorowski performed the ceremony at the Hotel Pierre in New York.
The bride, 21 years old, is a student at Yeshiva University.
Her father is a dentist.
Her mother, Susan Ascher, is the president of Mitchell Ascher Advertising in New York.


For Children
'Bastien und Bastienne'
New York Public Library  for the Performing Arts  40 Lincoln Center Plaza  (212) 221-7676  Recommended ages: 3 and up  Tomorrow
The German singspiel is a comic-dramatic work, usually accompanied by operatic music, that was especially popular around the latter part of the 18th century.
Mark McKillip of the Puppet Art Troupe, based in Manhattan, will be using this lively art form to present in German "Bastien und Bastienne," Mozart's first opera, which he presented at the mere age of 12.
Bastienne is a young shepherdess whose equally young love, Bastien, a shepherd, has abandoned her for a highfalutin lady.
Bastienne, as distraught as Juliet, relies on Colas, a magician, to help her win Bastien back.
Will she succeed?
"I chose it because it's a very simple opera: there are only three characters, it's easy to stage with puppets and it's short, 45 minutes long," Mr.
McKillip said.
He also admits to having fallen in love with the music, which will be on a taped sound track for his show.
"The melodies are beautiful," he said.
Mr.
McKillip has been a puppeteer for 12 years and started the troupe last year; in this 3 P.M. performance, his handmade hand puppets will perform on a full stage in the Heckscher Oval, on the second floor of the library.
Strollers are permitted; they can be whisked upstairs by elevator.
The audience may sit on the floor or on chairs.
Admission is free.


GORBACHEV SAYS COUP WILL HASTEN REFORM; YELTSIN LEADS THE CELEBRATION IN MOSCOW
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, chastened and isolated by his betrayal at the hands of men he trusted, said today that his rescue from the failed coup had taught him that he must join more closely with "democratic forces" and speed the pace of reform.
While elated Muscovites streamed through the streets in celebration of their triumph over the conspiracy, one of the putsch leaders, Interior Minister Boris K. Pugo, killed himself.
And the circle of high-level Gorbachev confidants implicated in the plot widened to include the leader of the Soviet Parliament, Anatoly I. Lukyanov, who was accused by a high Soviet official of being the coup's mastermind.


BUDGET IS PASSED FOR CONNECTICUT WITH INCOME TAX
After six months of anguished budget deadlock, capped by a 36-hour marathon of deal making and brinkmanship, the Connecticut legislature today approved Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s income tax plan and gave the state a budget for the fiscal year that began more than seven weeks ago.
The income tax, which was signed into law by Mr.
Weicker at 4 P.M., less than an hour after the final vote in the House of Representatives, will take effect on Sept. 1, thus shortening to only nine the list of states without an income tax.
Residents will feel the new tax in their paychecks by early October.
The income tax has a nominal rate of 4.5 percent, but it is somewhat graduated through a system of standard deductions and credits.


Economic Scene; Brady's Message On the Scandals
THE Salomon Brothers' misconduct in the Treasuries market -- coming after such scandals as the fall and bailout of hundreds of savings and loans, the drug and money-laundering and bribing activities of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, the junk bond debacle of Drexel Burnham Lambert and the assorted frauds in the Japanese stock market -- has further stirred anxieties about the integrity of financial markets.
Unless they are quelled, such anxieties could hurt saving and investment all around the world.
In cracking down hard on Salomon Brothers for exceeding the 35 percent quota for primary dealers in the auction markets for Government securities, the Treasury was sending a message to the other 39 primary dealers in that market that conduct like Salomon's would be dealt with harshly.
With $2.3 trillion in Federal debt to be marketed and rolled over ad infinitum -- a debt total that is expected to increase by $279 billion in the fiscal year 1991 and by $362 billion in 1992 -- any loss of faith in the integrity of the Government securities market might be extremely costly.


JAPAN RELUCTANT ABOUT SOVIET AID
Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu hailed the collapse of the coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and lifted a freeze on Japan's aid to the SovietUnion today, as Japanese officials took steps to blunt a renewed campaign for increased international aid to Moscow.
Government officials expressed concern that Japan will be expected to provide financial support for the Soviet Union if the West decides to bolster Mr.
Gorbachev's Government, without respect for Japan's strong reservations.


Market Place; A Detailed Look At Penny Stocks
LOOKING for a great way to make money?
Why not go into the penny-stock business, buy up shares of a company that has ceased operating, and make up facts about the company?
Then peddle the shares like crazy.
That, in any case, is what the Securities and Exchange Commission charges a small Florida brokerage house did.
That broker, which did not bother to register with the S.E.C., as brokers are required to do, took on an established sounding name, the First Fidelity Financial Corporation, although it is not related to any other First Fidelity; nor, for that matter, does it appear to be incorporated.


A Frustrated Dinkins Appeals for Peace: 'I Alone Cannot Do It'
Struggling to come to grips with the most serious racial clash of his administration, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday expressed frustration at the idea that as the city's first black Mayor he should be capable of solving the multilayered social and racial tensions that have eluded solution for years in New York.
In an interview that revealed an unusual depth of personal feeling, Mr.
Dinkins presented an array of complications in the turmoil in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn -- from a neighborhood riddled with misconceptions to youths without adequate parental guidance to a lack of support from community and civic groups.


The Accident That Started It All: The Focus of Protesters and a Grand Jury
The basic facts about the beginning of the unrest in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn this week are, for the most part, not in dispute: Shortly after 8 P.M. on Monday, a car glanced off another vehicle in an intersection, swerved and ran onto the sidewalk.
It hit a 7-year-old boy who was changing the chain on his bicycle and trapped him under the front bumper.
He died several hours later.
What happened next -- a confusing, rapid sequence of events -- is what is at issue on the streets.
And yesterday, a panel of 23 men and women began hearing testimony about the actions of the 22-year-old man in the driver's seat of the big Mercury station wagon, Yoseph Lisef.


China Detains Four Members Of U.S.-Based Rights Group
Four members of a human rights delegation who came from the United States to investigate conditions of political prisoners in China were detained overnight before apparently being expelled from the country today.


Credit Unit May Be Sold By TRW
TRW Inc. is considering selling its credit reporting business, in part because of the growing public outcry and regulatory scrutiny of the business of tracking and selling sensitive consumer financial data, Joseph T. Gorman, TRW's chairman and chief executive, said in an interview yesterday.
In recent months, he said, he had become less convinced that the information services business made sense for TRW.
"We need to take some strategic action" on the unit, which accounted for about 11 percent of sales in 1990.


California Eases Water Curbs
The Metropolitan Water District is slashing prices and revoking conservation incentives after cool weather and careful hoarding left major reservoirs full brim despite a five-year drought.
The district provides water to cities and regions from Ventura County, northwest of Los Angeles, to the Mexican border.


Suit on Slain Student Settled for $350,000
The landlord of a young woman slain in last year's student murders here has paid her parents $350,000 to settle a lawsuit charging that apartment security was lax, court records show.
The parents of the 18-year-old student, Christa Hoyt, and the landlord, Elbert J. Hoover, agreed not to disclose details of the July 15 settlement.
But a copy of the agreement was added to Ms.
Hoyt's public estate file, The St.
Petersburg Times reported on Wednesday.


A Pair Of Winners Say Adieu To 'Yonkers'
"Ideally," says Mercedes Ruehl, "I want to not act for a couple of months. I need to just stop for a while and do some living."
After this weekend, Ms. Ruehl will get her wish.


AFTER THE COUP: Needing Each Other, Even as They Stand Apart; Gorbachev and Yeltsin Are Bound By a Complex Mutual Dependency
It was perhaps the greatest paradox of the failed coup in Moscow that Mikhail S. Gorbachev's presidency was saved by the one man he had done his most to destroy, and that Boris N. Yeltsin had rescued a leader whose downfall he had actively sought.
They began as partners at the dawn of perestroika, Mr.
Gorbachev as the reformist new chief of the Politburo and Mr.
Yeltsin as one of the first recruits to the new leadership.
But within two years they had bitterly parted paths, with Mr.
Yeltsin cast out of the Kremlin to assume a new role as the persistent demander of radical change and Mr.
Gorbachev's role as the seeker of evolutionary change.


E.P.A. Failed to Evaluate Warnings On at Least 10 Dangerous Pesticides
Federal environmental officials who are supposed to evaluate studies warning of potential health dangers from pesticides say the agency overlooked such warnings on at least 10 chemicals.
One of those warnings concluded that metam sodium, the pesticide spilled last month in the Sacramento River after a freight train derailed, caused severe spinal and brain birth defects in laboratory animals.
The Environmental Protection Agency said today that it had received a study in 1987 from the manufacturer that the chemical could cause birth defects in rats but had never reviewed the information.


Edward J. Leon, Lawyer, 91
Edward Joseph Leon, a retired lawyer, died on Wednesday at New York Hospital.
He was 91 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Smoking Salomon
Salomon Brothers' fall from grace will be the subject of extensive Congressional inquiry, as is right and proper.
Legislators will search for new rules to control what has been described as a lightly regulated Government bond market.
No doubt, Salomon and some of its employees should be penalized for violating Treasury market rules, falsifying customer orders and then lying about their conduct.
But when regulators turn their attention to the scandal, they should resist the temptation to churn out volumes of detailed and obscure regulations.


Yankees' No. 1 Pick Packing for College
Brien Taylor, baseball's No. 1 draft pick, is apparently packing his bags in Beaufort, N.C., and getting ready to attend Louisburg Junior College some three hours away, unless the Yankees sign him in the next three days.
Bettie Taylor, the pitcher's mother, telephoned Russ Frazier, the Louisburg baseball coach, on Tuesday and asked him several questions about what her son needed for school and what time he had to arrive on Sunday for freshman orientation.
Frazier said that she did not mention the Yankees during the five-minute conversation.


For Harcourt, a Route Out of Debt
A sweetened offer for Harcourt Brace Jovanovich appears to have a good chance of success, analysts said, and should give the troubled publisher a new lease on life by freeing its basically sound businesses from the burden of overwhelming debt.
The General Cinema Corporation, a movie theater and retailing concern based in Newton, Mass., raised its bid for Harcourt yesterday to more than $1.5 billion, from the $1.4 billion it offered in January.
Moreover, it agreed to pay more to the bondholders, who rejected the earlier offer, and less to Harcourt shareholders.


Ira Gershwin's Widow Dies
Leonore Strunsky Gershwin, the lyricist Ira Gershwin's wife of 56 years, died on Tuesday in Beverly Hills, Calif., at the age of 90.
After Mr.
Gershwin's death in 1981 at the age of 86, Mrs.
Gershwin devoted much of her time to preserving his work and that of his brother, George, the composer.
Two years ago, she set up Roxbury Recordings, which recorded two Gershwin works in their entirety: "Girl Crazy" and "Strike Up the Band," which is to be released soon.
Surviving is a brother, W. English Strunsky of Manhattan.


Giant Banks: Will Little Guy Pay?
The proposed merger of BankAmerica and Security Pacific, the two largest banking companies in California, is the latest in a series of big-bank betrothals that promise cost savings, great riches for shareholders and power for the executives.
Consolidation in the banking industry is all the rage because everyone seems to win -- except, perhaps, the consumer and small-business borrowers.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Placed Marvin Freeman, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Called up Mark Ross, pitcher, from Richmond of the International League.


What Statistics on Japan's Lawyers Mean
To the Editor:
The comparison by the Agenda for Civil Justice Reform in America of the per capita number of lawyers in the United States (281 per 100,000 population) to Japan (11 per 100,000), shown in the chart accompanying your Aug. 14 article on Vice President Dan Quayle's speech to the American Bar Association, is misleading.


24-7 Spyz: Blame It All on the Baby Sitter
Jimi Hazel of 24-7 Spyz found his calling, and half his stage name, when he was 6 years old.
His older brother was supposed to be his baby sitter, but Jimi Hendrix was playing on Randalls Island, "and my brother wasn't going to miss that," Mr.
Hazel said.
So the brothers went to the concert together.
"From that moment, I knew immediately that this is what I wanted to do," Mr.
Hazel said.
"I bugged my parents for a guitar, and my seventh birthday was pretty close, so they gave me an acoustic guitar and I taught myself to play. I learned off records, off television -- any time I saw anybody playing I tried to figure out what they were doing. I remember months of sitting around my room yelling at my hands, 'Go there!' "


Montana Remains Sidelined
Joe Montana, bothered by tendinitis in his right elbow and unable to practice for most of the last two weeks, today was declared out of the San Francisco 49ers' exhibition game Friday night at Seattle.
Whether his condition will improve enough to allow him to play Sept. 2 in the regular-season opener against the Giants remains unknown.
"As of now, we'll evaluate it next week," George Seifert, the 49er coach, said after the team worked out today.


Review/Film; 'Uranus': Cosmic Anguish Over Harboring a Nazi Collaborator From Arrest
A French village schoolteacher named Watrin was in bed reading about the planet Uranus when a bomb destroyed the house around him.
Now, in 1945, the village is largely rubble and Watrin (Philippe Noiret) is living in the apartment of his neighbor Archambaud, pleasantly helping him hide a Nazi collaborator.
Watrin tells Archambaud and the collaborator about a persistent dream.
Whether he is asleep or awake, each night at 11:15, the moment the bomb hit, he is shaken by a "cosmic anguish." He feels the weight of Uranus, "that dark and icy star," bearing down on him, carrying despair.
Claude Berri's unsettling and provocative "Uranus" has a vision as dark, cold and weighty as that nightmare.
The villagers -- a barkeeper, a railroad clerk, a Communist Party official and many others -- offer a huge range of attitudes toward the Nazi occupation, yet there is not one war hero among them.
"Uranus," which opens today at the Lincoln Plaza Cinema, is a film of ambiguous characters and slippery morality, but it dares to ask powerful, profoundly disturbing questions: Is the collaborator worthy of sympathy and forgiveness?
How guilty are the passive observers of evil?


Just Forget Neighborhood Parking Stickers
To the Editor:
"What Is So Rare as a Parking Space?" (editorial, Aug. 9), suggesting neighborhood parking stickers for $5 or $10 a month, seems an attempt to help Mayor David N. Dinkins's administration solve its fiscal problems by attacking those New Yorkers least able to defend themselves from being singled out for additional taxation (for that is what it is about).


Frederick Is No German Peace Symbol
To the Editor:
Prof.
Nis Petersen (letter, Aug. 7) can't be serious in calling Frederick the Great a man of peace.
Despite Frederick's civilized taste for the French language and for music, and despite his love for dogs, he was an utterly ruthless war leader, bent on increasing his domains at the expense of his neighbors by means fair or foul.


Ryan's Son Transfers
REID RYAN, son of Texas Rangers pitcher NOLAN RYAN, has cleared his last hurdle in transferring from the University of Texas to Texas Christian, where he will be eligible to pitch for the Horned Frogs next season.
When Texas withdrew Ryan's scholarship Wednesday at his request, the action allowed Ryan to bypass the restrictive Southwest Conference transfer rule, which requires the loss of two years' eligibility for any athlete transferring from one conference school to another unless certain provisions are met.
Ryan met the criteria: he was in good academic standing at Texas, he previously had not transferred, and the university had no objection to his being granted an exception to the normal one-year residency requirement.


Brandee Erlanger, U.N. Volunteer, 64
Brandee Erlanger, a volunteer and fund-raiser for the United Nations for more than 30 years, died on Wednesday at Roosevelt Hospital.
She was 64 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of a stroke, her husband, Jack, said.


In Crown Heights, Simmering Tensions And a Fragile Peace
As darkness settled over Brooklyn, the dispiriting racial violence that had ripped apart the Crown Heights section for three consecutive nights did not return.
But tensions remained.
In an interview, Mayor David N. Dinkins insisted that his administration had come to grips with the violent aftermath of a Monday night automobile accident that resulted in the death of a black child and the subsequent killing of a Hasidic Jew.


Traffic Alert
Pakistan Day Parade: Lexington Avenue will be closed Sunday between 26th and 45th Streets from 1 to 3 P.M.
Pakistan Independence Fair: Madison Avenue between 23d and 26th Streets will be closed Sunday from 3 to 9 P.M.


Technology Lending a Hand to the Deaf in Court
As she prepared to attend court hearings on her divorce earlier this year, Ellen Levinson, a 44-year-old Maryland woman who had just lost her hearing, was worried that she would not be able to follow the proceedings.
Mrs.
Levinson, whose hearing had been degenerating for more than a decade, became completely deaf last November.
She could not read lips or understand sign language, and it was not clear to her lawyer and the officials at the Montgomery County Court in Rockville, Md., how she could participate in the case.


Helmy Kresa, Songwriter, 86
Helmy Kresa, a songwriter and the principal arranger and orchestrator for Irving Berlin, died on Monday at Southampton Hospital on Long Island.
He was 86 years old and lived in Bayside, Queens.
He died of pneumonia, said his son, Kent Kresa.


U.S. Team Uncovers New Failures In Nine-Mile Nuclear Disruption
The accident at the Nine Mile Point 2 nuclear plant near Oswego, N.Y., last week involved several more failures than were initially acknowledged, a report by Nuclear Regulatory Commission investigators shows.
But the report confirms that the most important safety equipment continued to function, despite an electrical disruption that blacked out parts of the control room.
There was no damage to the fuel in the reactor core, the report confirms, and no radiation release.


Surgeon and Wife Convicted Of Killing 5-Year-Old Child
A jury has convicted a surgeon and his wife, a former nurse, of murdering his 5-year-old daughter, who choked on pepper-spiked milk.
The defense had contended that the death of the girl, Amy Shipley, was an accident.


On Stage, and Off
Tune Puts 'Birdie' Ahead of 'Busker'
Tommy Tune and his agent, Sam Cohn, just might find themselves in court.
Mr.
Tune recently pulled out as the star of "Busker Alley," a new Broadway musical about street performers, despite a letter of intent that committed him to start rehearsals on Jan. 6.
He will remain instead with the national touring company of "Bye Bye Birdie," which has now extended its run through next May.
Mr.
Tune had been scheduled to leave it at the end of December.


Art in Review
'Letters'
Christine Burgin Gallery  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through next Friday
A wistful feeling runs through this show of art that refers to letters and letter-writing, and which includes work by William Wegman, Chris Burden, Sean Landers, Franz West and Allen Ruppersberg, among others.
Underlying many of the pieces is a sense that for all their apparent intimacy, letters may not be able to communicate much.
Raymond Pettibon's ink drawings in particular convey this quality of yearning for a contact not quite made.
Drawn in a cartoony style, Mr.
Pettibon's works include elliptical fragments of text that hint at more than they say.
"What a sad little letter!" one image proclaims, summing up the underlying tone of much of the work here.


Art in Review
Group Show
Jayne H. Baum Gallery  588 Broadway (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through next Friday
Nocturnal images, from the comic to the creepy, abound in this multimedia group show.
The hilarious centerpiece to the exhibition is Jeff Weiss's tour de force construction "Moon Rise" (1990), in which the illuminated globe of a Mobil Oil gas station sign -- its red Pegasus has apparently flown off into the night -- looms over a huge photograph of a pine-rimmed lake scene.
Larry Brown's painting "Magic Mirror" (1990), with its green moon and rust-orange meteor showers, lends an abstract twist to the nighttime theme, while in Eileen Cowin's Cibachrome tableau, a stylishly dressed couple appear to be burying something beneath the full moon (with wisps of studio mist rising behind them).
John Divola offers ectoplasmic emanations -- actually, clouds of flour thrown against an expressively painted backdrop -- in a pair of large black-and-white photographs that further the mysterious air of the show.


Our Towns
Kathleen and Albert Hofmann were looking for a neighborhood with a certain cachet, so naturally they chose the 142-acre Longtree Pond development, where $375,000 houses were enhanced by three tennis courts, nice shrubbery and a boat pond.
"This was supposed to be a luxury community," noted Mrs.
Hofmann.
Not any more.
A change in ownership, a downturn in the economy, a different philosophy -- these conspired to convince the new developer, Richard Mohring Sr., to find a new concept.
With just eight of the original houses built, Mr.
Mohring announced plans this spring to fill up the rest of Longtree Pond with affordable houses.
Affordable, as in $160,000.


Mets Put A Victory In Wince Column
It was the first inning of last night's 6-0 victory over the Cardinals.
Ozzie Smith was on first.
Pedro Guerrero, a notorious first-pitch fastball menace, was at the plate.
Dwight Gooden went into his windup and reached back for, as he said, "something extra." He got more than he bargained for, and more than enough to frighten him and the entire organization.
"I felt it grab," Gooden, the ace right-hander for the Mets, said of his right shoulder.


Contract Is Approved
Almost a month after the signing, BRENDAN SHANAHAN'S contract with St.
Louis has been approved by the National Hockey League, which yesterday informed LOU LAMORIELLO, the president of the Devils, to start negotiations with the Blues on compensation for losing Shanahan.
Lamoriello and the Blues have three business days to reach an agreement.
Shanahan, a forward, signed with the Blues on July 24 as a free agent after playing out his option with the Devils.
His contract is reportedly for one year at $500,000, and he also received a $125,000 signing bonus.


Review/Film; When Two Families Meet, And Eat, and Eat, and Eat
"The Story of Boys and Girls" was shown as part of this year's New Directors/New Films series.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 28.
The Italian-language film (with English subtitles) opens today at the 68th Street Playhouse, at Third Avenue, in Manhattan.
In "The Story of Boys and Girls," a charmingly rustic drama, the Italian director Pupi Avati tells of two families meeting on an important occasion in 1936, the sort of occasion that calls for a 20-course meal and a long, hearty celebration.
The most minute details of this happy event, from the dough-kneading to the rabbit-catching, are invoked with great gusto.


Public TV Must Let In the Voices of the World; The Moyers Affair
To the Editor:
John J. O'Connor has it backward in his Aug. 6 Critic's Notebook.
He singles out the Committee on Media Integrity as an organizer of campaigns waged against the television series "Point of View" and Bill Moyers.
We have made no complaint about the "P.O.V." film "Tongues Untied," as Mr.
O'Connor implies.
It is convenient for him to lump critics with whom he disagrees in one censorial bag, but that is little more than a guilt-by-association smear.
As for our alleged campaign against Bill Moyers, it was Mr.
Moyers who attacked us -- viciously and without justification, making false claims that Mr.
O'Connor simply repeats.


Review/Film; Fly Balls and Philosophy, All Minor League
Roy Dean Bream is a 41-year-old pitcher, barely hanging on in a losing, fanless minor-league team.
Roydean, as he is always called, is the kind of gung-ho guy who gives pointers to the younger players whether they want them or not.
After a defeat, he walks around the locker room with unfazed enthusiasm, saying, "You can't win 'em all, cannot win them all." He has heart and soul, spunk and team spirit, and one very special pitch he calls the Bream Dream.
Get him out of here!
He is every bit as annoying as his teammates think he is, though "Pastime" treats him like a candidate for sainthood.
The problem is not Roy Dean's sincerity, which might have been poignant and heroic, but the way "Pastime" embraces every baseball and movie cliche it can find.
The setting is California in 1957.
But the team, the Steamers, seems to have walked out of some standard Southern movie town.
There is a crusty old coach who appreciates Roy Dean's big heart, and a sweet but garish barmaid whom Roy Dean finally gets the nerve to ask out.
There is, honestly, a climactic scene of a slo-mo pitch with soaring music in the background.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 23


Coup's Failure May Bring More Investment
The failed coup in the Soviet Union caused a few hiccups in Moscow's business ties to the United States, but it may well lead to a more rapid expansion of Western investment in the long run.
The hazy consensus among many Western business executives is that the coup attempt was too short-lived to increase concerns about Soviet instability that much.
At the same time, many executives said, the coup's collapse left Boris N. Yeltsin, the Russian Republic's President, and other advocates of radical economic change in a better position to clear away some hurdles to Western investment and trade.


Critic's Choice/Music; More of Mendelssohn
This weekend, as last, one of the most promising places to hear classical music will be Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., with the second and final installment of the Bard Music Festival at Bard College.
As this critic found last summer at the first Bard Festival, which was devoted to Brahms and his contemporaries, Leon Botstein, the festival's chief founder and conductor, has many more ideas than fit comfortably into two weekends.


TENNIS: If Your Name Isn't Graf, Practice Time Is Short; Cacopardo Tries Out a Strained Abdominal Muscle and Readies His Resolve
At two o'clock, Martin Blackman was not at court 32.
This was bad news yesterday afternoon for Marco Cacopardo because practice time at the National Tennis Center in Queens was limited to about three hours for players like Steffi Graf and 45 minutes for qualifiers.
Cacopardo was a qualifier at the United States Open tennis championships who had waited since morning to test his strained abdominal muscle.
Now, he and his practice partner, Blackman, had crossed signals.


Exhibitions And Lectures For Metgoers
The Metropolitan Museum of Art is on Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
Museum hours through October are Tuesdays through Thursdays and Sundays, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M., and Fridays and Saturdays, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.
The Met is closed Mondays.
Suggested admission is $6 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 535-7710.


Abroad at Home; Triumph And Decline
The extraordinary drama of this week was in one sense a testament to what Mikhail Gorbachev has achieved.
Six years ago it was unimaginable that Soviet citizens would join in mass resistance to tyranny.
He has opened his people's minds to the possibility of freedom.
But the denouement also showed Mr.
Gorbachev's limitations.
On his return to power he defended the Communist Party.
He turned to the same old party types for acting heads of the K.G.B., Defense and the Interior -- figures like the very men who had joined the coup against him.


Accounts
*
Madison Square Garden to Burkhardt &amp; Christy for its $5 million account, previously at Grey Entertainment and Media.
The other finalists in the review, according to industry executives, were four other New York agencies: Della Femina, McNamee; Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond; TBWA Advertising, and Tarlow Advertising.
The account is for advertising and marketing for the Garden; the Madison Square Garden Network, a cable television sports network; the New York Knicks; the New York Rangers, and the Paramount Theater, the newly renamed Felt Forum.


Quotation of the Day
"How could these people talk about my health, when their own hands were shaking so?" -- Mikhail S. Gorbachev, of the men who tried to depose him.  [ A13:1. ]


George Copeland, Journalist, 98
George Copeland, a journalist, died on Sunday in North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I..
He was 98 years old and lived in Great Neck, L.I.
He died of cardiac arrest, his wife, Dr. Lynn Copeland, said.


There Is No Joy In Staten Island
The kids from Staten Island arrived here hoping they could test their abilities against the legendary kids from another island, one far removed from the life of New York City's forgotten borough.
But the route to a date with Taiwan in the Little League World Series championship was cut short this evening, when the team from the South Shore section of Staten Island was overpowered by California, 13-4, in the American bracket final.


Up to His Old Tricks, Connors in Quarters
He has always been adept at thumbing his nose at any element that threatened to get in the way of a victory, always welcomed a chance to defy the odds.
Today the potential enemies were a brilliant sun and the logic that favored an opponent nearly half his age and ranked 137 computer spots ahead of him.
But don't bring up computer logic to Jimmy Connors while he's still in the business of playing tennis.
Connors, on the cusp of retirement but still unwilling to play that way, advanced to the quarterfinals of the Norstar Bank Hamlet Challenge Cup this afternoon by upstaging and ultimately upsetting Nicklas Kulti of Sweden, 1-6, 6-4, 6-0.
Connors, whose quarterfinal opponent will be the defending champion, Stefan Edberg, has not survived this long in a tournament since claiming the 109th title of his career at Tel Aviv two years ago.


Viola's Stats and Leverage Both Slide
When it comes to salary drives, players can sometimes fall to either side of the spectrum.
Some drive toward a new contract with the skill and aplomb of an Indy racer; witness the Pirates' Bobby Bonilla, a hit this summer and undoubtedly heading for even more successes this winter.
Then there's the flip side, the players who wind up in the ditch, losing their gamble that contract offers made in the spring will improve after a good season.
Players like Shawon Dunston of the Cubs, who may find his bargaining chips down now that a season-long slump has landed him on the bench.


Deng Turns 87, Evermore an Enigma
Deng Xiaoping turned 87 years old today, probably marking the event by swimming and playing with his grandchildren at the beach resort of Beidaihe, but he is turning out to be more of an enigma in retirement than he was in power.
Mr.
Deng has not appeared in public since a brief television appearance in February, when he looked rather feeble.
Yet his eldest son said during a visit to Hong Kong earlier this month that a doctor had declared that China's paramount leader would live "at least another 10 years."


All Lottery Earnings Help School Districts
To the Editor:
In "Let's Have Some Truth on Lottery Revenue" (letter, Aug. 5), S. J. Schulman would have you think that lottery earnings are of no benefit to local education and that the benefit derived from this aid to elementary and secondary schools is rarely, if at all, delivered to them.


College Pros in Works
Baseball Commissioner FAY VINCENT and DICK SCHULTZ, executive director of the National Collegiate Athletic Association, are considering a plan that could change the relationship between the pros and colleges and provide a measure of relief to schools short of money.
Under the plan, still in the formative stage, college players would be able to sign with major league teams without losing their eligibility to play for their schools.
The teams would pay for the education of the players, who would play during the summer for teams run by a professional manager, perhaps outside the minor leagues.


National Semiconductor
The National Semiconductor Corporation said today that George M. Scalise had been appointed senior vice president, planning and development, effective Aug. 26.
Mr.
Scalise, who is 57 years old, was president and chief executive officer of the Maxtor Corporation, a disk drive manufacturer.
At National, Mr.
Scalise will have responsibility for business development and investment management, intellectual property protection, strategic planning and industry affairs.


Money Fund Assets Up
The assets of the nation's 555 money market mutual funds increased by $4.98 billion, to $466.34 billion, for the week that ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Those of the 204 institutional funds increased by $1.85 billion, to $139.35 billion.
The assets of the 260 general-purpose funds were up by $2.04 billion, to $178.26 billion.
The 91 broker-dealer funds rose $1.09 billion, to $148.72 billion, the institute said.


CHRONICLE
The PRINCESS OF WALES interrupted her vacation at Balmoral, Scotland, yesterday to return to London to visit a friend, ADRIAN WARD-JACKSON , who is terminally ill with AIDS.
Mr.
Ward-Jackson, 40 years old, is a major figure in the British art world.
He was appointed chairman of the Arts Council's Advisory Dance Panel last year but relinquished the post in May because of illness.
He began his career in the drawings department at Christie's auction house in London, and later became an art dealer, acting for such collectors as the Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif.


You Know, Qaddafi, Hussein and Rubiks
At his news conference in Moscow yesterday, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev drew laughter and applause when he talked of the world reaction to the failed coup.
He said he had talked with President Bush and the leaders of France, Germany, Britain, Canada, Australia, Japan, Italy and Egypt.
He added, "Other than Qaddafi, and Hussein and Rubiks, they all agreed with me."
He was referring to Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, the head of Libya, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, and Alfred Rubiks, the hard-line Communist Party boss of Latvia, who today was facing arrest in Riga for his role in supporting the coup.


Edythe Lutzker Dead; Medical Historian, 87
Edythe Lutzker, a historian and author who went to college at age 46, died on Friday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 87 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of complications from lung congestion, her son Michael said.


Send Help -- and Plenty of It
It is tempting to sit back and luxuriate in the clear victory for democratic change in the Soviet Union.
But this would be a major mistake.
The failed coup was not only a close call for the Soviet Union; it was also a wake-up call for the United States and its Western partners.
A successful coup would not only have scuttled reform in the Soviet Union.
It would probably have also meant the end of the new Start treaty, complicated the Mideast peace process and perhaps halted the Soviet military withdrawal from Eastern Europe.


Making a Friend of the Met Museum
A TRUE appreciation of art is like good manners: It can exist naturally, but more often it has to be instilled rigorously at a very early age.
For those of us with neither talent nor training, a trip to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, which claims to be "the largest art museum in the Western Hemisphere" (the Hermitage, of the Eastern Hemisphere, is slightly bigger), is one of those edifying New York excursions contemplated only at gunpoint.
Which is why I set off in a state of dread for Fifth Avenue at 81st Street to explore one of the most popular tourist attractions in New York City.
I had carefully selected a Friday night, lured by expectations of a soothing string quintet, liquor and fewer people. (Friday and Saturday nights, the museum stays open until 8:45 P.M. and chamber music wafts across a softly lighted bar area on the Main Hall balcony.) There was nothing soothing about it.


Time Inc. Unit Buys Assets Of Closed Health Magazine
The Time Inc.
Magazine Company announced yesterday that it had purchased certain assets, including the subscription files, name and trademarks, of Health magazine, one of seven titles that folded when Family Media Inc. closed on Aug. 7.
It was the first asset sale made by the New York publisher since it suspended operations after struggling with a heavy debt burden and other problems for more than a year.


Richard Maltby, 77, Dance Band Arranger
Richard Maltby, a composer, arranger and band leader, died on Monday at St.
John's Hospital in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 77 years old.
Mr.
Maltby was an arranger for Artie Shaw's big band, and conducted or arranged for such recording stars as Ethel Merman, Vaughn Monroe, Peggy Lee, Vic Damone and Sarah Vaughan.
He had his first hit recording with "St. Louis Blues Mambo" in 1954, the beginning of the mambo craze.
Hit records of "Stardust Mambo" and the theme from "The Man With the Golden Arm" followed.
Over the next decade he recorded more than a dozen singles and albums for RCA Victor, Columbia and other labels.


Review/Photography; How Racial and Cultural Differences Affect Art
Too often missing in the rhetoric of "differences" -- racial, sexual or otherwise -- that has become widespread in certain corners of the art world is any real discussion of the art involved.
Now an ambitious show of work by black and Hispanic artists using photographic processes, first shown at the Studio Museum in Harlem two years ago, has returned to the area and is on view at the Port Washington Public Library.
Local viewers thus have a second chance to see this informative and stimulating essay into important critical territory.
Organized by Deborah Willis of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, "Constructed Images: New Photography" undertakes the salutary task of examining the effects that racial or cultural difference might have on the works artists produce.
Not surprisingly, what's most notable about the works being shown is simply how diverse they are, and how broad a range of issues they address.
The work reflects a variety of distinctive visions, from Tyrone Georgiou's conceptually based constructions that attempt to differentiate pictorialist, modernist and post-modernist ways of handling the medium, to Todd Gray's photocollages of silhouetted bodies juxtaposed with other figures drawn in charcoal and conte crayon.
As the show's title suggests, most of the work stretches photography beyond its traditional task of recording events in the world, but even that isn't always the case, as Jeffrey Scale's black-and-white documentary study of a Harlem barbershop demonstrates.


BUSINESS DIGEST
THE ECONOMY
A former top Air Force official admitted he accepted bribes from military contractors in return for his help in steering contracts and confidential bidding information to them.  [ D1. ]


Bakker Pleads For Reduction Of Prison Term
Looking older, grayer and thinner than he did at his last court appearance here, Jim Bakker returned today to Federal court seeking a sharp reduction of the 45-year sentence he was given after his fraud conviction in October 1989.
There were some familiar elements from the saga of the television evangelist: his wife, Tammy Faye, in a black and white polka dot dress and a new curly auburn hairdo; his father and mother, Raleigh and Furina, and the Bakker faithful wearing yellow ribbons, praying and singing on his behalf outside the court.


Europeans Look at Costs of the Coup
Amid expressions of relief and delight at the failure of the Moscow coup, European Community governments resumed economic aid to the Soviet Union today and expressed hope that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev will now accelerate moves to introduce a full market economy.
But behind the euphoria, Western European governments began totting up how much the dramatic events of the last few days will cost them in terms of new economic assistance and trading opportunities for both the Soviet Union and the emerging democracies of Eastern Europe.


The Accident That Started It All: The Focus of Protesters and a Grand Jury
The basic facts about the beginning of the unrest in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn this week are, for the most part, not in dispute: Shortly after 8 P.M. on Monday, a car glanced off another vehicle in an intersection, swerved and ran onto the sidewalk.
It hit a 7-year-old boy who was changing the chain on his bicycle and trapped him under the front bumper.
He died several hours later.
What happened next -- a confusing, rapid sequence of events -- is what is at issue on the streets.
And yesterday, a panel of 23 men and women began hearing testimony about the actions of the 22-year-old man in the driver's seat of the big Mercury station wagon, Yoseph Lisef.


Art in Review
'In and Out of the Light'
Step Gallery  66 Crosby Street  SoHo  Through Thursday
Two different sides of photography -- the descriptive and the allusive -- are given different degrees of emphasis in the two groups of work here.
Orah Moore's panoramic views of cattle-ranching in Montana lean toward the documentary, blending images of the mythic West of cowboys and cattle drives with a contemporary reality of pickups and tractors.
Ms.
Moore's wide-frame pictures evoke the wide vistas of the West and suggest the epic scale of Cinema scope westerns as well.
A photograph of a calf tied up for branding, seen through the coils of rope in a cowboy's hand, has the arty drama of a shot from one of Sergio Leone's spaghetti westerns.
Other pictures undercut the dramatic possibilities of the Wild West, emphasizing instead the more mundane aspects of the ranching business, spreading hay for cattle in winter, say, or cattle lined up in a corral.


CHRONICLE
One of the more unusual tributes flowing into Moscow after this week's aborted coup was an offer of free salmon.
"On behalf of the State of Alaska," Gov.
WALTER J. HICKEL said in a cable to the Soviet Embassy in Washington on Wednesday, "I would like to offer several million fresh salmon as a gift to the Soviet people, to celebrate the victory of democracy."


The Accident That Started It All: The Focus of Protesters and a Grand Jury
The basic facts about the beginning of the unrest in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn this week are, for the most part, not in dispute: Shortly after 8 P.M. on Monday, a car glanced off another vehicle in an intersection, swerved and ran onto the sidewalk.
It hit a 7-year-old boy who was changing the chain on his bicycle and trapped him under the front bumper.
He died several hours later.
What happened next -- a confusing, rapid sequence of events -- is what is at issue on the streets.
And yesterday, a panel of 23 men and women began hearing testimony about the actions of the 22-year-old man in the driver's seat of the big Mercury station wagon, Yoseph Lisef.


Dollar Is Mixed as Traders React to Events in U.S.S.R.
The dollar was mixed against major currencies yesterday as traders continued moving away from the American currency after the failure of the Soviet coup.
"The rapid disintegration of the coup led directly to a rapid deterioration of the dollar," said Frank Pusateri, a vice president with the Bank of Boston.
The dollar is generally considered a safe currency in times of international turmoil.


Tandy Net Slides 66.8% In Quarter
The Tandy Corporation, as expected, reported a sharp drop in earnings today for the final quarter of its 1991 fiscal year, but another maker of personal computers, the Dell Computer Corporation, said its profits nearly doubled.
Tandy, hit by slow sales at its Radio Shack stores, weak demand for personal computers and a one-time charge of $9.8 million against earnings, said net income fell 66.8 percent.


More Transit Patrols Set for U.S. Open
In light of the death of a Utah tourist last year, the number of transit police at some subway stations will be tripled for this year's U.S.
Open, a Transit Authority police spokesman said yesterday.
"We're trying to acknowledge the tragedy," said Sgt. Robert Valentino.


CHRONICLE
It was 11:48 P.M. last Monday when JOHN E. FROHNMAYER, the chairman of the National Endownment for the Arts, answered the phone at his home in Washington.
The caller was a young Soviet journalist, VERONIKA KHILCHEVSKY, whom he had met in Moscow last year.
Miss Khilchevsky, the 25-year-old daughter of YURI KHILCHEVSKY, a former First Deputy of the Ministry of Culture, was in the Russian Parliament building with President BORIS N. YELTSIN of Russia and wanted the telephone number of the White House, apparently for Mr.
Yeltsin, Mr.
Frohnmayer said yesterday.
He gave her the number.
The journalist had met PRESIDENT BUSH twice, once this year when Mr.
Frohnmayer arranged a courtesy call at the White House for her and her husband, ARTYOM BOROVIK, the author of "The Hidden War," about the Soviet Union's intervention in Afghanistan.


Many Communists Desert Party For Its Complicity in Failed Coup
The Communist Party, for decades the bulwark of the Soviet state, was put to a humiliating rout today, as party bosses and organizations across the country either defected or were locked out of their offices in mass retribution for the party's complicity in the coup attempt this week.
In Moscow today, Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian federated republic, ordered a halt to the publication of Pravda and other party newspapers, sealed the headquarters of the Central Committee and suspended the activities of the Russian republic's party branch while an investigation takes place into party support for the coup.


Stereotype Dies Hard
To the Editor:
My pleasure at seeing my words in print ("Liz Taylor's Great Society," Op-Ed, Aug. 11) was dimmed by the illustration that accompanied it.
Although I took pains to dismiss the traditional stereotype of blue-collar males, the illustration faithfully reproduces it: a pot-bellied man, drinking beer, watching television and saying, "Is dis da life or what?" You have confirmed a point I argued in my book "Fear of Falling": Offensive stereotypes of the working class are so tenacious they easily survive refutation.
BARBARA EHRENREICH Syosset, L.I., Aug. 13, 1991


Rap Music Star Is Indicted On Charges of Rape in Ohio
The star of the rap music group Run-DMC was indicted today on charges of raping a woman two weeks ago.
Don Rolla, an assistant Cuyahoga County prosecutor, said the authorities had issued a warrant for the arrest of the 25-year-old defendant, Joseph Simmons of New York, who is known in the group as Run.
According to the police report on the case, the woman told the authorities that Mr.
Simmons raped her on Aug. 9 in his hotel room, where she had gone to get his autograph after a Run-DMC concert.


Piniella Takes Steps On Suit by Umps
As he brought his Reds to New York to face the Mets and the umpire he accused of bias three weeks ago, Lou Piniella said yesterday that he did not consider the umpire, Gary Darling, biased.
But the Cincinnati manager made clear that while he may have used the wrong word in denouncing Darling after a controversial call Aug. 3, he regarded the call as just as wrong as ever and would vigorously defend himself against a defamation suit Darling and the umpires' union filed against him in Philadelphia.


How World Bank Promotes Development
To the Editor:
Lance Taylor, in his Aug. 5 letter on this year's World Development Report, claims that the World Bank is again sending out the naive message that liberalizing markets will promote development.


Music in Review
Beaux Arts Trio Avery Fisher Hall


Isuzu Gives Ad Account to Goodby
American Isuzu Motors Inc. yesterday awarded its estimated $90 million advertising account to Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco, in one of the summer's most closely followed reviews.
The assignment lifts the agency to $250 million in billings and places it firmly in the ranks of the nation's best-known midsize shops.
It is the latest in a string of account victories -- including the National Basketball Association, the Carl's Jr. fast-food chain and The New Yorker magazine -- that have doubled the size of Goodby, Berlin's billings in the last year.


Colleen Dewhurst, the Actress, Dies at 67
Colleen Dewhurst, one of America's foremost actresses, whose career on stage, screen and television spanned 40 years and earned her two Tony Awards and three Emmys, died Thursday night at her home in South Salem, N.Y.
She was 67 years old.
She died of cancer, said her son Alexander R. Scott, a theatrical stage manager and writer.


Corrections
A listing of candidate endorsements on Tuesday with an article about the New York City Council election misstated the position of the Majority Coalition for a New New York on Margaret Chin, in District 1 on the Lower East Side.
She has the approval of the coalition, but has not been endorsed.
An approval rating carries no financial support.


Game at Foxboro Gives Giants Chance to Fine-Tune
The Giants will end their preseason today with a few twists and turns.
Jeff Hostetler will make his debut as the newly anointed starting quarterback.
Jumbo Elliott will play, but may not start.
Lawrence Taylor and Erik Howard are banged up and will not play.
Bob Mrosko will play much of the game.
The setting is Foxboro (Mass.) Stadium, where the Giants will play the New England Patriots at 4 P.M.
The game will be carried in New York by Channel 11 and WNEW-AM.


Banking Lifts Charlotte, City on the Rise, to the Top
This is still the home of the Billy Graham Parkway, the Charlotte Motor Speedway and the Jim Bakker fraud trials.
Outsiders still confuse this city with Charleston to the south and Charlottesville to the north.
But when Charlotte woke up one day last month to find itself being touted as America's third largest banking center, displacing Los Angeles, it marked a historic juncture, not just for Charlotte but also for the South.
From its glistening skyline and button-down corporate culture to its blend of big-time religion and civic boosterism, Charlotte's rise is very much the story of the rebirth of the South.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about Senator Al Gore misstated his position on the Persian Gulf war.
Mr.
Gore voted in favor of the Congressional resolution authorizing the President to use force against Iraq.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Long Island Amateur Defeats Mickelson


Jaguar to Cut Jobs
Jaguar, the Ford Motor company's British luxury car maker, will cut about 2,000 jobs from its 10,500 work force in the coming months, sources close to the company said.
They said the company was discussing voluntary job reductions with trade unions and some compulsory staff cuts were "inevitable." Jaguar, bought by Ford in 1989, has been hard hit by the slump in car sales in Britain and the United States and has already cut 1,500 jobs this year.
Its work force is expected to be trimmed to below 8,500 from a peak of 12,835 in 1988.


U.S. Issues Plunge on Durables Data
An extremely strong reading on the economy sent the credit market reeling yesterday, and prices of Treasury securities plummeted in moderately active trading.
The reported 10.7 percent increase in durable goods orders for July, the largest monthly rise in nearly 21 years, caught analysts by surprise.
Even though much of the increase resulted from a big increase in aircraft orders, economists said the report strongly suggested the manufacturing sector was on the road to recovery.


The Day's Highlights
Sweeping Away the Old Order
SHAKEUP IN THE KREMLIN: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, yielding to the ascendancy of the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin, in the aftermath of the failed coup, replaced the Soviet Government.
Page 1.


New Soviet Opportunity For Phone Executive
Edward J. Cheramy, president of the IDB Communications Group, made handsome profits providing satellite communications during the Persian Gulf war.
Now, thanks to a ruling from the Federal Communications Commission, his eight-year-old company appears to have a valuable toehold in the market for telephone service between the United States and the post-coup Soviet Union.
Based in Culver City, Calif., IDB provides satellite connections for broadcasters, government agencies and corporations that need to relay video, data or voice to far-flung locations.
About two-thirds of its $101 million in


Witnesses Fault Police in Melee Over Party
Several witnesses said today that the Plainfield police gave no warning before using nightsticks and chemical spray on Thursday night to break up a neighborhood party held in memory of a man who died in February.
But city officials said the police were trying to quiet a large, disorderly party on Thursday night when the youths started pelting the officers with rocks, bottles and broken bricks.
One police officer was injured and 12 people were arrested, including one juvenile, the authorities said.


Review/Pop; Ziggy Marley Connects With White Teen-Agers
Anybody looking for an example of how voracious the consumption of black pop culture is among white teen-agers needed to go no farther than Ziggy Marley's show at Jones Beach Theater in Wantagh, L.I., on Thursday night.
The concert, which also featured the club singer Crystal Waters and the rapper Queen Latifah, took place before a mostly affluent, white and young audience.
The crowd knew all the appropriate hip-hop and reggae responses and clearly embraced all the anti-authoritarian gestures.
Queen Latifah got the crowd started.
Backed by a disk jockey, a drummer and three singers and dancers, she milked the audience, asking them to chant along.
Moving through typical hip-hop phrases like "throw your hands in the air, and move them like you just don't care," she had the audience dancing and cheering along.
When the disk jockey did some scratching and Latifah mimicked him with her body, the crowd erupted in cheers.
Latifah's raps, which throw together a bit of racial and sexual pride and a lot of self-assertion, seemed ideal for the young crowd, giving them a feeling of empowerment they might not otherwise have.


Andrettis Plan to Take Another Spin With Indy
The family that drives together thrives together.
That's what the father and son team of MARIO and MICHAEL ANDRETTI has decided.
The two announced in Denver yesterday that they would continue racing Indy cars together for at least one more year.
The younger Andretti has signed a one-year contract to continue driving with Newman-Haas Racing, while his 51-year-old father has made a two-year deal to remain with the team operated by a Chicago businessman, CARL HAAS, and the actor PAUL NEWMAN.


Madagascar Head Loosens Grip In Attempt to Defuse Opposition
Battling an opposition movement trying to remove him from office, Madagascar's President, Didier Ratsiraka, has given his Prime Minister full powers to form a new, broad-based government.
Prime Minister Guy Willy Razanamasy, appointed two weeks ago, said Thursday night that Mr.
Ratsiraka had given him full powers to form a government and "to put the country together again, normalize the situation and install democracy."


How Bubka Soared Up, Up, Then Away
Could it be that after 23 years, the oldest record in track and field, Bob Beamon's long jump of 29 feet 2 1/2 inches, is ready to fall?
Probably not.
Unless, of course, Sergei Bubka of the Soviet Union does it.
Never mind that he does vertically what Beamon did horizontally.
As the world championships open on Saturday, with nearly 1,700 athletes from almost 170 countries, Bubka has arrived as not just the sport's dominant performer of the year, having set eight world records in the pole vault since February, but now a character almost larger than life for the compelling circumstances of his arrival.


Miami Bank To Revamp
The Southeast Banking Corporation, which lost 20 percent of its deposits in the first half of 1991, said today that it was preparing a recapitalization plan to submit to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporaiton.
A spokeswoman said Southeast was preparing a plan similar to the one it submitted two weeks ago to the Federal Reserve and Federal regulators.


Colleen Dewhurst, the Actress, Dies at 67
Colleen Dewhurst, one of America's foremost actresses, whose career on stage, screen and television spanned 40 years and earned her two Tony Awards and three Emmys, died Thursday night at her home in South Salem, N.Y.
She was 67 years old.
She died of cancer, said her son Alexander R. Scott, a theatrical stage manager and writer.


Dismissal Urged
A Federal magistrate recommended yesterday that a lawsuit by the former owner of the New England Patriots, WILLIAM SULLIVAN Jr., against the N.F.L. and 21 of its teams be thrown out on technical grounds.
Sullivan charged in the suit, filed in United States District Court in Providence in May, that the league and the teams had conspired against his plans to sell part of the franchise.
But United States Magistrate TIMOTHY M. BOUDEWYNS said the suit did not belong in Federal court in Rhode Island.
The Patriots play their games in Foxboro, Mass., less than 20 miles from Providence, and conduct training camp at Bryant College in Smithfield, R.I. (AP)


Bridge
A most unusual event was played in Albany on Wednesday and Thursday.
Twelve famous players who have among them won many national and international titles competed in an exhibition individual contest.
The final standings were: Zia Mahmood and Michael Rosenberg tied for first place with 130 imps; Bob Hamman in third place with 125 imps; Kathie Wei in fourth place with 118 imps; Dorothy Truscott in fifth place with 103 imps, and Sidney Lazard in sixth place with 97 imps.
The other competitors were: Victor Mitchell, Michael Lawrence, Ron Andersen, Sabine Zenkel, Lynn Deas and Bill Root.


Ciba-Geigy Profits Up
Ciba-Geigy A.G., the drug and chemical conglomerate, said today that its earnings rose in the first half of this year and its net operating profit in the whole of 1991 would improve from last year's 1.03 billion Swiss francs, or $682 million.
"Sales performance in the first quarter, the improvements in productivity and the development of exchange rates encourage us to make the statement that the profit for 1991 is expected to exceed that of the previous year," the company said in a statement.


Protest, In Peace; Pro-life, Pro-law
I am pro-life.
My hope and my prayer is that Wichita's expression of support for the right to life for unborn babies will be peaceful, prayerful and united in purpose.
As a civilized society, we must protect human life.
And, in a civilized state, we must respect our laws.
Be diligent in voicing your beliefs.
But please, do not endanger your safety or the safety of others.
Please, work within the law.


Polish Cardinal Regrets His Remarks
In a statement aimed at healing a breach with the Jewish community before coming to the United States, Josef Cardinal Glemp, the Roman Catholic Primate of Poland, expressed regret yesterday for suggesting in August 1989 that Jewish demonstrators who scaled the walls of a convent at the Auschwitz concentration camp site had intended to harm the nuns.
Cardinal Glemp also repeated condemnations of anti-Semitism made before and after the homily, saying "anti-Semitism is evil and is contrary to the spirit of the Gospel."


Western Union Check Venture
Western Union Financial Services Inc. announced a joint venture with Thomas Nix Distributor to orm a nationwide check cashing business under the Western Union name.
Nix owns Nix Check Cashing, which operates retail check cashing outlets throughout Southern California.


To Sell or Not to Sell Art? Reading, Pa., Is Divided
Many art historians believe "Cotopaxi," Frederic Edwin Church's Luminist depiction of an Ecuadoran volcano, was intended as an allegory for the Civil War.
Now, one of five extant versions of the oil painting is at the heart of a dispute that has left residents of this former mill town some 50 miles northwest of Philadelphia divided into two emotional camps.
At issue is a proposal by the Reading School District, which owns and operates the Reading Public Museum and Art Gallery, to sell off "Cotopaxi" and 25 other paintings from its permanent collection.
The goal is to establish an endowment without which, school district members say, the museum may have to close.


A Hauler Pays Price In Theft Of Buyers
In the rough-and-tumble world of New York City garbage hauling, muscling in on the competition's customers is not unheard of.
But Michael Vulpis, a longtime private hauler, gave new meaning to the practice recently when he tried to steal customers from a company owned by the Federal Government, court records show.
Mr.
Vulpis also chose a particularly poor time to start wooing customers from the business -- since the Government is trying to find a buyer to take it off its hands.


Chief Legal Counsel Quits Salomon Under Pressure
The Salomon Brothers scandal has ended another executive's career with the firm.
Donald M. Feuerstein, the firm's chief legal counsel, resigned yesterday under pressure from Warren E. Buffett, the new chairman and chief executive.


Gorbachev's Speech to Russians: 'A Major Regrouping of Political Forces'
Following is a transcript of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's speech and question-and-answer session today at the Parliament of the Russian republic, as translated by CNN.
President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia contributed to the presentation and took part in the session that followed.


The 3 New Top Security Appointees
Vadim V. Bakatin Chairman of K.G.B.


Two Convicted Killers Are Put to Death in Virginia and Missouri
Two convicted killers were put to death late Thursday night and early Friday morning after the United States Supreme Court refused to consider their last appeals.
In Virginia, Derick Lynn Peterson, 30 years old, convicted of killing a grocery store manager during a robbery in 1982, was executed shortly after 11 P.M.
Thursday


Inquiry Is Delayed by U.S. On China's Import Barriers
The Bush Administration announced today that instead of starting an immediate investigation that could lead to mandatory trade sanctions next year, the United States will give China a second chance to reduce its barriers to imports.
In a successful effort last month to limit Congressional opposition to the unconditional renewal of China's access to the American market, the Administration told the Senate that it would begin such an investigation if talks this month did not result in substantial progress.


Police Brace For Protest In Brooklyn
A huge police presence in the racially troubled Crown Heights section of Brooklyn appeared to have brought a measure of calm yesterday.
But Mayor David N. Dinkins failed in an apparent effort to persuade black leaders to call off a march into the neighborhood today, the Jewish Sabbath.
The Mayor and an entourage of his top aides traveled to Bedford-Stuyvesant last night for a rare meeting with the Rev.
Al Sharpton and the lawyer Alton H.  Maddox Jr., who had called the march.
It could not have been comfortable; the Mayor has a wary relationship with the flamboyant Mr.
Sharpton, who has, over the years, said many unkind things about Mr.
Dinkins.


News Summary
After the Coup 4-9
The aftermath of the attempted coup unleashed a shock wave that left the Communist Party reeling in retreat and President Mikhail Gorbachev yielding to the ascendancy of the Russian president, Boris Yeltsin.
Page 1


Bergner Stores Chain In Bankruptcy Filing
Citing its high debt and declining sales, P. A. Bergner &amp; Company, which operates the Carson Pirie Scott, Bergner's and Boston Store department stores in the Midwest, filed yesterday for protection under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
"The decision to file for Chapter 11 was a difficult and painful one," said Stanton J. Bluestone, Bergner's president and chief operating officer.
"Reorganization, however, is not an end but a beginning."


Britain to Assemble Group of 7 for Soviet Aid Talks
Prime Minister John Major will convene senior officials of seven leading industrial nations next week to discuss what might be done to further economic and political reform in the Soviet Union, a spokesman for Mr.
Major said today.
Mr.
Major called the meeting after the failure of the coup by Soviet hard-liners opposed to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Mr.
Major is now chairman of the Group of Seven, which includes the United States, Canada, Japan, Germany, France, Italy and Britain.


Double-Strength Drug Gets a Second Look
Behind a new study questioning the safety of some asthma drugs used by millions of Americans lies a curious series of events, linking science and business, that stretch from New Zealand to Germany to North America.
The study, conducted in Canada and paid for by Boehringer Ingelheim G.m.b.H. of Germany, suggests that excessive use of the most widely prescribed asthma drugs, beta-2 agonists, may increase the risk of fatal asthma attacks.
But the researchers said more study was needed to learn if the drugs, which are typically sold in inhalers, caused the attacks or if their increased use was simply an indicator of worsening asthma and did not directly cause the deaths.


India Pushes Investment
India has set up a Foreign Investment Promotion Board to lure multinational companies to India, a Government official said today.
The board includes the principal secretary of the prime minister, the secretaries of commerce and finance, and the secretary of industrial development.


Fighting May Unravel Yugoslav Truce
The Yugoslav federal presidency's commission for monitoring an all-but-disintegrated cease-fire in the war between rebel Serbs and Croatian Government forces neared complete breakdown today as the warring sides prepared for an escalation in the fighting.
"More crisis points have arisen since the cease-fire decision than there were before it," said the commission's spokesman, Irfan Ajanovic.
"In the 20-day cease-fire, there have been about 200 violations, more than 70 people have perished and communications and bridges have been destroyed."


Phone Call, Then a Suicide
A trick telephone call helped officials find Boris K. Pugo, the Interior Minister who killed himself rather than face arrest for his part in the coup, Grigory A. Yavlinsky, the prominent liberal economist, said today.
"It was like something out of Hitchcock," Mr.
Yavlinksy said in an interview at his office.


Religion Notes
Rejoicing Over Failure
The leaders of Christian and Jewish organizations rejoiced this week in the failure of the coup in the Soviet Union, with President Bush and the Russian Orthodox Patriarch, Aleksy II, being singled out for special praise.


Patents; Test To Detect Herpes In Farm Animals
The Upjohn Company received two patents this week involving a new test, developed through genetic engineering, to detect in farm animals a deadly and contagious herpes virus known as "pseudorabies."
Government regulations require that animals infected with the virus be quarantined, but company officials said that previously developed tests were unable to distinguish between infected animals and those that had been vaccinated with a modified, harmless form of the virus.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on the Law page yesterday about the increased use of computers in court reporting for the deaf referred incompletely to the woman who explained the difference between this service and sign-language interpretation.
She is Sarah Geer, a lawyer with the National Center for the Law and the Deaf in Washington.


Saratoga Winding Down
The experimental five-week season at Saratoga Race Course will close with flourishes in the next three days with major tests for 2-year-old stars and the final appearance here for Housebuster, the sprinting champion, who will end his racing career in November.
The three-day countdown will begin Saturday with the Hopeful, one of the nation's major tests for juvenile colts.
The race confronts 2-year-old colts with the sternest test of their young careers, six and a half furlongs against the best of the juvenile class.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
Stock prices soared to new heights on the heels of a surprisingly robust durable goods report.
The Dow vaulted to a record 3,040.25, up 32.87 for the day and 72.23 for the week.
While Wednesday's huge run-up, which put the Dow within striking range of the summit, was Wall Street's sigh of relief at the turn of Soviet events, this rally was clearly built on the strength of domestic data.  [ 39. ]


Moderate Drinking Cuts Risk Of Heart Disease, Study Says
In one of the most extensive reports yet on the health benefits of moderate drinking, scientists say that one or two drinks a day can substantially cut the risk of heart disease.
The new study not only confirms previous findings that suggested alcohol has positive effects on the body when taken in sensible amounts, but it also eliminates some of the uncertainties that made past studies open to skepticism and even angry dismissal.


Philippa Benson, A Student, Weds
Philippa Jane Benson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Guy K. Benson of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., was married yesterday to Benjamin Xu, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ji-kuang Xu of Shanghai.
The Rev.
Wayne Peck, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Heinz Memorial Chapel at the University of Pittsburgh.
Ms.
Benson-Xu, 33 years old, graduated from Oberlin College and received a master's degree in English from Carnegie Mellon University, where she is studying for a doctorate in rhetoric.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president of Trident Films Inc., a documentary producer in New York.
Her mother, Philippa Day Benson, also retired, was a correspondent in New York for the Australian Consolidated Press.


Susan Wheeler Is Wed to Dr. Philip Furmanski
Susan Wheeler, a press officer at New York University, and Dr.
Philip Furmanski, the chairman of the biology department at N.Y.U., were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of St.
Luke's in the Fields in New York by the Rev.
Ledlie Laughlin.
The bride, 36 years old, is keeping her name.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ray Barton Wheeler of New Boston, N.H.
She is a poet and contributes to American and European poetry magazines.
She is a graduate of Bennington College.


HE FORCES VAST GORBACHEV SHAKE-UP; ICONS ARE TOPPLED
From late afternoon well into the evening, the people of this capital city did something they said they had never done -- they flocked to Communist Party headquarters.
Then they stood there and laughed.
They stood in a large arc that constantly renewed itself as men, women and children came and went and stared and pointed at an empty marble pedestal.
Until early today, a larger-than-life bronze statue of Lenin had stood there in the familiar rhetorical pose, opposite the entrance to the modern headquarters building.


CHRONICLE
"Americans believe that crime is increasing, and they can't get enough information about it," said T. E. D. KLEIN, a mystery writer and the editor of Crimebeat magazine, whose first issue will appear on newsstands Tuesday.
The 62-page magazine, priced at $2.50, will include a tour of the "10 most dangerous streets" in the United States, Mr.
Klein said.


Ruddy King David
To the Editor:
Prof.
William A. Percy's statement that "we don't know the skin color of King David" ("About Hannibal's Color, No One Really Knows," letter, Aug. 10) should be corrected.
Our main source of information on King David is the Hebrew Bible, and there it is stated that his skin color was "ruddy" (I Samuel 16:12).


40 Pounds of Heroin Seized at Newark
United States Customs agents at Newark International Airport yesterday reported finding 40 pounds of heroin in the luggage of two women arriving from Sweden.
They said it was a record heroin seizure at the airport.
Judy Merle Corbin, 42 years old, of Atlanta, and her sister, Sandra Sue Corbin, 41, of Kansas City, Mo., were ordered held without bail on a charge of unlawful importation of heroin, a Customs spokesman, Neil Pitagno, said.
Authorities said they found the drugs on Thursday hidden in a false-sided suitcase and bag the women were carrying when they arrived on an SAS flight from Stockholm.


Jamaica's Debt Cut by U.S.
American and Jamaican officials signed an agreement today that cancels $217 million of Jamaica's debt with Washington and reschedules $54 million under much easier terms.
Deputy Treasury Secretary John Robson signed the agreement with Jamaica's Foreign Minister, David Coore.


CHRONICLE
The flying Cardinal of Los Angeles doesn't fly anymore.
In February 1989, ROGER MAHONY, head of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles and a longtime recreational helicopter pilot, was given a used $400,000 jet helicopter by church members to travel around his sprawling three-county archdiocese.
But last June, the 55-year-old Archbishop was named a cardinal, and with the scarlet robes came concern from the Vatican that more traditional forms of travel might better suit his exalted position.
He was urged to stop flying.
"With his new and increasing responsibilities he would not have had time to keep up with advances in aviation," the Rev.
Gregory Coiro, a spokesman for the archdiocese said yesterday.
He added that the Los Angeles area's hilly terrain was difficult for helicopter flying.
So the helicopter was sold this week, Father Coiro said, adding that he had no information on the buyer or the price.
While several other bishops fly fixed-wing planes, Cardinal Mahony had the distinction of being the only helicopter-flying cardinal, the spokesman said.


A Public Apartment Tower May Now Be a Private One
A state appeals court has ruled that New York City can no longer block Columbus Park Towers on the West Side of Manhattan from withdrawing from a state-subsidized middle-income housing program and converting to a private cooperative apartment project.
In a 3-to-2 ruling on Thursday, the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court said the city was required to approve the conversion, even though it opposed it.


INSIDE
Crown Heights Is Calmer; Sharpton to March Today
A huge police presence quieted the racially troubled Brooklyn neighborhood, but the Mayor failed to head off a march today by black groups.
Police officials conceded that they had been poorly prepared initially to deal with the disturbances.
Page 27.
A Strong Economic Sign
New factory orders for durable goods leaped 10.7 percent in July, the biggest gain in nearly 21 years, the Government said.
Economists saw danger lessening that the economy might slip back into recession.
Page 39.
Jim Bakker's Sentence Cut
The former television evangelist, whose 45-year prison term for fraud was thrown out by an appeals court, was sentenced to 18 years.
Page 10.
F.B.I.
Acts in Racial Case
The Federal Bureau of Investigation said it had disciplined eight employees for their roles in the racial harassment of a black agent.
Page 11.
Hartford Budget Aftermath
The day after an income tax was finally adopted in Connecticut, politicians hunkered down to weather the expected political storm.
Page 27.


Troubling Question: Whose Finger Was on Nuclear Trigger?
Bush Administration officials sought today to play down reports that President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had lost control of Soviet nuclear forces during this week's coup, but they expressed some concerns about the long-term stability of Moscow's vast nuclear arsenal.
The Pentagon and United States intelligence agencies have not been able to confirm a Washington Post report that quoted Vladimir Lysenko, a Russian legislator.
The report said Mr.
Lysenko asserted that when he and other legislators met Mr.
Gorbachev on Wednesday, the Soviet leader said that disloyal K.G.B. officials had seized the presidential briefcase that contained the codes to initiate orders to use nuclear weapons.


2 Airlines Join In Fare Curbs
Many of the nation's leading airlines have eliminated the three-day advance purchase restrictions that accompany most special discount fares.
The actions make it more difficult for business travelers to take advantage of such fares.
American Airlines and Delta Air Lines said yesterday that beginning Sept. 4 they would require a seven-day advance purchase, rather than three days, for the special discount fares.
Spokesmen for both companies said 20 percent discounts from full coach fares remained the same.
There are no other restrictions on the fare.


Radicals' Proud Moment
Boris N. Yeltsin and his minions were riding high on their victory today, grilling a humbled Mikhail S. Gorbachev, shaping the composition of the next Government, shutting down hostile newspapers and suspending the Russian Communist Party.
But even as they savored the spoils of a decisive victory over a system that had resisted them so long, it was far from clear that their ascendance would translate into the radical transformation of Soviet society that has been their goal.


MORE ON THE COUP
Political shock wave: a virtual countercoup against Communism. 4  After the euphoria of tearing down, perils of rebuilding. 5  Gorbachev and Yeltsin, speaking and sparring in Russia's Parliament: a transcript. 6-7  In the Baltic republics, lighting bonfires to annexation. 8  In the West, trying to keep pace with the changes. 9


WITH CRISIS EASED, STRAUSS IS LEAVING
Ambassador Robert Strauss of the United States, who rushed to the Soviet Union at the height of coup, said today that he would return home next week and present his credentials in Moscow in September as originally planned.
Mr.
Strauss refused to present his credentials to the hard-line coup government after arriving here on Wednesday and has not formally taken his post.


Taxing Small Food Items Hurts the Poor
To the Editor:
Your article on California's efforts to determine whether a food product is a food and not taxable, or a snack and therefore taxable ("California Tax Test: Is It Snack or Food?", front page, Aug. 3) treated the issue humorously, as if it were only steps away from determining how many angels dance on the head of a pin.


Yesterday's Hero
Their aims were reactionary and their methods brutal and inept, but the leaders of the failed coup in the Soviet Union were right: Mikhail Gorbachev has outlived his time and has to go -- for his own sake as well as his country's.
Ever since launching democratization, Mr.
Gorbachev has insisted that it was but a means to perfecting a socialism in whose name Lenin made the 1917 revolution.
He also insisted on appointing to high office fellow Communists whose allegiance to democracy was at best questionable.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
American Express Bank Ltd., New York, part of American Express Co., named Craig P. Dinsell executive director and head of human resources. *
Capital Credit Corp., Silver Spring, Md., a collection agency subsidiary of Union Corp., named William B. Hewitt chairman and chief executive.


Less Costly Light and Coolness, Too
If your air-conditioning bills are too high or your cooling system cannot keep up with hot days, consider changing light bulbs.
Utilities have long been recommending compact fluorescent light bulbs, because they give the same light as standard incandescent light bulbs for one-quarter the electricity or less.


Wassall-DAP Deal
Wassall, a British maker of metal and plastic bottle closures, office furniture and travel goods, said it had agreed to buy DAP Inc., a United States building products company, from the USG Corporation for $90 million.
Wassall said DAP was being sold in connection with a debt restructuring program by USG announced in December.
Wassal said its six-month pretax profit to June 30 was $:3.12 million, or about $5.3 million, up from $:3.05 million, or about $5.2 million, a year earlier.


Letter: On Highway Safety; Air Bags Are Proving Their Worth
To the Editor:
"Air Bags for All Cars," by Joan Claybrook and Benjamin Kelley (Op-Ed, July 30), attacks Jerry Curry, Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, and the agency's record of accomplishment since Ms.
Claybrook left that office.
Mr.
Curry has done an outstanding job in saving lives and making our country's highways safe for ourselves and our children.
He is an outstanding administrator.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.32
5.69
8.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.38
5.30
7.46
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.46
5.31
7.48
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.68
7.57
8.90
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.12
8.04
9.15
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.10
9.03
10.12
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.98
6.97
7.76
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers
**Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer
Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Colleen Dewhurst, the Actress, Dies at 67
Colleen Dewhurst, one of America's foremost actresses, whose career on stage, screen and television spanned 40 years and earned her two Tony Awards and three Emmys, died Thursday night at her home in South Salem, N.Y.
She was 67 years old.
She died of cancer, said her son Alexander R. Scott, a theatrical stage manager and writer.


Long to File Appeal
The National Football League commissioner, PAUL TAGLIABUE plans to hear TERRY LONG's appeal of his positive steroids test Wednesday in New York, according to the lawyer for the Steelers' guard.
Attorney GEORGE SAUNDERS said he expected Tagliabue to rule on the appeal before the Steelers' Sept. 1 season opener against the Chargers.


Source of Jobs in 80's Fizzles in 90's
As the economy limps out of a recession, a spurt of layoffs, hiring freezes and corporate mergers is hitting some of the biggest engines of the 80's expansion: service companies, government and high-tech manufacturing.
The job dearth is also a portent that the 90's may produce new jobs at the slowest rate since the 1950's, say economists at Data Resources/McGraw-Hill.


Rose Raising Brows
Business talks between PETE ROSE and a Virginia developer whose company was found guilty of gambling have raised questions about whether the fallen baseball star violated probation.
United States Probation Officer JOHN COLE told The Palm Beach Post that he was unaware of Rose's conversations with the developer, EDWARD S. GARCIA Sr., about opening a restaurant in a proposed waterfront project on land owned by Garcia in Boynton Beach, Fla.
Rose has been on a one-year probation after serving a five-month sentence for filing false tax returns.
According to the conditions spelled out in his release, Rose is not to "associate with any person convicted of a felony unless granted permission to do so by the probation officer."


U.S. Returns 2 Fraternity Houses Seized in a Drug Raid in Virginia
Defending its anti-drug policies but saying it was willing to settle drug cases in a "novel" manner, the Federal Government today returned two of three fraternity houses it seized last spring during a drug raid at the University of Virginia in Charlottesville.
The return of the houses came just as students were beginning to return to the university founded by Thomas Jefferson and followed trials in which five of the 13 arrested during the raid have been found guilty of drug trafficking and sentenced to up to 13 months in prison.


Devices That Try to Outwit Shoplifters
Now you see them, now you don't.
To protect their merchandise from shoplifters, retailers are using increasingly sophisticated security devices.
Some are covert and designed to catch thieves; others are overt and designed to deter theft.
"One of the things that promotes shoplifting is the belief that it is not a consumer's problem," said Richard Feinberg, director of the Retail Institute at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Ind.
"But part of the price you pay for a suit is the cost to the store in dealing with shoplifting."


A Stumbling Start in Tokyo
The world track and field championships began today in inauspicious fashion, as the leaders in the last lap of the men's 20-kilometer walk just missed crashing into the starting blocks being used for the first round of the men's 100 meters.
A path was cleared quickly enough, shearing several meters off the intended course, and Maurizio Damilano of Italy, the defending champion, became the first gold medalist in what was still regarded as a meet record of 1 hour 19 minutes 37 seconds.
But he was assisted in no small manner by Mikhail Shchennikov of the Soviet Union, who misjudged the finish line.


Traffic Alert
Pakistan Day Parade: Lexington Avenue will be closed tomorrow between 26th and 45th Streets from 1 to 3 P.M.
Pakistan Independence Fair: Madison Avenue between 23d and 26th Streets will be closed tomorrow from 3 to 9 P.M.


Oil Rig Count Drops
The number of working oil and gas rigs in the United States continued its seasonal decline this week, dropping by five, Baker Hughes Inc. said today.
The Houston-based oilfield tool maker reported 792 rigs were operating nationally, 195 fewer than the 987 working a year ago at this time.


Photo of Iraqi Supergun Released By U.N.


Home Voice Mail Doesn't Guarantee Privacy
To the Editor:
"Home Voice Mail: Privacy, but at a Price" (Consumer's World, Aug. 3), on home voice mail as offered by some regional phone companies, fails to probe.
In some ways home voice mail may lessen privacy, and under appropriate conditions, answering machines can provide privacy.


Another Early Evening For Viola
There were no boos at Shea Stadium last night when Bud Harrelson emerged from the dugout and marched to the mound to change pitchers.
There were, instead, cheers, although they were offered more in mockery than mercy.
Frank Viola, in his latest misadventure in what has become an absolute stagger through the second half of the season, last night was shredded by the Reds, his night splintered in an explosion of singles, doubles and a home run.


Rise in Durable Orders Is Steepest in 21 Years
New orders to factories for long-lasting goods leaped 10.7 percent in July, the biggest increase in nearly 21 years, the Commerce Department said today.
The orders for durable goods are a leading but erratic indicator of the nation's investment spending and industrial production.
Economists cautiously greeted today's unexpectedly strong increase as an indication that the economy may be in less danger of slipping back into a recession only a few months after it began growing again.


Your Taxes; S Corporations Get I.R.S. Break
Owners of closely held businesses and their tax advisers are cheering because the Internal Revenue Service has just done an unusual about-face, or nearly so.
Last October the I.R.S. proposed tough new regulations for S corporations, a popular form of small-business organization because profits flow directly to the owners and are taxable at personal, rather than corporate, rates.
The proposals, which were to have been applied retroactively, put a strict interpretation on Subchapter S of the internal revenue code and threatened loss of S corporation status to those found in violation.


Patents; Breeding High-Volume Dairy Cows
Researchers at the University of Wisconsin won a patent this week on a genetic test designed to help breed cows that produce more milk, as well as milk with better cheese-making characteristics.
Invented to help breeders raise animals more selectively, the test identifies a genetic "marker" in a particular line of Holstein cows that indicates an inherited superiority in milk production.
The patterns appear in both male and female animals, and the test is intended primarily to determine which bulls can sire high-volume dairy cows.


2d Arrest in Polish Scandal
A scandal in Poland's foreign-debt agency widened today with the second arrest in two days of an official who helped run the fund.
Meanwhile, the man credited with negotiating a reduction in the nation's debt was dismissed as supervisor of the agency, which pays the interest on Poland's $46 billion foreign debt.


Yeltsin Orders Pravda and 5 Papers Suspended
President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic today ordered the suspension of Pravda and five other Communist Party newspapers and the seizure of their property on Russian territory.
A decree also ordered the dismissal of the head of the official Soviet press agency Tass, Lev N. Spiridonov, for spreading "disinformation" to the nation and the world.


Police Official Is Critical of Lack of Preparation
A top New York City police official said yesterday that the department failed to respond quickly enough to the violence in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn this week.
The official, Chief of Patrol Mario A. Selvaggi, said the police did not have enough manpower on the streets of the torn Brooklyn neighborhood early in the week and that there was no coherent plan to contain the disturbance until Thursday.


United Route Bid
United Airlines said it had applied for authority to fly daily service between Orlando, Fla. and the Brazilian cities of Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo.
It also asked the Department of Transportation for permission to fly daily Orlando-Mexico City flights, beginning in December.
"Expansion to Latin America is an essential part of United's international growth strategy," said Stephen M. Wolf, the chairman of United.
United, owned by the UAL Corporation, proposed phasing in its Latin American service in early 1992, with daily service by Jan. 1, 1993.


PROVINCES RUMBLE WITH COUP ECHOES
Thousands of people in the Baltic republics of Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania commemorated the annexation of their nations by the Soviet Union today with bonfires in their capitals and on a road linking the three.
The trail of fire on a 360-mile road, marking the 52d anniversary of the Hitler-Stalin agreement that resulted in the annexations, came as Baltic residents continued protests set off in the wake of the failed coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
The repercussions of the coup also shook Soviet republics from Central Asia to the Caucasus.


Woman Escapes Sinking Car
A 48-year-old Stamford woman escaped unharmed after accidentally driving her BMW into Long Island Sound.
The police and witnesses said Kathleen Rhinesmith climbed out of the car window as it sank in an inlet off the sound about 8 P.M.
As she was reaching through her car window into the mailbox at the end of her driveway, witnesses said, her foot slipped, stepping on the accelerator.
The gray BMW went over the curb and across the sidewalk, plowing through shrubs and a wooden railing before sliding down a hill, flipping over as it plunged into the sound.


Tax War, the Sequel, May Play in Connecticut
Almost the only sounds in the Capitol today, finally still after its 53-day budget siege, were the first threats of Election-Day revenge against legislators who voted for a Connecticut income tax.
Those noises echo the great protest of 1971, when angry voters forced the repeal of a newly enacted income tax.
In the weeks before smaller paychecks end the abstract nature of this debate and possibly amplify the rumblings, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and others bound to the tax can only hope that the storm will be swift in passing and that events will prove them right.


Taylors Vs. Yanks: 9th Inning
Gene Michael met secretly with Brien Taylor and his mother two days ago in North Carolina, but the Yankees' general manager said today that he did not make progress in his attempt to sign baseball's No. 1 draft pick and that the club might not be able to sign him at all.
The Taylor family has set Sunday as the deadline for reaching agreement with Brien; otherwise, the 19-year-old pitcher will attend junior college and cease talking to the Yankees.


Katheryn Manchee, Historian, 86
Katheryn Hait Dorflinger Manchee, a historian and lecturer whose specialty was glass, died on Wednesday in North Naples Hospital in Naples, Fla.
She was 86 years old.
She died of cardiac arrest, said her daughter, June Dorflinger Hardy.


The Poses of Summer


As Power Returns, L.I. Seeks Tourists
Virtually all the power lost during Hurricane Bob was restored to restaurants, motels, inns and private homes on Long Island yesterday, and now officials are trying to restore tourism as well.
The return of electricity had Long Island officials getting out the word to vacationers that all was well and it was time to take advantage of the last two weeks of summer.


Review/Rock; A 16-Year-Old Guitarist With a Jimi Hendrix Tone
Eric Gales, a 16-year-old guitarist who brought his Memphis-based band to the Marquee on Wednesday night, doesn't exactly avoid comparisons to Jimi Hendrix.
He plays a left-handed Stratocaster, leads a power trio and knows how to use a wah-wah pedal and wide vibrato to make notes moan and wail.
He also knows how to approximate Hendrix's thick, curdled tone.
With Hubert Crawford Jr.'s explosive drumming behind him, there are moments when the Eric Gales Band re-creates the timbre of the Jimi Hendrix Experience.
But only moments.
Mr.
Gales's older brother Eugene writes the band's songs, sings them and plays bass, and his allegiance is to the riff-rock that Hendrix bequeathed to band leaders like Robin Trower.
On stage, Eugene Gales's lyrics, which veer between gospel optimism and lovers' quarrels, and his serviceable melodies are buried in the stomp and crunch of the band; they're a backdrop to Eric Gales's guitar.
During the set, the young guitarist's limits became as noticeable as his gifts.


3 Are Accused Of Kickbacks
Federal prosecutors have accused three former savings and loan executives of scheming to divert $7 million in loan money intended for real estate deals to cover debts and pay themselves kickbacks.
The charges against the former officers of the Universal Savings Association of Houston added 12 conspiracy, fraud and tax counts to an indictment that already charged two borrowers with illegally profiting from real estate loans.


Havana Silent But Gives News
The Cuban Government maintained its official silence today on the reinstatement of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev but continued to publish news agency reports.
It was not known whether Fidel Castro, head of both the Cuban Government and Communist Party, had sent messages to Mr.
Gorbachev since his return to power.


Public &amp; Private; Three-Letter Word
They were married a week ago today.
Her dress was white lace; he wore his Army uniform.
They met last year, when her best friend was dating his.
In the wedding pictures, they are both handsome people.
She is white; he is black.
Those facts seemed unimportant to both of them until the week before the wedding.
After the minister met the groom he told them that, no matter what the invitations said, they would not be wed at the Wesleyan Church.
"He said it was nothing personal with Brian," said the former Angie Harms, who became Angie Storm after the couple found an eleventh-hour clergyman.
"He just said he would never perform an interracial marriage. He said, 'Angie didn't tell me what the situation was.' I didn't think there was a situation."


To Save Its Economy, Brazil Plans to Amend Constitution
Brazil's Government, desperate to stave off fiscal collapse and runaway inflation, wants radical changes to the Constitution to rein in spending, raise taxes and encourage investment.
The changes, detailed by Economy Minister Marcilio Margues Moreira late Thursday, would scrap public employees' right to a job for life, end the monopoly of the state telephone holding company Telebras and cut the amount that state governments can spend.


About New York
The homeless, the panhandlers, the ill, the forever lost -- all God's most precious children -- were gathered at the Bowery Mission to attend a church service in return for a free meal afterward.
They reeked of too few baths, too much whisky, too many years on the pavement.
Without being told, they matter-of-factly dropped their bags -- some paper, some plastic, some little more than rags -- behind the last pew.
They stumbled to sit down, then began waiting -- whether for Jesus or dinner or eternity wasn't apparent.
They had been here before.


Review/Film; Buddy Trip With Rourke And Johnson
"Harley Davidson and the Marlboro Man" is an old-fashioned buddy adventure updated to the year 1996, possibly to distance it still further from "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid," which it calls up without profit to itself.
The film opened at theaters here yesterday.
Mickey Rourke, sporting a punkish haircut, one earring and a cross around his neck, is nicknamed Harley Davidson because he rides one.
Don Johnson also rides a Harley, but he's nicknamed the Marlboro Man.
He affects the look of a cowboy from his hat down to his boots, and always has a cigarette in his mouth.


Dr. Chassin: Promising, Untested
Just when public and private funding began to run dry in the 1980's, the twin epidemics of AIDS and drug abuse put costly new pressures on New York's health care system.
That made a firm grasp of economics and regulation essential to the job of state health commissioner.
On that ground, Dr.
Mark Chassin, Governor Cuomo's choice to take over the job now, looks well qualified.
His capacity to fill the job's political dimension remains to be tested.


Cubans' Hostages Appear to Be Well
As the hostage siege at the Federal correctional center here entered its third day, prison officials today continued a policy of not disclosing what is happening inside, other than to say that contact had been made with some of the hostages held by Cuban detainees and that they appeared well.
Prison officials said arrangements had been made for some of the hostages to talk by telephone with relatives who had gathered in a chapel at the 200-acre prison and just several hundred yards from the cellblock unit that was seized Wednesday by inmates about to be deported to Cuba.


F.B.I. Disciplines 8 Workers In Racial Harassment Case
The Federal Bureau of Investigation said today that it had disciplined eight employees for their roles in the harassment of a black agent in a case that has come to symbolize the racial bitterness in the agency.
Two field agents and six managers, including five at the bureau's headquarters, were disciplined, the agency said in a statement.
In the most severe punishment, an agent in the F.B.I.'s Chicago field office was suspended for 21 days without pay.
The supervisors received letters of censure, oral reprimands or were ordered to undergo cultural awareness training.
The other agent received a letter of censure.


Patents; A Camouflage Paint That Easily Washes Off
A paint company in Cortland, N.Y., has patented a camouflage coating for tanks and other military vehicles that holds up in tough weather but can be washed off easily with an ammonia gel.
The new coating was invented by Kenneth G. Meades, vice president and technical director of the Potter Paint Company, who said the United States Marines had used it extensively during the Persian Gulf war.


Excerpts of From Comments by Shevardnadze
Among those who have most harshly criticized President Mikhail S. Gorbachev have been his former top aides, including Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the former Soviet Foreign Minister who resigned from Government in December 1990 after saying he was concerned that a dictatorship might arise in the Soviet Union.
Following are excerpts from an interview Mr.
Shevardnadze had today with CNN in which he was asked if he would take a post in the Gorbachev Government.


Now New Voters May Register At the D.M.V.
New Jersey residents who enter a variety of state offices will face some new questions -- Are you registered to vote?
Would you like a registration form? -- under a law approved by the Assembly.
The new voter registration program, which could further increase Democratic dominance among the electorate, is expected to be signed by Gov.
Jim Florio.


Panel to Ask That No Action Be Taken Against Jeffries
A faculty committee at City College will recommend that no action be taken against Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. for a racially charged speech he made last month, the head of the committee says.
The executive committee of the Faculty Senate, in a resolution now being drafted, will criticize Dr.
Jeffries's choice of words, said James L. de Jongh, an English professor who is chairman of both the Faculty Senate and the executive committee.
But the resolution will also defend his right to express his beliefs without facing punishment for doing so, Dr. de Jongh said.
The resolution is to go to the full Faculty Senate for consideration next month.
Approval by the Senate would not, by itself, prevent City College officials or the City University's board of trustees from disciplining Dr.
Jeffries.


City Opera's 'Butterfly'
The season premiere of the New York City Opera's production of Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" is to be at 8 o'clock tonight at the New York State Theater.
Elizabeth Holleque is to sing the title role; others in the cast include Robynne Redmon as Suzuki, Stephen O'Mara as Pinkerton and Jeffrey Kneebone as Sharpless.
Chris Nance is to conduct.
Tickets are $8 to $62.
Information: (212) 870-5570.


Music in Review
Surry and Leningrad Opera Companies Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church


Jets' Puzzle Taking Shape for Coslet
As Jets Coach Bruce Coslet prepares to complete his second exhibition season with a game against the Washington Redskins here on Saturday night, he has the answers to more questions than he did at this time last year.
He knows he wants Kenny O'Brien as his starting quarterback, something he didn't decide last year until less than a week before the opening game.
Troy Taylor is the backup and second-round draft choice Browning Nagle is perhaps a year away.


Fed's Meeting in July Backed a Neutral Policy
Federal Reserve policy makers voted last month to maintain a neutral monetary policy that did not favor further interest rate cuts to stimulate the economy, according to minutes of their meeting released today.
Nevertheless, less than a month later the Fed cut short-term interest rates out of concern that the economy's nascent recovery might falter.
At its latest policy meeting this week, a similar resolution favoring a neutral policy on rates was believed to have been adopted, but comments by Fed officials have suggested that with inflation dropping the Fed has the room to ease rates further if needed to stimulate the economy.
Raising rates, for the time being, appeared to be out of the quetion.


Animal-Bite Unit Responded Caringly
To the Editor:
I was recently bitten by a dog while out jogging during a visit to Connecticut.
Unfortunately, because the dog could not be found, it was assumed I needed the rabies series of injections.
I was advised to get in touch with the animal-bites unit of the New York City Department of Health.


Get Off the Court and Call It a Qualified Success
The sun toasted the sidecourts yesterday afternoon at the National Tennis Center in Queens, where tempers and slice backhands were clearly growing short.
On court 6, David Engel of Sweden knocked a soda out of the hands of a spectator who was moving too often, too close to the player's qualifying match for the United States Open.
The fan reached back into his emptied cup, found some ice and hurled it at Engel.


Graduate Student Is Killed In Brawl Near Yale Campus
A graduate student was killed early Thursday in a fight at pizza parlor near the Yale University campus.
The police said today that they had leads but did not expect a quick arrest.
The student, Guy Young, 21 years old, of Miller Place, N.Y., a graduate student at Southern Connecticut State University, was shot to death about 12:30 A.M.
Thursday when he and a group of friends got into a fight with two other men at Broadway Pizza.
Mr.
Young's friends said the two strangers started the brawl, and one pulled a gun.


White House Shuns Key Role on Lead Exposure
After announcing an ambitious plan last spring to reduce children's exposure to lead, the Bush Administration has now decided that while the program is urgent, the Federal Government will not take a major role in it, either financially or by seeking new laws.
Earlier this year, the Administration outlined a plan for widespread testing of homes for lead hazards.
The plan called for certification of those who would test for lead and clean it up, and treatment for affected children.
Lead can cause damage to the developing nervous system.


Richard Wilson, 75, Longtime Associate of Welles, Is Dead
Richard Wilson, a director, producer, writer, actor and longtime associate of Orson Welles, died Wednesday at his home in Santa Monica, Calif.
He was 75 years old.
He died of pancreatic cancer, said Myron S. Meisel, one of his co-producers.


Latvian to Face Charges
Alfred Rubiks, the hard-line leader of the Communist Party of Latvia, was arrested yesterday and the republic's Parliament is seeking to bring charges against him, reports said.
The Latvian Radio, in a broadcast monitored by the BBC, said the Parliament in Riga had lifted the immunity of Mr.
Rubiks, who was cited with scorn by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev on Thursday, when he spoke of the foiled coup.
The Baltic News Service reported last night that Mr.
Rubiks had been arrested in Riga.
No details were given.
Before his arrest, Mr.
Rubiks had told the Latvian Radio that he had quit the Communist Party to start his own independent party.


Offer to Acquire On-Line Software
Computer Associates International Inc., a leading software company based in Garden City, L.I., said it would acquire On-Line Software International Inc. for about $89.8 million in cash.
On-Line, based in Fort Lee, N.J., develops and acquires, and markets a broad range of software for mid-range and large computers made by the International Business Machines Corporation and compatibles.
Computer Associates said it would make a tender officer for all of the approximately 5.7 million outstanding shares of On-Line common stock at a price of $15.75 a share.
The offer is conditioned upon a minimum of 2.5 million shares being tendered


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 24


Iraq Ruling For Consarc
A Federal judge upheld his $64.1 million award to a New Jersey concern that says Iraq breached a contract to buy industrial furnaces by maintaining they were meant for civilian rather than military use.
Federal District Judge Stanley Sporkin's order, issued Thursday, also allows the Consarc Corporation of Rancocas, N.J., to try to collect some of the money by asking that some Iraqi assets in this country be unfrozen.


Dow Soars To Record Of 3,040.25
Stock prices soared to new heights yesterday on the heels of a surprisingly robust Government report on durable-goods orders for July.
The Dow Jones industrial average vaulted to a new record, rising 32.87 points, or 1.1 percent, to 3,040.25.
Record highs were also posted by the Nasdaq, the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 and the Big Board composite.


Stephen Steinberg, 42, Writer on Dance, Dies
Stephen Cobbett Steinberg, a writer, historian and documentary film maker, died on Wednesday at his home in San Francisco.
He was 42 years old.
He died of complications from AIDS, said a spokesman for the San Francisco Performing Arts Library and Museum, where he worked.


The Talk of Crown Heights; On Crown Heights' Crowded Streets, Signs of Trouble Jostle Signs of Peace
A giant floral wreath surrounded by bunches of brightly colored flowers marks ground zero in the explosion of events that has befallen Crown Heights.
Under a harsh noon sun, people stop to pay their respects at the site near Utica Avenue and President Street where a car crashed into Gavin Cato and his cousin Angela, setting off a chain reaction that has bruised this community physically and emotionally.
Men and women, some clutching their children by the hand, stop and stare silently at the spot, which by now has been flecked with tiny, wilted petals like splattered paint.
A picture of Gavin, taped to the wall, reminds them that this is a memorial for a child, but the surrounding posters that read "We Black and Strong" and "This is Not Palestine" transform it into a call for political action.


G.E. Layoffs Set
The General Electric Company, the nation's third- largest military contractor, has announced it will cut at least 200 jobs at a local plant by the end of this year.
The cutback announced Thursday means a 15 percent reduction in G.E.'s Volusia County work force of about 1,300.
The first wave of layoff notices to an undetermined number of workers will come Sept. 4.
"Global defense budgets are shrinking and competition for a larger share of a smaller pie is intense," Pete Kujawski, G.E.-Daytona general manager, said in a statement.


British Aerospace Wins Japan Order
British Aerospace P.L.C. said it won a $750 million contract to supply the Japan Air Self-Defense Force with 27 BA 125-800 aircraft.
The aircraft are to be delivered between 1995 and 2003 and represent Japan's next generation of search and rescue aircraft, the company said.
British Aerospace has sold more that 800 125-800's since 1964, when the aircraft were first built.
The Japanese force in 1989 ordered three similar aircraft from British Aerospace for flight inspection duties, in a contract worth $75 million.
That order was the first time the force had ordered a non-American overseas-built aircraft, British Aerospace said.


Quotation of the Day
"On a lighter note, shall we now sign a decree suspending the activities of the Russian Communist Party?" -- Boris N. Yeltsin, the Russian President.  [ 4:5. ]


U.S. Vehicle Sales Dropped 10.2% in Mid-August
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks fell 10.2 percent in mid-August, reflecting somewhat weaker demand in the United States auto market than analysts had expected.
The seasonally adjusted annual rate of car sales from Aug. 11 to 20 was 6.1 million, a drop from 6.2 million in early August, and a sharp decline from the rates of 6.7 million in June and 6.8 million in July.


Albanians Celebrate Failure of the Soviet Coup


Yanks' Attempt to Be Spoiler Goes Sour
The Yankees were playing the spoiler role as if it were named after them until the ninth inning tonight at the Skydome.
That is when Steve Farr stumbled, Randy Velarde dropped a ground ball, Roberto Alomar slapped a crucial hit and Toronto stole an important 6-5 victory.
The Yankees carried a 5-4 lead into the bottom of the ninth and had Farr, their reliable closer, ready to clinch the triumph and drop the Blue Jays into a first-place tie with the Tigers in the American League East.
Instead, the inning disintegrated in front of them as Farr hit two batters and Velarde botched an apparent double-play grounder to load the bases for Alomar's game-winning single.


Quick Aid To F.D.I.C. Is Urged
The General Accounting Office said yesterday that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's financial condition was weaker than previously estimated and that the deposit insurance agency would need additional money from the Government within a few months.
By the end of the year, the bank insurance fund "will likely be insolvent" but will still have the cash needed to pay depositors of failed banks, the accounting office said.


4 Shoe Plants in Missouri to Close
The Brown Shoe Company, the nation's leading maker of women's shoes, said today that it would close four plants in Missouri and lay off 1,400 factory workers within three months.
The St.
Louis-based company cited the recession and the shift to imported shoes.
Brown, founded in 1878 and the maker of the Buster Brown line of shoes for children, said it had watched imported shoes gradually take over the women's shoe industry in the United States.


Police Brace For Protest In Brooklyn
A huge police presence in the racially troubled Crown Heights section of Brooklyn appeared to have brought a measure of calm yesterday.
But Mayor David N. Dinkins failed in an apparent effort to persuade black leaders to call off a march into the neighborhood today, the Jewish Sabbath.
The Mayor and an entourage of his top aides traveled to Bedford-Stuyvesant last night for a rare meeting with the Rev.
Al Sharpton and the lawyer Alton H.  Maddox Jr., who had called the march.
It could not have been comfortable; the Mayor has a wary relationship with the flamboyant Mr.
Sharpton, who has, over the years, said many unkind things about Mr.
Dinkins.


Kennan Says Failed Coup Eclipses '17 Revolution
George F. Kennan, one of the leading American historians and diplomatic experts on the Soviet Union, has said he believes that the events surrounding the failed coup in Moscow eclipse the Russian Revolution in importance.
"I find it difficult to find any other turning point in modern Russian history that is so significant as this one," he said in an interview Thursday night on "The MacNeil-Lehrer Newshour."


HE FORCES VAST GORBACHEV SHAKE-UP; Soviet President Is Heckled By the Republic's Parliament
A political shock wave swept through the Soviet Union in the aftermath of the failed coup today as the Communist Party reeled in retreat across the nation and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev yielded to the ascendancy of the Russian President, Boris N. Yeltsin.
Mr.
Gorbachev, struggling to regain his leadership role after three days as a hostage to the coup plotted by hard-line Communists, spoke before the Russian republic's Parliament.
During his appearance, broadcast on national television, he found himself facing an openly skeptical, at times abusive audience.
He was scorned by the lawmakers for remaining loyal to the party after the harrowing national ordeal of the last five days.


Judge Cuts Bakker's Prison Term, Making Parole Possible in 4 Years
A Federal judge today sentenced the fallen evangelist Jim Bakker to an 18-year prison sentence, far less than the 45-year term thrown out by an appeals court but far more than he and his followers had hoped for.
The sentence, which came after a subdued Mr.
Bakker apologized for his stewardship of his PTL Ministry and described prison as "the land of the living dead," means Mr.
Bakker will most likely serve at least four more years in prison.


Germany Rejects a Hostage-Prisoner Link
In a declaration that could complicate efforts to free the Western hostages in Lebanon, the German Embassy in Beirut today rejected any link between the release of the two German hostages and two Shiite Muslim Lebanese jailed in Germany on terrorism charges.
The declaration appeared to rebut reports by fundamentalists here of an agreement between Teheran and Bonn according to which the Lebanese prisoners, Mohammed Ali Hamadei and his brother Abbas, would be freed from prison in Germany several months after their associates here free the German captives, Thomas Kemptner and Heinrich Strubig, as part of a general exchange of prisoners in the Middle East.


Rumors of Move by Brazil Send Coffee Prices Soaring
Coffee futures prices spurted higher yesterday amid rumors of a halt in Brazilian exports and perceptions that Latin American producers are close to carrying out a plan to withhold some of their crop from the market.
Coffee for delivery in September rose 3.6 cents, to 82.90 cents a pound, on the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange in New York.


Dollar Posts Sharp Climb On Durable Goods Report
The dollar moved sharply higher yesterday, helped by a report on orders for durable goods that indicated the economy was returning to health.
The Commerce Department said orders for durables soared 10.7 percent in July, with gains in almost every major industry group.


Why Should Success Doom a Bronx School?
To the Editor:
I am mystified by the action of a New York City school district superintendent, Dr.
John Reehill, who has made a decision that would spell the demise of the Bronx New School (news article, Aug. 10).


Police Brace For Protest In Brooklyn
A huge police presence in the racially troubled Crown Heights section of Brooklyn appeared to have brought a measure of calm yesterday.
But Mayor David N. Dinkins failed in an apparent effort to persuade black leaders to call off a march into the neighborhood today, the Jewish Sabbath.
The Mayor and an entourage of his top aides traveled to Bedford-Stuyvesant last night for a rare meeting with the Rev.
Al Sharpton and the lawyer Alton H. Maddox Jr., who had called the march.
It could not have been comfortable; the Mayor has a wary relationship with the flamboyant Mr.
Sharpton, who has, over the years, said many unkind things about Mr.
Dinkins.


Music in Review
Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra Avery Fisher Hall


Sports of The Times; Mom, Boston Is Teasing Me Again
Just when the forlorn fans of the Boston Red Sox thought they were safe from the ultimate letdown, their team has set them up for it once again.
The Red Sox, who haven't won the ultimate baseball series since 1918, have made a career out of fooling their fans, perpetrating one excruciating hoax after another.
The Fenway Faithful can recite the cruel disappointments more readily than a first grader can say his A B C's.


Ever-Faster Flow of Events In Moscow Are Joy to Bush
President Bush said today that the Soviet Union was moving more rapidly toward "the objectives that we want," and he praised the Government shake-up in Moscow, which reversed decisions that had drawn criticism on Thursday from the Bush Administration.
"The people appear to be moving toward the objectives of United States foreign policy and, in the process, toward democracy, freedom, self-determination -- all of these things," Mr.
Bush said, adding, "Clearly, we are in extraordinary times."


TRANSACTIONS
Auto racing
NEWMAN-HAAS RACING -- Signed Mario Andretti to a two-year contract and Michael Andretti to a one-year contract.
Baseball


Green Warriors Trash Audubon's Integrity
To the Editor:
The news of the editorial purge at Audubon magazine (news article, July 31) is another sorry chapter in the destruction of what was, under the editorship of Les Line, America's finest natural-affairs publication.
As a contributor to Mr.
Line's magazine and a working magazine editor, I am not impartial.
However, I take exception to the remarks attributed to Peter Berle, the Society's president, characterizing the old Audubon magazine as a publication that merely "marveled" at nature.


Dead Whale Is Towed Out to Sea


Patents; Sweat Is Measured In Diabetes Monitor
Three Minnesota inventors have patented a device that looks like a wristwatch to help people with diabetes monitor their blood-sugar levels by measuring sweat.
People suffering from insulin diabetes must constantly walk a delicate line between having too much sugar or too little in their systems.
To keep track, many patients must take tiny blood samples, sometimes more than once a day, by pricking their fingers or another part of the body.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
H.J.
Heinz Co., Pittsburgh, the food company, has completed the acquisition of JL Foods from John Labatt Ltd., London, Ontario.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Hitachi Ltd., Tokyo, said it would set up a production line capable of making up to 16-megabit dynamic random access memory chips at a plant being built near the facilities of its German unit, Hitachi Semiconductor G.m.b.H.


Rapist Set Free by New Jersey Is Seen and Held in Las Vegas
A convicted rapist mistakenly freed from a New Jersey prison because of a "clerical oversight" was apprehended in a hotel parking lot in Las Vegas today, the authorities said.
The man, 40-year-old Kenneth Arnold Yarter of Easton, Pa., is also wanted by the authorities in Florida who suspect him in the rapes of two Canadian women in St.
Petersburg earlier this month.


Smashed Icons
So amazing are the scenes in Moscow this week that television's voluble commentators have to grope for ways to describe the unimaginable.
With the collapse of a bungled coup, the Russia of Ivan the Terrible and Joseph Stalin was transformed into a delirious street fair for freedom.
And now, one by one, the very icons of Communist power are crumbling, dooming a system that once seemed as impregnable as the Kremlin walls.
Nobody can predict the outcome of Russia's democratic revolution but its first moments resonate with promise.
A chastened and diminished Mikhail Gorbachev now defers to Boris Yeltsin, Russia's popularly elected president, who confidently set a national example of resistance against Communism's bankrupt old guard.


Wichita Tires of Spotlight on Abortion Protesters
This heartland city of 300,000 people has grown weary, its normally sturdy shoulders and spirit beginning to sag under the weight of an unwelcome and unaccustomed national spotlight accompanying the disruptive anti-abortion demonstrations that began six weeks ago.
Such turmoil seems out of place in Wichita, a city of churches, minor league baseball and friendly people.
While it has many of the problems of large cities, it is a good place to raise children, everyone from the hotel bellmen to the Mayor say.


Observer; Saving the World
My Committee on the Pace of Life sends these statistics on time consumed by humanity's most vital activities in the 1990's:  War, 100 hours;  Coup, 60 hours;  Baseball, 3 hours.
It is instantly obvious that while wars are getting shorter, baseball is getting longer.
Whether coups are also getting longer is hard to say since our sample coup was a failed model.
It also occurred in the mild Soviet climate and not in the torrid coup belt, the so-called "home office of coups," where unbearable heat may speed things up since participants are naturally in a hurry to take over nice air-conditioned palaces.


Out With the Old, In With the New: Hour by Hour Across the Land
The tumult in the Soviet Union yesterday was reflected in a welter of official announcements, resignations, appointments carried by wire service dispatches filed from Moscow and other Soviet cities.
Here are summaries of dispatches from Tass, the official Soviet press agency; from the unofficial Interfax agency, and from The Associated Press and Reuters.
All times Eastern daylight time.


Sale of Midtown Office Tower May Be Bad Sign for Market
In a potential real-estate deal sending shivers through New York's already depressed office market, Citicorp, the city's largest lender to developers, said yesterday that it was negotiating the sale of a vacant 42-story office tower that it holds in foreclosure to Bertelsmann A.G.
The sale would most likely be at a loss.
Bertelsmann, the diversified German concern whose United States holdings include RCA Records and Bantam Doubleday Bell, the publishing concern, confirmed the negotiations.


Connors Makes It Close, But Edberg Avoids Upset
Time seems suspended for Jimmy Connors as he approaches his final year of 30-something.
"Honestly, I don't know what keeps me going," admitted Connors, after finally losing to top-seeded Stefan Edberg, 6-3, 4-6, 6-4, in the quarterfinals of the Norstar Bank Hamlet Challenge Cup today.


Review/Opera; From Taiwan, More Than Meets the Ear
The Fu Hsing Chinese Opera Troupe's current visit to New York is a pleasant excuse to make the acquaintance of a new and attractive performing space: the 234-seat Taipei Theater deep in the bowels of the McGraw-Hill Building on the Avenue of the Americas at 49th Street.
Gracefully proportioned and with a generous stage, it is the kind of chamber-music/chamber-opera venue that could serve the performing arts in this city well.
Thursday's performance was part of a bigger "Taipei Encounter" that has included acrobats, art exhibitions and various musical entertainments.
This was a two-part evening: first, a public version of a ritual usually conducted in private; second, an 11-part instrumental recital by the Experimental Chinese Orchestra.


Kerry Sees Help on Americans Missing in Asia
The leaders of Vietnam and Cambodia have renewed pledges of an "open inquiry" to resolve rapidly the fates of Americans listed as missing in action in those Southeast Asian nations, Senator John Kerry said today.
After a weeklong visit to Vietnam and Cambodia, Mr.
Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat, said the two Communist countries had promised to allow United States helicopters to take part in the search.
They also pledged to welcome Americans making their own inquiries and to give unprecedented access to a newly formed Senate committee investigating the possibility that some of the missing Americans are still alive, he said.


Beijing Journal; For Jailed Scholar, a Wife's Daring Voice on Rights
Hou Xiaotian's face brightens with an innocent grin as she weaves her bicycle through the traffic.
But her girlish demeanor belies a life these days composed more of tears than smiles, more of prison than family, and of memories of a husband whom she is not scheduled to be reunited with again until the year 2002.
Ms.
Hou, 28 years old, has become virtually the only person in Beijing now who dares to speak out for human rights to the foreign press.
She assumed the role after her husband, Wang Juntao, was sentenced in February to 13 years in prison for his role in the Tiananmen Square democracy movement.


Salomon's Errant Cowboy
Wall Street bond traders have two theories about what happened at Salomon Brothers Inc.
One is the conspiracy theory.
The other involves Paul W. Mozer.
The conspiracy theory contends that Salomon was deliberately trying to manipulate the Treasury market for its own gain and that if the top brass, including the firm's crusty chairman, John H. Gutfreund, didn't actually encourage it, they at least looked the other way.
They did so because the practice had the potential to earn immense profits for Salomon.


Focus: Riverside, Calif.; The Welcome Mat's Out for 'Granny Flats'
AMONG the fruits of a special zoning law in this desert community 70 miles east of Los Angeles is an 800-square-foot apartment in the backyard of Anthony and Darla Riggio, which the couple built last year as a home for Mr.
Riggio's retirement-age parents.
Under Riverside's so-called "Granny Flats" ordinance, which encourages the construction of apartments on the lots of existing single-family homes, the Riggios applied for and received a permit to build the unit.
Mr.
Riggio, a former roofer who drives a delivery route, spent five months and $40,000 building the free-standing apartment with the help of friends and contractors.


A Face on TV Across a Lonely Room
Fade in to Manhattan skyline.
Close-up of attractive 30ish woman in burgundy-colored dress heading home, entering apartment, sitting on sofa, heaving sigh.
She picks up remote control, turns on TV.
She is next seen happily making a telephone call.
Cut to well-manicured male thumb ringing doorbell.
Woman -- now in dressier brown outfit and pearls -- opens door, smiles.
Male hand thrusts tasteful bouquet at her.
Half an hour later, the couple are seen strolling along a litter-free block, happily holding hands.
In between the opening and closing sequences, viewers have seen and heard 40 or so ads placed by men ("Tracy looking for a Hepburn, Bogie searching for a Bacall") and women ("tired of dancing with Richard Simmons") on the lookout for friends, companions and, just possibly, romance.
Welcome to "Prime-Time Personals."


Tension in Brooklyn; Blacks March by Hasidim Through a Corridor of Blue
The Rev.
Al Sharpton led some 400 shouting, chanting black protesters through the heart of Hasidic Crown Heights on the Jewish Sabbath yesterday as a blue wall of police officers made sure that the march went off without serious incident.
The police vastly outnumbered the marchers.
Double columns of officers on each side and motorcycle patrols kept pace as a helicopter circled.


Albanians Expose High Living by Ex-Rulers
They sent their daughters to Vienna "for treatment of migraine" at a cost of $3,400 or more.
They secretly billed the Government for imported clothes, cosmetics, appliances, vacation homes and items as banal as camera film and soccer magazine subscriptions -- at a cost of $2 million a year.
They enjoyed the best of food and drink.
They are members of the 26 families of the Communist elite that for more than four decades ruled Albania, the poorest country of Europe.


Car Thieves In East Europe
Travelers are finding it difficult to rent cars in Western Europe to drive to Eastern Europe because of fears by rental agencies and insurance companies that the vehicles will be stolen.
Jean Hubert, vice president of marketing for Europcar, said, "Due to the huge number of cars that have been converted or stolen, cars cannot be taken into Eastern Europe."


Now Is The Summer of Discontent
It was a balmy, breezy Sunday afternoon deep in the suburbs.
Two weeks ago, about 15,000 people, the vast majority between 16 and 25 years of age, gathered in the concert field of bucolic Waterloo Village in Stanhope, N.J.
They were nice folks in clean T-shirts, halter tops, shorts, jeans and mass-market punkwear; even the buzzcuts were designer-styled.
When someone bumped into someone else, as happens at sold-out rock concerts, polite "Excuse me's" were traded.
The fans had congregated, however, for nine hours of howling, bawling, shouting and wailing, for denunciations of everything from self-pity to police brutality to parental abandonment, and they yelled affirmation when Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails groaned, "I hate everybody!" or Ice-T sang, "I'm a cop killer!"


WEATHERING PREJUDICE
Richard G. Carter's About Men column "Weathering Prejudice" (Aug. 4) was compassionate, intelligent and honest.
Everything he said hit home.
I am 40 and white, and have been very happily married to a black man for 17 years.
Yes, we, too, have endured the displeasure of others.
But the deep love and respect we have for one another greatly outweighs the ignorance of social prejudice.
SHERYL FINLEY Elmont, L.I.


Raisa Gorbachev Is Ill
Raisa Gorbachev, distressed by the coup against her husband, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, is ill, a spokesman for Mr.
Gorbachev said today.
"I can say that she is not very well," Karen Karagezyan said by telephone from his Kremlin office.
He declined to elaborate.


Katherine Anderson Is to Wed Neil O'Hara
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Anderson of North Key Largo, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Scott Anderson, to Neil Andrew O'Hara, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William I. O'Hara of Edenbridge, Kent, England.
The wedding is planned for the fall of 1992.
Ms.
Anderson, 32 years old, is an associate at the New York law firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell.
She graduated from Duke University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was the president of Mattel Inc. in New York.
Mr.
O'Hara, 38, is a general partner of Amster &amp; Co., a New York investment management concern.
He graduated from the University of Warwick.
His father, who is retired, was a director of Balfour Beatty, an international engineering and construction company in London.


Miss O'Hanlon Weds Thomas Evanoff
Karin Ann O'Hanlon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. O'Hanlon of Armonk, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Thomas Walter Evanoff, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter M. Evanoff of Vienna, Va.
Msgr.
Walter Schroeder performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick Church.
The couple, both 25 years old, are graduates of the University of Delaware.
Mrs.
Evanoff is a mortgage insurance specialist at the First Union Mortgage Corporation in Raleigh, N.C.
Her father is a vice president and deputy general counsel of the New York Life Insurance Company.
Her mother, Nancy O'Hanlon, is a registered nurse.


Opposition Vows to Keep Up Strike in Madagascar
Opposition leaders today rejected an effort by the country's longtime authoritarian leader to diffuse unrest by announcing that he was handing over power to his Prime Minister.
Instead, they vowed to keep up the general strike that has paralyzed this island nation for the last two months.
So far they have failed to dislodge the President, Didier Ratsiraka, one of Africa's more durable autocrats.


INSIDE
400 March in Brooklyn
After a week of violence, the Rev.
Al Sharpton led 400 protesters through Crown Heights yesterday, as a blue wall of police insured relative quiet.
The day before, black residents in the neighborhood spoke of their an ger and outrage.
Page 36.
New Fight on Fetal Research
A Federal rule that requires the father's permission whenever the Government pays for fetal research has angered many researchers, who are finding ways around it.
Page 20.
News Summary, Page 2 Obituaries, Page 42 Weather, Page 43 Radio, Late TV, Page 60


Kirsten A. Manninen To Marry in Autumn
Mr. and Mrs.
R.
John Manninen of Ipswich, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kirsten Alexandra Manninen to John Greenough Lewis 3d, a son of Sheila Lewis Henry of New London, N.H., and Mr.
Lewis Jr. of Barnard, Vt.
A November wedding is planned.
Miss Manninen, 22 years old, is a research and development assistant at Marketing Planners in Providence, R.I.
She graduated cum laude from Wheaton College.
The prospective bridegroom, 25, is a client administrator at American Express in Providence.
He graduated from Brown University.


THE GREAT ALASKA DEBATE
Egan's mention of Arctic Village in the Brooks Range reminded me of my visit there as a young surveyor in 1963, just after Alaska became a state and before the development of the oil pipeline.
We hired an Indian man to take us grayling fishing up the Junjik River, many hours by skiff from this already remote place.
Along the way, we encountered a summer squall that left us wet and cold.
Our guide beached the boat and asked if we would like to see him build a fire the Indian way, with only one match.
Eager to learn Indian and Eskimo ways, I nodded and watched as he gathered dry and wet wood and arranged it in a pile.
He walked to the boat, drained a cup of gas from the tank, threw it on the twigs and tossed on a single lighted match.
We laughed as the wood burned furiously.
Now, nearly 30 years later, I see how prophetic that moment was of a new paradigm for Alaska.
ROBERT COLE Seattle


Out of Character


Sharon Accuses U.S. Over Peace Conference
Ariel Sharon, Israel's hard-line Housing Minister, sought today to raise new objections to a planned Middle East peace conference, accusing the United States of backtracking on a promise to provide Israel with advance guarantees about the discussions.
"We expected a memorandum of understanding," Mr.
Sharon told the army radio.
"I know from foreign sources that the United States has already given a negative answer and does not intend to sign a memorandum of understanding with Israel."


Air Travel
To the Editor: I thought the use of tape to hold planes together was no longer needed after World War I. Not quite so.
On a recent flight, the captain said we couldn't take off from Albany because one of the overhead bin doors wouldn't latch.
Someone tried to stuff too much into it, I suspect.
The captain said the bin would be emptied and the door taped shut by a mechanic, who took less than a minute to attach two pieces of black tape at the hinge and 50 minutes to arrive and complete the paperwork.
On the way to Chicago, a flight attendant opened the door and off it came when she tried to close it.
She quickly buried it somewhere in first class.


Bad Ideas? Not When They Work.
Ralph Waldo Emerson, in his famous exhortation to self-reliance, wrote grandly of bold strokes and great souls.
But willy-nilly, in cautioning against a foolish consistency, the great essayist offered a boon to every fallible human, and especially to every waffling critic.
It is good to have this rationalization.
For inevitably, exasperations build up in one area or another and finally erupt in a sweeping generalization.
Then along comes some wholly unexpected tour de force, and prejudices are shattered; principled objections seem petty.
As examples, two recent Mozart productions come to mind -- or rather, have lingered insistently in the memory for weeks: John Neumeier's sober and mystical ballet setting of the Requiem for the Hamburg Ballet, which opened the Salzburg Festival in Austria last month, and Mark Lamos's whimsical and delightful staging of "Il Re Pastore," which will end its run at the Glimmerglass Opera in Cooperstown, N.Y., this afternoon.
Though the theatrical conceptions could hardly have been more disparate, both violated one critic's cherished sensibilities.
Yet each confounded dismal expectations, succeeding brilliantly on its own terms.


Switzerland
To the Editor: Your article on Lucerne (Travel, July 21) was evocative and informative and it reminded me of our visit of a few years ago.
My husband and I wandered through the narrow, winding, cobblestone streets seeking a restaurant noted for its fondue.
My husband strolled on ahead, leaving me isolated for a few moments.
And that was when a youth, who had obviously been stalking us, struck, padding up behind me, yanking my purse from my shoulder and then racing off.
My husband immediately gave chase, game leg and all.
Hopeless.
Gone was the purse, the $200 in cash, passports, traveler's checks.
All this in broad daylight.
So, of course, we went to the police station where we were treated most courteously and were told the purse would show up soon probably without the cash.
Sure enough, after we returned to the Hotel Montana, the same officer appeared, purse in hand.
It had been recovered in the stall of a men's room in a restaurant.
Only the cash was missing.


Guilty, Guilty . . .
Somehow even 176 pronouncements of "guilty" did not convey the enormity of the crime of Julio Gonzalez.
Early one Sunday morning in the Bronx 17 months ago, Mr.
Gonzalez splashed gasoline about the entryway of the crowded Happy Land social club, lit a match in anger and touched off a roaring inferno that killed 87 people, widowed 60 men and women and orphaned 106 children.
Mr.
Gonzalez, whose lawyer used an insanity defense, admitted setting the fire after being thrown out of the club for arguing with his girlfriend, who worked there (and survived the fire).
Most of the victims were from a closely knit community of immigrants, and 59 of the dead were recent arrivals from Honduras.
Many of the victims' relatives wept as they heard the litany of verdicts, which covered two different kinds of murder for each victim.
Ruben Valladarez, one of only six people to escape the blaze, was also in court for the verdict.
"It's a good thing," he said, "a just thing."


On the Street; Stretching Summer With 'Second Skins'
This summer's stunning look is not a soaring hemline, a plunging neckline or the backless dress.
It's second-skin dressing, in a variety of stretch bodysuits, unitards, tights and leotards that reduce fashion to the bare bones of simplicity.
The women shown here exude self-confidence as they stroll Fifth or Park Avenue.
All-black designs are a perfect foil for gold jewelry, a decorative belt or, for the more modest, a matching stretch hip-wrapper from Chanel, securely held with four of those expensive signature gold buttons, at far right.
Some of the one-piece cat suits with flower prints are worn without other embellishment.
Still others are topped with a transparent flowered flyaway shirt.
There is nothing timid about this cutting-edge look: a few yards of stretch cloth that almost seem painted on.


James Criares Wed to Pamela Nelson
Pamela Miles Nelson, a daughter of Doris J. Nelson of Claremont, N.H., and Andrew W. Nelson 3d of Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to James Theodore Criares, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore Criares of Springfield, Va.
Bishop Isaiah officiated at the Holy Resurrection Greek Orthodox Church in Claremont.
The couple, both 29 years old, graduated from Drew University.
Mrs.
Criares produces documentary films and heads video services for the accounting firm of Deloitte &amp; Touche in Wilton, Conn.
Her father, who retired as the director of public relations for I.B.M. in Armonk, N.Y., is the director of communications for the State Motor Vehicles Department in Wethersfield, Conn.
Her mother is the Claremont City Clerk.


Janis Ellen Cohen Marries Rodd Warren Schlerf
Janis Ellen Cohen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard C. Cohen of Wheatley Heights, L.I., was married last evening to Rodd Warren Schlerf, a son of Joanna Moncure Glenn of Wilmington, Del., and Gilbert Schlerf of West Islip, L.I.
The Rev.
Maurice A. Fetty, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the Waterview Club in Bayville, L.I.
The couple, both 27 years old, graduated from Cornell University.
The bride received a J.D. degree from the Brooklyn Law School.
She is a claims supervisor at American International Group, a New York insurance company.
Her father is the executive director of Coney Island Hospital.


Film Makers Are Victors In a Lawsuit on Coloring
The artistic debate over the pros and cons of coloring old black-and-white movies seems likely to continue, but after three years of judicial wrangling, France's Supreme Court has ruled that a film's director or the director's heirs should have the last word.
The decision does not forbid the coloring of a film by an individual or company that owns it.
But the film cannot be distributed in theaters or broadcast on television in France against the wishes of its director or the director's heirs, who retain what the court termed a "moral right" over the work.


Alamo to Repay Repair Costs
Rental car customers who were charged too much for repairs between January 1983 and December 1989 by Alamo Rent A Car will be reimbursed under an agreement between the company and the United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York, in Brooklyn.
Alamo, the nation's fifth largest rental car concern, with 94 United States outlets, estimated that 10,000 renters who damaged cars in collisions have overpaid because of its policy of billing customers for the estimated costs of repairs, and neglecting to reimburse them when the actual costs were lower.


Initials For W.L.A.F. May Soon Be R.I.P.
The World League of American Football could be facing extinction if supporters among the National Football League owners can't appease other owners, who aren't happy that the spring league lost nearly $7 million in its inaugural season.
N.F.L. owners met in Dallas last Wednesday to discuss the future of the W.L.A.F.
They left the meeting uncertain about where the league is headed.
The options discussed included continuing with the league in its current form, moving teams to larger television markets, suspending play for a year to reorganize or folding the league altogether.


Young Russian Dancers In a Berkshire Retreat
A rehearsal is in progress in a rustic cabin that serves as a dance studio, its windows looking out on the lush greenery of the Berkshire hills.
The faces of dance stars of another era peer out like household gods from old photographs that line one wall, as a choreographer puts their young heirs through the age-old ritual of learning a dance.
It might be just another hot afternoon in August at the Jacob's Pillow Dance Festival.
But something is markedly different.
A Russian translator is on hand to assist the choreographer Amanda Miller as she softly calls out her instructions.
Several of the elegant young dancers seem to be on the verge of helpless giggles as Ms.
Miller, the American associate director of William Forsythe's Frankfurt Ballet, instructs performers bred to dance the swans and princes of classical ballet in the art of moving like melting taffy and pratfalling rowdies.
"Lutshe!" Ms.
Miller says, having mastered the Russian word for "better." And the poised bodies relax a little, ready for the next unfamiliar challenge.


The Terminators
LORDS OF THE SCAFFOLD
A History of the Executioner.
By Geoffrey Abbott.
Illustrated. 191 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $24.95.


Despite the Rain, Plants Need More Water
EVEN though the region has had thunderstorms and some rainfall, this is not the time to ignore plants, especially those with woody stems.
The rainfall helped the shallow-rooted crops, herbaceous plants and annuals, but many of the big ornamentals supported by large root systems need help.
A finger poked deeply into the soil will reveal how little moisture really soaked into the ground.
Keep the hose out, and allow water to trickle slowly for 15 to 20 minutes a plant, so it reaches deep to the root zones.
A good soaking once a week or every 10 days should be adequate.
There are small attachments for the ends of hoses that allow this gentle trickle of water to seep directly into the ground.
This type of watering conserves valuable moisture for the purpose intended, and the water is not lost to evaporation as is often the case with sprinkler attachments for garden hoses.


Data Update
BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED (Housing units)
June 91
May 91
June 90
New York
2,966
3,104
3,241
New Jersey
1,515
1,313
1,655
Connecticut
754
718
640
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
9.36
9.48
10.31
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.16
7.21
8.39
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
9.25
9.37
10.12
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.06
7.15
8.09
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
9.30
9.44
10.17
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
6.97
7.03
8.31
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
9.50
9.63
10.51
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
7.62
7.61
8.55
*2*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
5.72
5.88
7.73
National Mortgage Contract Rate
9.12
9.12
9.85
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


For Young Blacks, Alienation and a Growing Despair Turn Into Rage
It was late at night in the Albany Houses project in Crown Heights when a group of young black men got the word that a white man had killed a black child.
"Someone said, 'let's go,' " said Lance, a 19-year-old resident of the project who refused to give his last name.
He and his friends headed for Utica Avenue and President Street, the scene of the car accident that had killed the child.
"I helped flip over a police car," Lance said.
"It made me feel like I scored a point. One of the guys I was with yelled at one of the cops that was there, 'You want to see how strong the black man is?' "  A Chance to Express Rage
For Lance and for many others in Crown Heights last week, the disturbance was a chance to express their rage.


December Bridal For Nadine Freed
Dr. and Mr.
Jack H. Freed of Ithaca, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Nadine Debra Freed to Robert Norman Bernard, the son of Arden M. Bremer of Ithaca and Charles F. Bernard of Buffalo.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Freed, 24 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Cornell University.
She is a candidate for a master's degree in psychology at the University of Denver.
Her father is a professor of chemistry at Cornell.
Her mother, Renee Freed, teaches high school history in Ithaca.


A la Carte: For Slavic Festival, Bring an Appetite
ONE of the biggest food festivals on Long Island is staged by one of its smallest churches, the 240-family Byzantine Catholic Church of the Resurrection in Smithtown.
The biennial event, scheduled over the Labor Day weekend, is the Byzantine Bazaar, Long Island's Slavic Festival.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Tomato Eaters
Q.
My tomato plants were quite healthy until recently, when I noticed that most of the leaves had been chewed and the flowers had disappeared.
What happened, and what can I do about this? -- Jim DeVries, Queens.


Revolution's Witness
It began as an idea -- glasnost and perestroika, the Russians called it -- but crystallized into action with a speed and force that stunned the world with images: Lech Walesa at the gates of the shipyard, Germans chipping away at a wall.
Last week, the revolution came full circle.
Serge Schmemann of The New York Times saw it all happen.
The Week in Review.


Elizabeth Anne Gillard Has a Wedding
Elizabeth Anne Gillard, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William J. Gillard of Kinnelon, N.J., was married there yesterday to Todd Gregory Giamportone, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Giamportone of Highland, N.Y.
The Rev.
William Mooney performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of the Magnificat.
Mrs.
Giamportone, 27 years old, graduated from the College of the Holy Cross and received a master's in health administration from Duke University.
She is a manager in the department of medicine at Beth Israel Medical Center in New York.
Her father is the owner and president of the Chocolate Popcorn Company in Kingston, Pa.


This Week: The Lawn
It's too late to prune or fertilize shrubs and trees.
The late growth will be too immature to withstand freezing temperatures.
But it is time to seed the lawn, or consider ground covers like wildflowers or low-maintenance perennials like rudbeckia, yarrow, sedum.
Check house plants that summered outdoors for insects or disease.
Prune back, fertilize and repot if needed.
Get them ready for indoor light.


Discounter Challenges Clothiers for Men
DISCOUNTING in men's wear will soon heat up on Long Island with a vengeance.
Price-cutting of men's suits, furnishings and sportswear has been a staple on Long Island for years, but on Wednesday Today's Man, a New Jersey-based men's wear chain that is one of the fastest growing in the multibillion-dollar-a-year industry, will open a massive store at 164 Glen Cove Road in Carle Place.


Offical Tallies of Arrests Differ
Official figures released by the police yesterday showed a total of 110 arrests and 43 issued summonses related to the violence in Crown Heights this week, as of yesterday morning.
Earlier accounts given by senior police officials put the number near 180.
A police spokesman yesterday could not explain the apparent discrepancy.
According to the official figures most of those arrested and given summonses were young black men.
Only 20 of those charged were over the age of 25, and only seven were women.
Seven of the people arrested were white.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Those Optimistic Men And Their Flying Reactors
NEAR the potato farms of the Snake River Valley in Idaho, a pair of 25-foot-tall jet engines with nuclear reactors at their cores stand as mute testimony to an atomic-powered bomber that never flew.
In the Nevada desert are enormous concrete bunkers where blistering hot reactors once thundered to test the feasibility of nuclear rockets and ramjets.
There were even proposals for atomic helicopters.
Despite the efforts of thousands of engineers and the expenditure of billions of dollars, these nuclear dreams of the 1950's and 1960's never materialized.
Today, as momentum grows once again to get nuclear propulsion off the ground -- for both the military and the space program -- a re-examination of the past may hold lessons for the future.


Public Radio By and For L.I.
Over three centuries ago the Pequot Indians of Connecticut exacted tribute from the Montauks of Long Island to insure peace between the tribes.
Later, the great Montauk Sachem Wyandanch sent payments to the English authorities in Hartford for similar security.
Thus Long Island became known as Paumonok, or the Land of Tribute, but that precedent is no reason Long Island should still be sending tribute to Connecticut.
Now we hear that WSHU-FM, a National Public Radio affiliate in Fairfield, Conn., has applied to the Federal Communications Commission to broadcast and presumably fund-raise on vacant, noncommercial radio frequencies in Shirley and Noyac, L.I.
Long Islanders have challenged those applications and the licenses should go to Long Islanders.


Andre Watts to Perform At Ives Center Benefit
FOR singers, the grant given by the Marian Anderson Award Fund -- named for the beloved contralto, a longtime resident of Danbury, and established there last summer by the Charles Ives Center for the Arts -- may well become a preeminent prize.
"In a single year," said the center's administrator, June Goodman, "the Marian Anderson Award has been recognized as one of the most prestigious grants in the concert and opera fields. It is given to rising stars whose abilities are unquestionable but whose need for assistance is vital. Our task now is to build the Marian Anderson Endowment to a strong and enduring level."


Strutting, Fretting and Driving a Playwright Crazy
Actors can drive me insane, and they can make me blither with happiness; this is why they must be worshiped, and occasionally shot into deep space.
Here are a few random thoughts from the trenches, or at least from the back of the theater, right near the $3 candy bars.
Actors I Hate
The Rebel: This is almost exclusively a white male actor, most often the product of an upper-middle-class suburb; due primarily to the marketability of his hair style, he will rapidly acquire a chunk of Malibu beachfront and a $3 million barn in New Hampshire, a fully renovated retreat that allows him, on talk shows, to claim he's a farmer.
This actor insists on playing only moody outcasts, sensitive, creative yet monosyllabic dudes from the Kerouac side of the tracks.
His notion of rebellious behavior is limited to his choice of motorcycle and bandana; he would never play anyone truly unpopular or persecuted, merely someone glamorously misunderstood.
He will play any character named Bo or Maverick, but you will never catch him playing, say, someone with AIDS, or any sort of teacher.
He will take on a genuinely challenging role only if his career is in trouble, and it's all he can get; after that, it's right back to charismatic drifters, alienated race-car drivers and rookie cops with attitude problems.
In real life, these actors know only comfort and adulation; on stage or screen they insist on "breaking all the rules."


R. L. Stump Weds Claire Wiseman
Claire Victoria Wiseman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Wiseman of Weston and Harwich Port, Mass., was married yesterday at the First Congregational Church in Harwich, Mass., to Randall Lee Stump, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milo E. Stump of Churubusco, Ind.
The Revs.
Charles T. Newberry 3d and Diana W. Phillips, ministers of the United Church of Christ, officiated.
The bride, who is 26 years old, graduated cum laude from Cornell University.
She received a master's degree in psychology from American University, where she is enrolled in a doctoral program in clinical psychology.
Her father is the business manager of the Children's Museum in Boston.


Sports of The Times; Chris Evert Observes New World
THINGS have come to a pretty pass in women's tennis when the most exciting event of the year has been Monica Seles fading out of Wimbledon, Madonna playing Garbo.
Tennis needs all the stars it can get, without overexposing them.
Two stars, Gabriela Sabatini and Jennifer Capriati, have even been persuaded to play a free exhibition at the National Tennis Center this afternoon, the day before the United States Open begins.


Don't Pronounce the Democrats Dead Just Yet; Unsupported Assertion
To the Editor:
Stop publishing this front-page blather about growing distress among Democrats, with only a couple of anecdotes to support the assertion.
Your article of Aug. 8 contends that decisions not to seek the Presidency by Senator Jay Rockefeller and Representative Richard Gephardt have created a "frustrating, embarrassing pattern for the party."


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; Recent Sales
Guilford, Conn. 251,000
75 Coventry Way  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 6-year-old colonial; ceramic tile entry, dining room, family room w/fireplace, 0.75 acre; taxes $3,493.
North Branford, Conn. 153,000
48 Harrison Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 32-year-old ranch; large kitchen, open-floor plan, deck, 0.50 acre; taxes $1,608.
Old Lyme, Conn. 95,000
69 Rogers Lake Trail  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; fireplace, walk to lake, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,598.
Katonah, N.Y. 465,000
76 Birch Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 12-year-old colonial; deck, family room, fireplace, enclosed porch, 4.5 acres; taxes $9,417.
Larchmont, N.Y. 340,000
89 West Brookside Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 56-year-old colonial; fireplace, breakfast area, family room; taxes $7,389.
Mount Kisco, N.Y. 530,000
28 Wood Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 11-year-old ranch; 2 stone fireplaces, beamed ceiling, terrace, den, 4.4 acres; taxes $8,495.
OTHER AREAS Wyckoff, N.J. 381,000
355 Stratton Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; brick patio, alarm system, fireplace; taxes $5,814.
Mahwah, N.J. 157,500
130 Johnson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, over 50 year-old colonial; pool, natural woodwork, deck; taxes $1,758.
Bay Shore, L.I. 675,000
29 Lawrence Lane  6-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 53-year-old colonial; 1.1 acre, inground pool; taxes $11,300.


C. A. Czaja Wed To Miss McMoran
Cynthia Ann McMoran, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George A. McMoran of Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday at the Dingletown Community Church in Greenwich to Christian Andrew Czaja, a son of Anita Czaja of Old Greenwich, Conn., and Dr.
Paul C. Czaja of Littleton, Colo.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Baugh, a Methodist minister, officiated.
Mrs.
Czaja, 28 years old, graduated from Michigan State University.
She was until recently an account coordinator for the Harris &amp; Drury advertising agency in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
Her father owns McMoran Associates, a public-relations concern in Greenwich and New York.
Her mother, Betty McMoran, is an editor for Newsbank, a news service in New Canaan, Conn.


Painful Words
Bree Walker-Lampley, a Los Angeles news anchor, must sometimes wonder why her disability is so much more an issue for others than for her.
Ms.
Walker-Lampley, who has ectrodactyly, which causes fingers and toes to be fused, had an awkward moment on the air in New York several years ago.
In a discussion of abortion, her male co-anchor asked if she thought her mother would have had an abortion if she had known Bree would be born with deformed hands.
Recently in California, Ms.
Walker-Lampley, who is pregnant, learned that a radio show host had asked if it was fair for her to give birth when the child might inherit her disability.
Ms.
Walker-Lampley said she felt "terrorized."


U.S. Finds More Flaws in Census Undercount
The 1990 census contained more flaws than the Census Bureau's figures show, actually missing 9.7 million to 15.5 million people, while double counting 4.4 million to 10.2 million, according to a General Accounting Office report released Friday.
The report does not dispute the Census Bureau's figures showing that about 5.3 million people were left out of the final count of 248.7 million Americans.
It expands on data released earlier this summer, showing that the 5.3 million figure is a net undercount, reflecting both the double counting and the people missed in the original count.


Sailor Held in Bomb Threat
A sailor reportedly trying to delay an airplane that another sailor needed to catch was charged with making a fake bomb threat.
Lawrence Curtis of the United States Naval Base in Groton was charged Friday with violating Federal laws dealing with bomb threats involving commercial airliners for a call he reportedly made on Aug. 12 to Delta Airline reservations workers in Boston, the F.B.I. said.
According to an affidavit, a caller said that a bomb had been placed on Flight 907 from Bradley International Airport in Windsor Locks to Arkansas.


Ms. Taylor Wed To J. A. Hoekema
Wendy Kathleen Taylor, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert H. Taylor of Long Beach, Calif., was married yesterday to to James Anthony Hoekema, a son of Mrs.
Anthony A. Hoekema of Grand Rapids, Mich., and the late Rev.
Dr.
Hoekema.
The Rev.
James M. Bank performed the ceremony at the First Unitarian Church in Baltimore.
Mrs.
Hoekema, 33 years old, graduated from the University of Southern California.
She is studying for a master's degree in education at George Washington University and is an intern at the Octagon Museum of the American Institute of Architects in Washington.
Her father is an engineer with the American Can Company in Long Beach.


An Easel in the Countryside
COROT IN ITALY
Open-Air Painting and the Classical-Landscape Tradition.
By Peter Galassi.
Illustrated. 258 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $55.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
FARMERS' MARKETS
More than two dozen farmers' markets are listed by the Hartford Food System, an organization that fosters agriculture in the state, and more farmers may be found by calling Connecticut Farm Fresh, 653-4759.


Corrections
A map on Aug. 4 with an article about Lyons, France, located Strasbourg incorrectly.
It is near the German border, not the Swiss border.


Don't Pronounce the Democrats Dead Just Yet; An Open Convention
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 8 front-page report of disappointment at the shrinking field of potential Democratic candidates for the Presidency: The party and indeed the country might rather focus on the possibilities of an open convention.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Our house has cedar siding that had been stained.
Two years ago, the stain started to peel, and so we had the siding restained.
The cedar boards on the southern side of the house are peeling again.
How can we correct the problem?
A.
A true stain does not peel, because it soaks into the wood and leaves no surface coating that can peel.
What was apparently used on your siding is one of the so-called heavy bodied stains or opaque stains that are more like paint than stain.
It would be best to remove all of it and apply a true semitransparent shingle stain.
If you do not remove the old finish, then you will have to continue applying the same type of coating used before.
The peeling problem is most likely caused by moisture inside the outer walls, which can be corrected by installing small louvers or vents in the outside siding, enabling trapped moisture to escape.


No, India Can't Keep Up With Japan, but Neither Can the U.S.
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 6 report on the changes made in India by the new Prime Minister, P. V. Narasimha Rao, contains misleading implications.


When the Call Is for a Custom-Made Suit
AFTER growing up in New Jersey and graduating from college in Maine, Nancy Hilton decided on an unusual career move.
Rather than follow her classmates' early forays into the corporate world, Ms.
Hilton chose instead to follow her heart.
She headed south and landed a job exercising race horses in Florida.
Now Ms.
Hilton deals with thoroughbreds of another sort -- the wealthy doctors, well-dressed lawyers and chief executive officers who hold the reins of power in some of the state's largest corporations.


Keeping the Bridge To Ellis Island
As a tourist visiting this country, I was amazed by the comments of several politicians on the pedestrian bridge to Ellis Island.
Nowhere is there mention of the fact that for many, if not most, large families, the trip is an impossibility due to the ferry charges.


Amazin' Mets Play Elsewhere
To the Sports Editor:
As the baseball season enters its final weeks, the Mets are in first place.
Throughout the season, they have played exciting baseball.
Even when they were down by a few runs, the fans were confident that the Mets will ultimately prevail.


The World; In Mexican Politics, The More It Reforms The More It's the Same
IN the lexicon of the new Mexico, change has a thousand names.
Businessmen discuss the "synergies" in their deals, columnists talk of "Salinastroika," and most everyone seems to like the way it sounds.
But last week, officials found themselves returning to the lexicon of old, specifically with the term "steamroller."
For years, the word -- aplanadora in Spanish -- has referred to the Institution al Revolutionary Party, the ruling machine known as the PRI.
At least it did until 1988, when election computers broke down with a populist dissident, Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, looking like he might break PRI's hold on the Presidency for the first time since the Government establishedthe PRI six decades earlier.
When the computers did revive and cough out a victory for Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the Harvard-trained economist declared an end to the days of the one-party state; the steamroller seemed to have ground to a halt.


At Candlewood, 'Me and My Girl'
AFTER the "Me and My Girl" deluge of 1990, the idea of going a whole year without seeing a single production of the spruced-up 1937 English musical -- anywhere -- was not unwelcome.
But that was rash.
Now the high-visibility show of last year, is being more sensibly apportioned.
On Tuesday, three days after an Ivoryton edition closed, the Candlewood Playhouse in New Fairfield, the state's premier summer stock showplace for popular musicals, finally came up with a "Me and My Girl" of its very own, thereby reaffirming the show's evergreen charms.
It's a wonder that it took the popular West End musical almost 50 years to reach Broadway, where it opened triumphantly in August 1986.
That version followed a London restoration, with a revised book, that was commissioned by Richard Armitage, the son of the show's composer, Noel Gay, whose real name was Reginald Armitage.
It contained four songs of Mr.
Gay's that were not in the original score, and was capped by an incomparable star turn by Robert Lindsay, who repeated his London success on Broadway.


World Markets; Caution in the Coup's Aftermath
It is not quite the same as the Berlin Wall coming down.
But the collapse of the hard-line coup in the Soviet Union last week is expected to send a new surge of confidence though Europe, giving some lift to the stock markets in the countries that will play a role in economic development of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
"It is the definitive death of Communism. The political risk of Communism has diminished, and that changes the whole outlook for Europe," said David Roche, international strategist at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company in London.


Ann Nealon Weds Everett Petronio Jr.
Ann Carroll Nealon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Nealon of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to Everett Anthony Petronio Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Petronio Sr. of Cranston, R.I.
The Rev.
Joseph Castaldi performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of SS.
John and Paul in Larchmont.
Mrs.
Petronio, 23 years old, and her husband, 24, graduated from Brown University.
Her father is a senior vice president and the chief financial officer of JWP Inc., a technical services company in Purchase, N.Y.


Mutual Funds; How the Wealthy Gather Advice
How do affluent individuals view various sources of investment advice?
For a new book, "Banking on Affluent Business" (Lafferty Publications), Russ Alan Prince interviewed 1,042 wealthy investors, people who have more than $1 million each in investment assets.
In all parts of the world, money managers are seen as the most capable investment advisers.
But mutual funds -- essentially collective money managers -- usually come in a close second.
Banks rank high in Europe, primarily because of the high reputation of Swiss bank accounts.


Reagans in Excellent Health, Mayo Clinic Checkups Find
Former President Ronald Reagan and his wife, Nancy, have been pronounced in excellent health after routine checkups at the Mayo Clinic.
"All tests were satisfactory, and their physicians found them both to be in excellent health," a spokeswoman for the Reagans, Cathy Goldberg, said in a written statement on Friday.
She said the Reagans arrived at the clinic on Wednesday and left Friday to return to their California home.


Amy Botto Married to Harrison Moore
Amy Louise Botto, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bruno Ernest Botto of Lee, Mass., was married yesterday in Annisquam, Mass. to Harrison Lyman Moore, a son of Mrs.
Alice Lyman Bennink of Winchester, Mass., and the late Charles Lothrop Moore.
The Rev.
Fayette Severance performed the ceremony at the Annisquam Village Church.
Mrs.
Moore, 33 years old, is a stockbroker at Merrill Lynch in Boston.
She graduated from Bentley College.
Her parents are retired; her father was an engineer with the Mead Corporation, a paper manufacturing company in Lee, and her mother, Helen Botto, was the assistant treasurer of the Lee Savings Bank.


Commercial Property: Exchanges Headquarters; A Two-in-One Structure With a 'Trading Box' Slab
TO the delight of New York officials in desperate need of any development news -- and the dismay of downtown neighbors who see another oversized tower in the works -- the New York Exchanges Headquarters project is taking form.
Designed for the New York Mercantile Exchange, Commodity Exchange, Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange, New York Cotton Exchange and New York Futures Exchange, the 1.2 million-square-foot structure is to rise on the block bounded by West, Warren, Greenwich and Murray Streets.
It is to be developed by Tishman Speyer Properties of Manhattan and completed in 1994.


A Utility Player Runs the Show Off Broadway
A radiance surrounds Don Scardino when he talks about his new job: the sweet, heady radiance of early love.
Next January, Mr.
Scardino will become artistic director of Playwrights Horizons, one of Off Broadway's most prestigious developmental theaters.
"It's been my dream all my life to live in this kind of atmosphere, know these people," the veteran actor-turned-director said one recent afternoon in a small office above the theater's lobby.
Tall and slender, with an air of youthful, scrubbed vitality, he admitted his appointment had also come as something of a shock.
"I'm surprised as hell to be here," he said.


D. A. DeLo Wed To Miss Persons
Sarah Noble Persons, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Persons of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dirk Andrew DeLo, the son of Dorothy DeLo of Riverside, Conn., and David DeLo of Laguna Beach, Calif.
The Rev.
Bruce Anderson performed the ceremony at the Church of Christ Congregational in Norfolk, Conn.
Mrs.
DeLo, 24 years old, graduated from Manhattanville College, where she is studying for a master's degree in education.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler.


The World at His Feet, Feet Firmly on the Ground
Everybody likes him.
What's not to like?
Bob Whitfield is big like a bear and funny and apparently always at ease, as if the world and everything in it had been placed at his feet for his choosing.
In some ways, perhaps it has because Whitfield -- not quite 20 years old but already being called one of the finest offensive linemen in the land -- has choices to make.
The most important: Does he bolt Stanford University and grab the riches of the National Football League after finishing his junior season?
Or does he fulfill his family's wishes, play two more years and complete a degree in industrial engineering?


GORBACHEV QUITS AS PARTY HEAD; ENDS COMMUNISM'S 74-YEAR REIGN
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev resigned today as the head of the Communist Party, disbanded its leadership and in effect banned the once monolithic party from any role in ruling the vast country over which it had held iron control for more than seven decades.
With Communism under brutal assault across the Soviet Union and his own leadership in shambles in the aftermath of a coup attempt, Mr.
Gorbachev abandoned his efforts to defend party leaders who had obviously collaborated in the putsch and finally dealt the party a fatal blow.


55 Killed in Typhoon At Tip of South Korea
At least 55 people were reported killed today after a typhoon struck the southern tip of the Korean Peninsula on Friday night.
Dozens were reported missing and more than 30,000 people were driven from their homes, South Korean news reports said.


Yeltsin, Repaying a Favor, Formally Recognizes Estonian and Latvian Independence
President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian federated republic said today that his republic formally recognized the independence of Estonia and Latvia and urged President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union and the rest of the world to do the same.
Mr.
Yeltsin issued decrees recognizing the two republics.
Lithuania, which declared its independence in March, has already been recognized by Russia as a sovereign state.


It Isn't the Paul Mozer They Knew
Those who worked closely with Paul W. Mozer during his dazzling 12-year career at Salomon Brothers say they are shocked and baffled by the pivotal role he played in the bond scandal.
Though he traded Government securities with gusto, Mr.
Mozer was not perceived, before this month, as a man who would cross the line into illegal or unethical activity.
Many of Mr.
Mozer's former colleagues said they were reserving judgement until he tells his story.
Mr.
Mozer, through his attorney, Lee Richards, has declined to comment.


Anne Sexton's Vision of Reality
To the Editor:
Our aunt Anne Sexton, whose biography was recently published (review, Aug. 18), was a unique literary personality.
Her insistence on what she saw as brutal honesty has given much to American poetry and literary thought.


Business Diary/August 18-23
INTERNATIONAL


Preserving a Flat Roof
FLAT roofs, which are usually built up with layers of roofing felt and asphalt or coal tar, should be recoated every two to four years, unless they are covered by a layer of gravel or other stone chips.
About two times a year, the roofs should also be inspected for blisters, cracks and other flaws that can lead to leaks.
Coating waterproofs and protects the original roofing.
It is available in five-gallon containers as a black or metallic liquid.
The material is thicker than paint, but not as thick as tar.
It is applied with a long-handled brush resembling a small push broom.


The Day's Highlights
Requiem for a Monolith
THE LEADER QUITS HIS PARTY: President Mikhail S. Gorbachev resigned as head of the Soviet Communist Party, disbanded its leadership and effectively banned the party from any effective role in governing.
Page 1.


A Patriotic Jordan Reconsiders the Games
He has already had the honor of helping the United States win an Olympic gold medal in basketball, in 1984, and he doesn't want to keep another player from enjoying the same honor next year by claiming a place on the team for the 1992 Games.
That has been MICHAEL JORDAN's stance.
But now the Chicago Bulls' star says he is reconsidering his position, but not, he wants you to know, because of a wave of unfair, uninformed attacks on his patriotism.
"I love my country," Jordan told The Chicago Sun-Times, bristling at suggestions that he might not.


We Owe Seven-Day Week to Babylonians
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 8 book review of Witold Rybczynski's "Waiting for the Weekend" discusses his preoccupation with the idea of the week and the weekend.
Sometimes it is a shock to discover how much of one's ordinary expectations are not necessarily part of a natural order, but products of human invention.
So it is with the week.
Long known in anthropology as an invention of the ancient Near East, the seven-day week was discussed as an item of cultural diffusion as early as the time of A. L. Kroeber.


Skeptics Piling On Merrill
Since General Manager Gene Michael placed part of the blame on Stump Merrill for the Don Mattingly haircut fiasco, there has been increased focus on the manager's seemingly tenuous position.
Mattingly was the first player to question Merrill's authority and now others are lining up to register their complaints.
Shortstop Alvaro Espinoza wrongly lashed out at Merrill on Friday night when the shortstop did not play in a 6-5 loss to the Blue Jays.
Espinoza said it had cost him a $25,000 incentive bonus for games played.
Actually, he had already lost the chance to play 150 games before Friday.


Sandra Jaenichen Is Married on L.I.
Sandra Kay Jaenichen, a real-estate broker, and George L. Engelke Jr., a savings official, were married last evening at the Community Church of East Williston, L.I.
The Rev.
Norman Towler performed the nondenominational ceremony.
Mrs.
Engelke, 51 years old, is the owner of Jaenichen-Degen Realty in Garden City, L.I.
She graduated from Penn Hall College.
She is the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Stilz.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did that of the bridegroom.


Rampaging Braves Turn Up Heat And Trail Dodgers By One Game
David Justice and Brian Hunter hit consecutive home runs in the sixth inning and Tom Glavine became the National League's first 16-game winner, leading the Atlanta Braves to a 4-2 victory over the Philadelphia Philles Friday night.
The Braves, the hottest team in the National League since the All-Star Game break at 28-14, have won four straight in their battle to overtake first-place Los Angeles in the National League West.
The Braves moved within one game of the lead as the Dodgers lost in St.
Louis.


Jennifer Wilson To Marry in June
Valerie Ann Wilson of Bronxville, N.Y., and Robert G. Wilson of Key Biscayne, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Lynn Wilson to Brian Joseph Buttigieg, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Buttigieg of Floral Park, L.I.
A wedding is planned for June.
Miss Wilson, 23 years old, and her fiance, 24, graduated from Haverford College.
She is a vice president of Valerie Wilson Travel in New York, a company owned by her mother.
Her father is the chairman of Ecologic Waste Services in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.


The New Fall Style
It shouts.
It whispers.
It's spectacular, or so subtle only the cognoscenti catch the drift.
The new fall style is not about definitive hemlines or silhouettes.
It's about nuances and strong statements.
Tweeds and plaids, shimmering paillettes, glints of gold stand out.
Brilliant color is at an all-time high, but so is dense black.
Accessories -- played up or stripped down -- set the mood.
The cost of so much new fashion is staggering.
Yet every idea can be had for less -- and less than that.
The real point of the new fall style is that it can give you a lift.
Seeing it is to be bewitched.
Owning just a piece of it is even better.


I.B.M. Gears Up for Battle Over Mainframe Disk Drives
Here in what may be the biggest factory building west of the Mississippi River, the world's largest computer maker is fighting to protect its most profitable line of business.
In a dust-free room clean enough to make computer chips, the International Business Machines Corporation assembles disk drives for its most powerful mainframe computers, turning out one drive every five minutes of every hour, five days a week.
But now, those file-drawer-sized storage systems, which I.B.M. sells separately or packaged with mainframes, are at risk of becoming a victim to the same force that has stalled the company's mainframe business.
Just as the microprocessor chip has made possible ever-more powerful and inexpensive desktop computers and work stations, new palm-sized disk drives are opening up similar possibilities in the storage segment of the business.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Our house has cedar siding that had been stained.
Two years ago, the stain started to peel, and so we had the siding restained.
The cedar boards on the southern side of the house are peeling again.
How can we correct the problem?
A.
A true stain does not peel, because it soaks into the wood and leaves no surface coating that can peel.
What was apparently used on your siding is one of the so-called heavy bodied stains or opaque stains that are more like paint than stain.
It would be best to remove all of it and apply a true semitransparent shingle stain.
If you do not remove the old finish, then you will have to continue applying the same type of coating used before.
The peeling problem is most likely caused by moisture inside the outer walls, which can be corrected by installing small louvers or vents in the outside siding, enabling trapped moisture to escape.


HIM ALONE
Several years ago I read an article lamenting the absence of writers who deal with the subject of mainstream American life.
Now we have John Hughes depicting
very
mainstream America, and critics call him lightweight and silly.
I say yea for John Hughes, and for the return to the screen of entertainment.
JAN V. L. BREWSTER Grafton, Mass.


Dustin Coleman Wed to Miss Fairchild
Theresa Dawn Elizabeth Fairchild and Dustin Lawton Coleman were married yesterday at St.
Matthew Roman Catholic Cathedral in Washington.
The Revs.
Joseph A. Haller and Robert J. Rokusek officiated.
The bride is a daughter of Elizabeth Fairchild of Alexandria, Va., and the late Charles Fairchild.
The bridegroom is a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William Coleman of Yardley, Pa.


In Country


Roberts Nears Accord
Of the Giants' three unsigned veterans, William Roberts will probably join the team Monday and Dave Meggett anywhere between Monday and Wednesday.
Mark Ingram's negotiations have reached an impasse.
A source with knowledge of the negotiations said today that negotiations had all but concluded with Roberts, an eighth-year offensive guard.
The source said Roberts would sign a three-year contract worth $2.45 million.
He would get annual salaries of $750,000, $800,000 and $850,000, with a $50,000 signing bonus.
But Roberts was said to be trying for $900,000 in 1993.
Last year, Roberts earned $430,000.


A Sloop in Search of a Safe Harbor
THE 42-foot Sojourner Truth may soon become a ship without a port.
Docked off riverfront property here, the bright yellow sloop with its majestic tanbark-colored sails needs a new slip on the Hudson River to call home.
The boat, which is modeled after a 19th-century single-masted sailing vessel, is owned and operated by the environmental and educational group Ferry Sloops and has been part of the waterfront landscape of this village for more than a decade.
But the owners of the industrialized dock area, worried about the deteriorating condition of the bulkhead, have given the group until the end of October to find another base of operations.


In the Nation; Damned Either Way
The staggering news from Moscow momentarily obscured events that ordinarily might have occupied Americans' attention, such as the new questions raised about the integrity of financial markets by the Salomon Brothers scandal; the withdrawal of another potential Democratic Presidential candidate, Albert Gore, and the battle developing over President Bush's nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court.
But the latest Wall Street disclosure only underscores again the sleazy grab-it-while-you-can economic atmosphere of the 80's, which is now coming into full view.
And Democrats, sooner or later, will field a Presidential candidate, weak or strong, and contest the 1992 election, well or poorly.


Winter Wedding For Karin Christ
Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Christ of Lebanon, Pa., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Karin Lisa Christ, to Brian Harrison Mitchell, a son of Mrs.
J.
Murray Mitchell Jr. of McLean, Va., and the late Dr.
Mitchell.
A February wedding is planned.
Miss Christ, 27 years old, is an information systems consultant in Philadelphia for Andersen Consulting, a division of Arthur Andersen in New York.
She graduated from Gettysburg College and received an M.B.A. from Pennsylvania State University.
Her father is the president of Hershey International in Hershey, Pa.


Chips Off Different Blocks
To the Editor:
Michael Kimmelman's article on the kouros in the Getty Museum  [ "Absolutely Real? Absolutely Fake?," Aug. 4 ]  gives an exceptionally clear account of the recent history of this puzzling sculpture.
One important fact should be added: When we purchased the modern torso we were told, as Mr.
Kimmelman reports, that our kouros and the torso were made from the same block of marble; subsequent analyses demonstrated, however, that they could not have been carved from the same block, nor is it likely that the marbles are even from the same quarry.
JOHN WALSH Director, J. Paul Getty Museum, Santa Monica, Calif.


Style Makers; Kerri Kent, Windsurf-Wear Designer
As an avid sportswoman in the windsurfing mecca of Hood River, Ore., in the Columbia River Gorge, Kerri Kent knew firsthand the problems with wearing most bathing suits while windsurfing.
"The straps came down and the bottoms crept in," she said.
"The only alternative was competition suits, which are pretty uninteresting looking."


ABOUT NEW JERSEY
AS cities keep sliding, they become more like antiques, evocative but often useless.
Their cracks and jagged edges give them age and character; they can trigger memories and bring up warm feelings for what once was, but their deficiencies far outnumber their strengths.
Still, cities have special meaning for those who can hear the past when they walk down cracked sidewalks and see yesterday turning corners before them.
One such man is Louis J. Sisbarro of Nutley, formerly of Newark, and his link to the past took him on a strange but wonderful voyage in which he learned something about cities and something more about the city that still exists inside himself.


Making a Difference/The Soviet Coup; Betting on a Moving Market
At first, Benoit Ruaudel shrugged off the report he got from his Tokyo office late Sunday night that Mikhail Gorbachev was ill.
"For the last three years, we have had so much news on Gorbachev," said Mr.
Ruaudel, the chief foreign exchange options trader in New York at Societe Generale, the giant French bank.
"And when you are in bed, what does it mean?"
But within a few minutes, Mr.
Ruaudel had changed his mind.
This could be major news, he decided, and he told Tokyo he was on his way to the office.
And it was there that one of his most topsy-turvy weeks in the currency options business began.


Produce for Summer Hors d'Oeuvres
SUMMER produce simplifies entertaining.
There is still plenty of time to take advantage of the fresh harvest from local farms.
And the fresher the ingredient, the better the flavor, so elaborate preparation is unnecessary.
Even a platter or bowl of necessary tidbits to buy time before all the dinner guests arrive can be as elemental as fresh vegetables.
Crudites are perennial favorites, for example, but when assembled from the seasonal crop they become more than merely vehicles for creamy dip and are delicious in their own right.


WEATHERING PREJUDICE
My wife and I have been together for more than 11 years and, as a couple, we have virtually never experienced any incidents of rudeness, either in New York City or in any of the places we have vacationed over the years.
Of course, people stare at us, but we usually don't mind the stares.
People are naturally curious about "mixed" couples.
In fact, I often look at other mixed couples myself, in part because I like to see who else has chosen to take the risks that my wife and I took and because, when children are present, I am fascinated to see the ways that the parents' colors blend in them.
STEWART N. WEISS Jackson Heights, Queens


Talking: Dual Fuels; Flipping Between Gas and Oil
UNCERTAIN whether gas or oil will become the fuel of choice -- or whether the advantages will continue to bounce back and forth between the two -- a growing number of New York apartment buildings are updating their heating plants to burn either fuel at the flip of a switch.
"It's the logical way to go," said Oskar Brecher, managing director of American Landmark Management of Manhattan.
The popularity of dual-fuel systems is further increasing, he added, as technology improves and boards and landlords discover it costs only $500 to $1,000 more to buy a system with the dual capacity.


Honoring Columbus Backfires in Philadelphia
Plans to rename a street after Christopher Columbus have run afoul of two groups: neighborhood associations who like the current name, Delaware Avenue, and American Indians who say such a change is an insult to them because of Columbus's mistreatment of their ancestors.
Sometime before Columbus Day on Oct. 14 -- when the nation will start celebrating the 500th anniversary of Columbus's landing in America -- the city plans to tear down street signs along almost four miles of Delaware Avenue and erect new ones that say Christopher Columbus Boulevard.
About a mile stretch of the wide avenue along the waterfront, filled with potholes and intersected with abandoned railroad tracks, will remain Delaware.


'Peer Gynt' on CD: Ibsen Comes Back Into Grieg's Territory
Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, Brahms's "German Requiem," Schubert's "Winterreise" -- these are only the most obvious examples of music that has benefited from the uninterrupted playing time of the CD format.
A series of recent recordings argue the case for adding Grieg's incidental music for Ibsen's "Peer Gynt" to the list.
It's not simply that Jeffrey Tate (with the Berlin Philharmonic; Angel/EMI 7 54119 2; CD) and Herbert Blomstedt (with the San Francisco Symphony; London 425 448-2; CD and cassette) offer some 20 to 25 more minutes of Grieg's score than the standard LP editions.
More important, the added music goes beyond stand-alone mood portraits to dramatically more specific musical settings as well as extended scenes with music -- most notably Peer's harrowing"Night Scene" in Act V, with its echoes of the ghostly Wolf's Glen scene of Weber's "Freischutz."


Metro Datelines; 4-Year-Old Boy Shot With Father's Gun
A four-year-old child was yesterday shot in the abdomen, apparently while he played with his father's gun, the police said.
The accident occurred early yesterday.
The police said they had been told by the father, Carlton Russell, that he had left his handgun unattended on a couch overnight, and heard a gunshot this morning at his home at 2223 Andrews Avenue in the Bedford Park section of the Bronx.


A Musical of Wry Comments on Class
AFTER the "Me and My Girl" deluge of 1990, the idea of going a whole year without seeing a single production of the spruced-up 1937 English musical -- anywhere -- was not unwelcome.
But that was rash.
Now the high-visibility show of last year is being more sensibly apportioned.
On Tuesday, three days after an Ivoryton edition closed, the Candlewood Playhouse in New Fairfield, the state's premiere summer stock showplace for popular musicals, finally came up with a "Me and My Girl" of its very own, thereby reaffirming the show's evergreen charms.


Metro Datelines; Bronx Man Is Slain in Robbery Attempt
A 22-year-old man was stabbed to death yesterday when he tried to rob an employee in a Bronx store, the police said.
Allen Cabble of 12-29 Collage Avenue entered a bodega at 1275 Webster Avenue with a gun and demanded money from the store employee.


Lisa J. Youngling Plans To Wed Orion Howard
Lisa Jennifer Youngling and Orion Maurice Howard, who are completing studies for medical doctorates at Cornell University, plan to marry in October.
Miss Youngling is the daughter of Karen Lehrhaupt of Matawan, N.J., and James A. Youngling of Litchfield, Conn.
Mr.
Howard, 25, is the son of Dr.
Jan M. Howard of Potomac, Md., and Norman C. Howard of Atherton, Calif.
The prospective bride graduated from Swarthmore College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
The future bridegroom graduated cum laude from Williams College.


HIM ALONE
Thank you, thank you, thank you for Bill Carter's article "Him Alone" (Aug. 4).
I've always wanted to know what John Hughes was really like, and from what I read he sounds brilliant.
As a 14-year-old, I feel Hughes's movies like "The Breakfast Club" and "Sixteen Candles" have become the classics of my generation.
John, if you read this, I have two things to say: First, I know someone who loves "The Breakfast Club" so much that she can recite the whole movie.
Second, don't worry about the critics; you're really something else.
HALEH NEMATZADEH Searingtown, L.I.


Boredom With TV Spurs Discontent in China
The best thing about Chinese television these days, a university teacher in his 30's said the other day, is that it's excruciatingly boring.
"My wife used to sit in front of the TV all evening," he said.
"But these days, it's so dull that we talk more to each other, and we go on long walks together. The result is that we're more healthy and our relationship is better."


Mandates Evolve for Public Television
WHEN Jerry Franklin became president and chief executive officer of Connecticut Public Broadcasting six years ago, he said, he found a "non-aggressive station." Worse, CPTV was commonly called "sleepy TV" by the public, and had a market penetration of only 30 percent of the state's population.
Not only did the station have an identity crisis, in some areas of the state it was also competing with WGBH of Boston and WNET of New York.
The Connecticut Public Broadcasting system consists of Channel 24 in Hartford, Channel 49 in Fairfield County, Channel 53 in Norwich, Channel 65 in New Haven and Channel 12 in Waterbury as well as FM radio stations in Middlefield, Norwich and Stamford.
The CPTV guide, which appears in Connecticut Magazine, is produced by the station, as is its own Applause Guide.
A profit-making production company called the Corporate Video Center is a subsidiary in Stamford.
Mr.
Franklin has turned things around for Connecticut Public Broadcasting.
Now, 60 percent of the state's viewers tune in to their home station, according to Nielsen surveys.


The Clash of Sweet Memory and Bitter Reality
SWEET.
I remember that first trip through Harlem like it was yesterday.


PLAN TO DEVELOP AMAZON A FAILURE
Fifteen years ago, Maria Luisa de Oliveira Dias hiked down a jungle trail here to claim a 250-acre wood lot under an ambitious plan to colonize the Amazon.
Today, she wishes she had never left her home in southern Brazil.
Plantings of corn and rice withered in the sandy soil.
Rubber trees never produced latex.
And coffee prices are so low that income this year for her family of four adults will be less than $1,000.


Randy Peeler Is Wed to Kate Kellogg
Katherine Cissel Kellogg, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James C. Kellogg 4th of Summit, N.J., was married yesterday at All Saints Episcopal Church in Bay Head, N.J., to David Randolph Peeler, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald R. Peeler of Charlotte, N.C.
The Rev.
Edward B. Gammons Jr. performed the ceremony.
The bride, 25 years old and known as Kate, is keeping her name.
She and the bridegroom, 26, who is known as Randy, are candidates for M.B.A. degrees at Harvard University.
Both are members of Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a summa cum laude graduate of Dartmouth College.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Townley &amp; Updike.


Keeping the Bridge To Ellis Island
Objections to the Ellis Island footbridge raised by New York officials are as specious as their real motives are mercenary.
These same New York officials who profess such sympathy for the vendors in Battery Park are having no qualms about destroying the livelihoods of vendors on Fifth Avenue.
Their concerns over having tourists relive the entire immigrant experience would include not only the boat ride but also the ripoffs and degradations that many of those immigrants first encountered on these shores.


Despite the Rain, Plants Need More Water
EVEN though the region has had thunderstorms and some rainfall, this is not the time to ignore plants, especially those with woody stems.
The rainfall helped the shallow-rooted crops, herbaceous plants and annuals, but many of the big ornamentals supported by large root systems need help.
A finger poked deeply into the soil will reveal how little moisture really soaked into the ground.
Keep the hose out, and allow water to trickle slowly for 15 to 20 minutes a plant, so it reaches deep to the root zones.
A good soaking once a week or every 10 days should be adequate.
There are small attachments for the ends of hoses that allow this gentle trickle of water to seep directly into the ground.
This type of watering conserves valuable moisture for the purpose intended, and the water is not lost to evaporation as is often the case with sprinkler attachments for garden hoses.


Corrections
An article on July 21 about the Nashville Parthenon misstated the admission price.
It is $2.50 for adults and $1.25 for children.


POSTINGS: Consent Decree; Gay Rights In a Co-op
A dispute between a gay couple and a co-op board has led to a settlement that borrows from the two-year-old Braschi decision, which expanded the definition of "family" in rent-controlled housing.
Stephen Rzewuski and his companion, whom he did not want identified, charged that the board of 165 Duane Street, at Hudson Street, had prevented Mr.
Rzewuski from co-owning his companion's co-op shares because they are unmarried and homosexual.


Learning to Meet That Deadline
IT was any journalist's nightmare.
With deadline fast approaching, Jeffrey McMurray needed to talk to the county prosecutor's office about the latest developments of the capital murder case.
But would the prosecutor be available for comment?
Would he have anything new to say?
Mr.
McMurray knew that his article hinged on a good quotation.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 11 about the Bayeux Tapestry misidentified the father of King Harold of England.
He was Godwin, Earl of Wessex.


Don't Pronounce the Democrats Dead Just Yet
To the Editor:
"Democrats' Distress Grows as Presidential Field Shrinks" (front page, Aug. 8) fans the flames of dismay among liberals and progressives in this country by declaring that the Democratic heavyweights are by and large not seeking their party's nomination for President.
Whatever the truth of that, by which I mean that the Democrats with the greatest name recognition and financial backing may well be sitting this race out, this article and others like it create a self-fulfilling prophecy that will lead us to four more years of George Bush and his search for the "vision thing."


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Bay Shore 675,000
29 Lawrence Lane  6-bedroom, 5 1/2-bath, 53-year-old colonial; 1.1 acre, inground pool; taxes $11,300.
Bayport 420,000
51 Browns River Road  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 26-year-old ranch; den, dining room, eat-in kitchen, Florida room, fireplace, boat slip; taxes $8,100.
Hauppauge 152,500
85 Lincoln Boulevard  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 28-year-old ranch; basement, fireplace, deck, 2-car garage, 1 acre; taxes $3,000.
Kings Park 126,000
10 Raleigh Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35- year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room, basement; taxes $3,100.
Smithtown 248,500
2 Springbriar Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; basement, c/a, 2-car garage, 0.5 acre; taxes $6,100.
West Islip 500,000
86 Anchorage Drive  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old waterfront colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room; taxes $8,700.
OTHER AREAS Old Lyme, Conn. 95,000
69 Rogers Lake Trail  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; fireplace, walk to lake, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,598.
Larchmont, N.Y. 340,000
89 West Brookside Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 56-year-old colonial; fireplace, breakfast area, family room; taxes $7,389.
Mahwah, N.J. 157,500
130 Johnson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, over 50 year-old colonial; pool, natural woodwork, deck; taxes $1,758.


Jody Hoffer, a Researcher, to Wed Ross Gittell, an Assistant Professor
The engagement of Jody Hoffer to Ross Gittell, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Gittell of New York, has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
John Hoffer of Lancaster, Pa.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Hoffer, 30 years old, is a research associate at the Community Development Research Center at the New School for Social Research in New York.
She is to begin studies next month as a Scanlon fellow for a doctorate in industrial relations at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She graduated from Reed College and received a master's degree in economics from the New School.
Her father is the president of the Hoffer Development Corporation, a real-estate company in Lancaster.
Her mother, Shirley Hoffer, is an associate broker with Jack Gaughen Realtors in Harrisburg, Pa.


Bob Passes, Altering Lives and Landscape
BOB, the first hurricane of the 1991 season, plundered its way up the East Coast last week, killing more than a dozen people and disrupting the lives of millions of others.
The storm caused drownings as far south as the Carolina sea islands, but the worst damage from its 100-mile-an-hour-plus winds was inflicted along the crowded coasts of the Northeast.
Along with more deaths by drowning and other storm related accidents, Bob brought power and telpehone outages lasting up to several days and affecting up to 2.1 million people in Long Island, Connecticut, Rhode Island and Massachusetts.
Trees snapped, dozens of boats were sunk or flung ashore, several beach houses were washed away -- along with some beaches -- a Metro-North commuter train conductor was killed when Bob dropped a tree on her train, an auto accident victim died in an ambulance after being turned away at two hospitals that had no electricity, and one man had his leg broken when a wave burst through his living room window.
Damage that could be expressed in dollars in the four states ran to several billion.


Lawyer Jailed for Anti-Semitic Court Outburst
A Houston lawyer who made anti-Semitic remarks about a county judge in an angry courtroom outburst has been ordered by a Federal judge to begin serving a six-month jail term.
In appealing two criminal contempt convictions, the lawyer, Jack Love, had argued that the sentence, which was handed down by a state district judge and includes a $500 fine, was unconstitutionally harsh.


MORE ON THE SOVIETS
End of an era 14
The party's legacy, the American outlook 15
Dissecting the coup 16
A funeral march to new horizons 17


Artists Crusading for Nature
NOT since it was declared "the environment" has nature had so much attention.
And much of the fuss is coming from the artist, who -- Shelley himself might agree -- has replaced the poet as society's "unacknowledged legislator."
In Westchester, the eye of the storm is at the Somerstown Gallery.
"Environment Watch/40 Artists" is the title of its show, but 47 contributors are listed, and whatever immediacy is missing from their works -- paintings, drawings, prints, photographs and sculpture -- is made up for by their verbal statements.


A Nautical Look Without Stuffed Fish
A DECADE ago, seafood restaurants were filled with lobster traps, nets and mounted fish.
The 90's nautical look is like a trip to old New York, with its pressed-tin ceilings, large mirrors, lazy fans, period light fixtures and turn-of-the-century photographs of docks, sailing ships and majestic bridges.
The straightforward scene is achieved in black and white with hunter-green accents and nary a stuffed fish in sight.
Chatham's in Locust Valley fits the mold and then some.
At its heart is a magnificent antique mirror-backed bar accented with mahogany, golden oak, marble railing and columns and shiny brass.


Pitching: Problem, What Problem?
Baseball executives, managers, players and fans talk constantly about the poor state of pitching that exists today.
Major league pitching has never been worse, they generally agree, and it's going to get worse with expansion.
Teams can't find five decent pitchers to stock their starting rotations; they're fortunate if they have two or three dependable starters.
This season, teams have summoned a succession of rookie pitchers from the minor leagues, only to send many of them back and call up others who are given the opportunity to play in the major leagues long before they are ready and long before their predecessors ever had the chance.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Philadelphia; Riverfront Clubs Bloom
FINANCING difficulties may be stalling much of the residential and office development on the Delaware River, but a former industrial area is blossoming with new restaurants and nightclubs.
One of the new clubs, the $1 million Katmandu, an outdoor restaurant and bar, was a response to the recession by two developers, Lance Silver and Stuart Harting of Philadelphia.
It opened in mid- May on Delaware Avenue.
A Katmandu partner, David Preefer, said recreation is a natural use for the river's edge about a mile east of the central business district.


The Nation; The Environmental Impact of President Bush
IN 1988, George Bush stood on the deck of a boat in Boston's filthy harbor and proclaimed himself an environmentalist.
Throughout the campaign he promised to scrub the skies with a strengthened Clean Air Act, set a goal of "no net loss of wetlands" and do everything in his power to halt global environmental threats.
"Those who think we're powerless to do anything about the greenhouse effect," he declared in a speech in Michigan in August 1988, "are forgetting about the White House effect."
This month, prompted by Administration proposals to open millions of acres of wetlands to development and to officially lower the risk estimates for dioxin and other long-feared contaminants, Mr.
Bush's record on the environment is undergoing more scrutiny than at any other time in his Presidency.


New &amp; Noteworthy
AMERICAN CASSANDRA: The Life of Dorothy Thompson, by Peter Kurth. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) By the late 1930's, when The New York Herald Tribune gave her a column next to Walter Lippmann's, Dorothy Thompson had become so influential a journalist that Time magazine said she was the country's second most popular woman, after Eleanor Roosevelt.
Readers "will be pleased to meet a fascinating, driven and indomitable woman who richly deserves this fine biography," Thomas Griffith said here last year.
LIKE LIFE, by Lorrie Moore. (Plume, $8.95.) In one of these stories about people stranded by love, a playwright whose girlfriend has left him becomes obsessed by the idea that he is being poisoned by truck fumes in his apartment above a sex shop in Times Square.
In 1990 our reviewer, Stephen McCauley, praised Lorrie Moore for "the accuracy of her observations, the lyricism of many of her descriptions and the wry view of behavior wryly expressed." She has written "a rewarding, even exhilarating book."


Corrections
A picture caption last Sunday about tugboats in New York Harbor misidentified the ship and tugboat shown.
The ship was the Orion Highway, a car carrier, and the tugboat was the McAllister Sisters.


Metro Datelines; NOW Walk Backs Bid for Abortion Pill
About 75 mem bers of the National Organization for Women of New Jersey walked the Boardwalk yesterday to suport efforts to legalize an abortion pill.
The 10th annual Abortion Rights Walk-a-thon commemorated Women's Equality Day, which is tomorrow, said the group's president, Donna Puluka.
The group was led by a New Hampshire state representative, Gary Gilmore, a Democrat from Dover who is the chief sponsor of a bill that would allow testing of the abortion pill, RU486, in his state.


Challenging Residency as Job Requirement
THE recent settlement of a suit filed by the N.A.A.C.P. against the City of Clifton has renewed the debate over whether municipal employees should be required to live in the towns and cities where they work.
On one level, the debate centers around contentions by the N.A.A.C.P. that the requirements are racially disciminatory.
On another, the issue revolves around a question of fairness to municipal workers.
Some of the unions that represent uniformed employees argue that the laws should be scrapped, while those that represent clerical workers and laborers assert that the rules should be expanded to include employees like teachers, police officers and firefighters and should be enforced more vigorously.


In Movie Posters, High Concept Is King
"Movie posters are really the last poster art form in the United States," says Anthony Goldschmidt, president of Intralink Film Graphic Design, a Los Angeles company.
In Hollywood's heyday, posters were likely to capitalize on emotion-drenched images of leading ladies and men, such as the sultry Vivien Leigh, eyes half-closed, draped around Clark Gable for "Gone With the Wind." Or they may have tried to encapsulate an entire film, as in the great illustrated posters for 1950's westerns, which were likely to feature herds of cowboys galloping off into the sunset.
Today, however, movie posters pitch the concept as much as the cast.
In a world of sound bites and quick sells, film posters have become telegraphic rather than panoramic.
"The old 'tell 'em the story' approach for the graphic and print symbols for a film has really changed," says Greg Morrison, president of marketing for MGM-Pathe.
Because potential audiences see snippets of a film's plot in television commercials and movie trailers, the posters are free to astonish and tease.


Keeping the Bridge To Ellis Island
Re: "A Bridge New Jersey Wants but New York Doesn't" (July 21):
All this business about taking down the pedestrian bridge is ridiculous.
Having to arrive at Ellis Island by boat to have part of the "immigrant experience" is equally ridiculous.
And the notion of a free pedestrian bridge as ruining the tourist business of New York City is not only ridiculous, it is absurd.
People will continue to go to New York City because it is New York City.
I am a resident of Jersey City, with about a 15-minute walk to Liberty State Park, and would be more than willing to pay a nominal fee (say $1 to $3, which would go to the upkeep of the bridge) to enter the Ellis Island park.
In our current economic standing, taking a family of four to see a national monument, which should be free, would cost $18 by the ferry service.
It isn't worth it.
Keep the bridge.
ARNITA D. SASS  Jersey City


From Idealism to Terror to Rejection: 74 Years of Pervasive Communist Rule
The Soviet Communist Party, condemned to the ash heap across its native land in the last 48 hours, was born of the vision of the 19th-century philosopher Karl Marx and molded by the turn-of-the-century revolutionary Lenin into a blunt instrument to take over and control a sprawling, impoverished society in turmoil.
For almost 74 years, between its rise to power in November 1917 and its leader's repudiation of it yesterday, this institution born of ideology was church, state, government, watchdog, exclusive club and secret society, a pervasive presence in every aspect of daily life for the millions of people of the Soviet Union.


Drug Lord? Impossible. Not Him. He Had It All.
People in the village of Southold, L.I., thought the world of William F. LaMorte.
In 1976, at the age of 30, he moved into a lavish 19-room house on the waterfront.
He had a charming family, neighbors said, with two daughters and a son.
He owned a handful of supermarkets scattered about Suffolk County, and he seemed a hardworking type, with expensive tastes, like a personal helicopter and a 110-foot yacht.
"He was a regular businessman," said John Nickles, who sold Mr.
LaMorte some property over the years.
"He was so active in the community."


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended Aug. 10  MANHATTAN  Carnegie Hill 976,000
1170 Fifth Avenue (98th St.)  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned-elevator, maid's room, eat-in kitchen, Central Park view; maintenance $2,158, 26% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia-Carnegie Hill Properties)  Clinton 145,000
529 West 42d Street  (Armory)  1-bedroom, 1/2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft., duplex-co-op; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, fireplace, 2 entrances, Hudson River view; maintenance $975, 58% tax-deductible (Broker: Kuzmuk Realty)  SoHo 550,000
84 Mercer Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 4,000-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, 12-ft. high ceilings, decorative columns, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,615, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: Sinvin Realty-Eychner &amp; Associates)  TriBeCa 330,000
335 Greenwich Street (Jay St.)  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, dining area, 2 exposures, Hudson River view; maintenance $835, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Tabak Real Estate)  Upper West Side 650,000
145 West 79th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. prewar, penthouse co-op; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, windowed kitchen, fireplace, terrace; maintenance $1,100, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  BRONX  Castle Hill 230,000
1956 Chatterton Avenue  3-family, detached, brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in others; 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: ERA/Marland Real Estate)  Norwood 165,000
3074 Hull Avenue  2-family, detached, frame house; 4 bedrooms in primary unit; 3 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; taxes $1,107 (Broker: Tryax Realty)  BROOKLYN  Kensington 227,500
446 East 4th Street  3-family, detached, frame house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; 1 bath, dining room, eat-in kitchen, open and enclosed porches in each; 1-car garage; taxes $1,273 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Park Slope 389,000
23 Prospect Place  5-bedroom, 3-bath, single-family, 4-story brownstone; formal parlor, 2 fireplaces, original moldings and details, additional building lot on 38- by 80-ft. property; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Aguayo &amp; Knox)  QUEENS  Elmhurst 200,000
90-51 Corona Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, single-family, attached, brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 900-sq.-ft. of commercial space on the ground floor, 18- by 70-ft. lot; taxes $3,200 (Broker: Century 21/Elms Real Estate)  Forest Hills 207,500
89-31 70th Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, frame house; eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 24- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,000 (Broker: Dix Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Great Kills 295,000
105 Islington Avenue  2-family, detached, high-ranch; 3 bedrooms, 3 baths, dining room, family room in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; eat-in kitchen in both; finished basement, 1-car garage, 45- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,100 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)  Lighthouse Hill 395,000
55 Scheffelin Avenue  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, single-family, detached, center-hall Dutch colonial; eat-in kitchen, Florida room, finished basement, 2-car garage, 105- by 80-ft. lot; taxes $3,200 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


Mindy Frucht Is a Bride
Mindy Jaye Frucht, a daughter of Carol Berliner of Paramus, N.J., and Stephen Frucht of Fort Lee, N.J., was married last evening in Livingston, N.J., to Jonathan Alan Greene, a son of Rebecca Greene of Plainview, L.I., and Philip Greene of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
Rabbi Hyman Krantz performed the ceremony at the Livingston Country Club.
Mrs.
Greene, 27 years old, graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University.
Mr.
Greene, 30, graduated from Syracuse University, from which he also received a master's degree in communications.
He is a producer for WNBC-TV in New York.


It's Survival of the Fittest at Open
It's the tennis tournament that the top professionals love to hate, housed in an unforgiving stadium Boris Becker says no player in his right mind would bother to visit were it not for the Grand Slam event that lives there.
But with a record $7.25 million at stake, none of them can afford to pass up the 1991 United States Open when it begins tomorrow morning at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
"The countdown starts on Monday, and from that point on, only the fittest survive," said the No. 1-ranked Becker, the 1989 men's champion, who likens the Grand Slam experience to mountain climbing and finds the Open, with its heat, noise and demonstrative crowds, to be as treacherous as it is tantalizing.


Stamps
Radio Days
The United States Postal Service's marketing of stamp-collecting as a hobby will accelerate this week with the issue of a booklet honoring comedians.
The five designs and the booklet cover include novelties that should appeal to collectors; the theme should appeal to everybody.


Charter Flights
To the Editor: Travelers who require special meals in flight should be alerted to the fact that some charter operators are not prepared to be accommodating.
Inquiry should be made before paying for the trip.
Having never run into this problem before we never thought of asking until all flights, hotels and car rental were confirmed.
When my travel agent called the wholesaler to report that I was in her office to pay for the trip and to request kosher meals she was told that kosher food would not be available.
I have flown on many airlines, domestic and foreign, and I was never before told that they would not accommodate me for special meals.
For $20 more my travel agent was able to book me on a regular flight, not a charter, and Air France will provide the kosher meals.
DANIEL L. FRIEDENREICH Queens Village, Queens


Out of the Running
With George Bush showing no signs of vincibility, the field of Democratic Presidential candidates is narrowing down to those for whom the nomination alone would be prize enough.
Last week, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee added his name to the list of nationally known, Presidentially inclined Democrats who have decided that this is not the time to bow to their inclinations.
In the last few weeks, Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th of West Virginia and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri have both announced non-candidacies.
Their reasons have been different -- in Mr.
Gore's case it was the desire to spend more time with his family -- but it is probably fair to say that none cares to risk having a lopsided loss on his Presidential Contender resume.
So the field for now consists of former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts and possibly Governors Bill Clinton of Iowa and L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia, none of whom have much to lose by losing to Mr.
Bush.


Gigli's Cheaper Line Is for Her or for Him
When Romeo Gigli created two collections -- one high-priced, one medium-priced -- he was looking for two different markets: the haves and the have-somes.
With his expensive collection, the Italian designer is a fantasist, designing women's clothes for an ethereal, fragile creature.
With the G Gigli collection, whose prices are about two-thirds those of the other collection, he is a pragmatist.
The clothes are androgynous, for men and women to wear interchangeably.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
RICHARD III EXHIBITION
The Richard III Society, large in England but with no more than 600 members here, marches to a decidedly different drummer.
An exhibition sponsored by the society, composed of material rebutting Shakespeare's depiction of Richard can be seen at the North Castle Public Library in Armonk at 19 Whippoorwill Road East, through Aug. 31.


Design; Harmonic Convergences
If handled properly, design can be one of the great healing arts," says Clodagh, the Manhattan designer. A self-professed new-ager, Clodagh began exploring different areas of enlightenment as a 16-year-old growing up in Ireland. "In Europe, people thought I was a crank," she says. "Here, they accept it."
Clodagh's methods are intriguing.
She spouts Chinese philosophy and practical design solutions, esthetic ideals and technological innovations all in the same breath.
And while she is definitely a free spirit, Clodagh believes in collaboration in the truest sense.
On this project, she joined forces with her partner, Robert Pierpont, as well as an architect, a contractor, an expert in feng shui, the Chinese art of placement, and more than 40 artists and craftsmen.
"It was quite a team," she says.


Focus: Riverside, Calif.; The Welcome Mat's Out for 'Granny Flats'
AMONG the fruits of a special zoning law in this desert community 70 miles east of Los Angeles is an 800-square-foot apartment in the backyard of Anthony and Darla Riggio, which the couple built last year as a home for Mr.
Riggio's retirement-age parents.
Under Riverside's so-called "Granny Flats" ordinance, which encourages the construction of apartments on the lots of existing single-family homes, the Riggios applied for and received a permit to build the unit.
Mr.
Riggio, a former roofer who drives a delivery route, spent five months and $40,000 building the free-standing apartment with the help of friends and contractors.


Historic B &amp; B In Louisiana
A new bed and breakfast in the hamlet of Sunset offers visitors a taste of life in the antebellum South as well as a smorgasbord of Civil War lore.
Chretien Point Plantation, about 10 miles northwest of Lafayette, is a graceful Greek Revival structure built in 1831 by Hypolite Chretien 2d and his wife, Felicite, prosperous cotton planters.
The home is designed in the traditional French manner of the period, with 12-foot-high ceilings, oversized windows, six fireplaces, arched lunettes and fluted woodwork.
Before the Civil War, Chretien Point served as a base for contraband delivered by the notorious pirate Jean Lafitte.
The home was spared destruction only because Mr.
Chretien's son, Hypolite 3d, was a Mason -- as was the Union Army commander.


Health Insurers, in Trying to Save, Find New Costs in Managing Care
Eager to slow runaway medical expenses, the nation's health insurers are competing to offer services that press doctors for discounts and, to the distress of some physicians and patients, freely second-guess medical decisions.
But a look at this rapidly spreading approach, known as managed care, makes clear that saving money costs money.
And critics say the cost of saving money is too high.


Hospital Chief Faces 'Testing in Office'
THE county's new Hospitals Commissioner, an administrator with 18 years of experience in New York City hospitals, will be "tested in office," a key member of the County Board of Legislators said last week, rather than waiting for formal approval by the lawmakers before taking up his new duties.
The appointee, Mack L. Carter Jr., became a focus of dispute when County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke ignored a search committee's choice to name the 43-year-old Mr.
Carter to the $141,120 post.
The committee's choice was Edward Stolzenberg, the Acting Commissioner.


Lynn Carlson Is Married
Lynn Carlson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert P. Carlson of Bettendorf, Iowa, was married there last evening to Vijay C. Popat, the son of Indu C. Popat of London and the late Chandrakant Popat.
The Rev.
Kenneth Harden officiated at the Bettendorf Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Carlson Popat, 31 years old, is a production assistant for "Donahue" in New York.
She graduated from the University of Iowa.
Mr.
Popat, 32, is a principal of Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton, a management consulting company in New York.
He graduated from the London School of Economics and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.


Camera
Cameras get smarter.
Automation takes over for human decision-making.
So why hasn't photographic high-tech made how-to books obsolete?
It's because people, not cameras, make pictures.
From the human mind and hands come mistakes, both technical and esthetic.
Before buying a how-to book, look up an area of current interest to you to see how the author treats it.
If it is covered well, the book is probably worth buying.
I selected composition -- an important element in every photograph -- as a test subject to judge some new and not-so-new books.
These worthwhile titles are generally available in bookstores or camera shops:


Cambodia Says It Gave G.I.'s Remains to U.S.
Cambodia has given a delegation of United States specialists what are believed to be the remains of an American missing in action during the war in Indochina, the official Cambodian press agency said today.
Col.
William H. Jordan of the United States Army, who heads the American group, received the remains on Friday in Phnom Penh from Deputy Foreign Minister Long Visalo, the report said.


Homeowners Revive Interest In Solar Power
IN Berta Nelson's backyard in Norwich, past a cluster of pink phlox and a pyramid-shaped greenhouse that she designed and built, sits an array of blue solar panels facing south.
As the sunlight streams down, the panels' photovoltaic cells convert the light to electricity.
The current is then carried into the house and stored in eight batteries.
The system, installed in June, supplies enough power to run Ms.
Nelson's refrigerator, lights, television, typewriter and other appliances.
Ms.
Nelson said that even before she considered installing a solar electric system in her five-room house, which is shaded by two large oak trees, she had already cut her electric bill by 80 percent after buying a low-voltage refrigerator and by conserving energy as much as possible.
After a month of receiving power from the sun, Ms.
Nelson's electric bill was less than $5.
Though Ms.
Nelson may be an exception, an increasing number of people share her concerns, said advocates for solar power.
They added that recent events like the Persian Gulf war and the debate over where to store the state's low-level radioactive waste have spurred interest in alternative energy sources, particularly the sun.
"One of my dreams is to get off the grid for good," said Ms.
Nelson, who is the house manager at a women's group home.
For now, her solar electric system is automatically connected to the outside transmission network when she needs more electricity.


Dollar Soars, Then Drops
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
136.90
137.30
146.50
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7480
1.7645
1.5590
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.1444
1.1447
1.1354
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.6775
1.6575
1.9408
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$353.50
$357.70
$414.00
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


At Farmers' Markets, the Crush of Customers Is Expanding
NOW that coupons are being accepted at farmers' markets in New York State, tens of thousands of low-income families have joined the regular customers at farmers' markets, "helping themselves and New York State farmers," said Commissioner Richard McGuire of the Department of Agriculture and Markets.
Under the 1991 New York State farmers' market coupon program, 66,900 low-income families enrolled in the Social Supplement Food Program for Women, Infants and Children receive $20 in coupons redeemable at 83 farmers' markets in the state.
And for the first time this year an additional 5,000 low-income elderly are receiving $10 in coupons.


Lisa Bronson Is Engaged
Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Bronson of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Lisa Bronson, to James S. Mezoff, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin Mezoff of Woodbridge, Conn.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Bronson, 26 years old, is the project director at Becker Hockfield Design Associates, a graphic design studio in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
The future bridegroom, 27, is an account executive for the New York advertising agency of Backer Spielvogel Bates.
He is also a graduate of Brown.


Speeches by Gorbachev And Yeltsin at Funerals
Following are transcripts of speeches by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union and President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic at a memorial service today for those who died during the coup attempt, as translated by The Associated Press:


Seattle: The Art of Living
IF you board a bus in downtown Seattle and try to stuff a handful of quarters into the receptacle, the driver will cover the slot and look at you funny.
During the day, bus rides are free within a broad zone in the center of town.
Take advantage of the municipal benevolence, and stay with the bus until it goes underground, through the new $400 million tunnel beneath Pine Street and Third Avenue.
Get out at any of the regular stops.
Look around: You are in the city's strangest and most extravagant showpiece of public art, essentially a mile-long gallery, a well-lighted tube with splashy designs at every stop.
The tunnel, years in the making, was supposed to be Seattle's late-century answer to its pressing traffic problems.
The idea was to route buses underground, clearing the streets above for regular auto traffic.
Since it opened last fall, the tunnel has done very little to ease near-gridlock conditions on the waistband of land downtown that is squeezed between Puget Sound and the residential hills of the city.
But it has proved to be a bonanza for the casual consumer of visual art.
And, in its way, the tunnel's new work fits the city's emerging reputation -- a place where art isovert.


Robin Reid Weds Robert Mack Jr.
Louise Forester Reid, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Reid of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday in Charlotte, Vt., to Robert Lawrence Mack Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mack Sr. of Charlotte.
Greg B. Cluff, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the home of the bridegroom's parents.
Miss Reid, who is 35 years old and is keeping her name, is known as Robin.
She graduated from Colby College.
She is to become a special-education teacher this fall at the Monkton (Vt.) Central School.
Her father is the vice chairman of Rollins Burdick Hunter, an insurance brokerage in New York.
Her mother, Louise Reid, is an interior decorator in New Canaan.


Rental vs. Co-op
To the Editor:
It amazes me that New Yorkers would still opt to rent, especially considering all the incredible bargains on co-ops these days ("Demands for Rentals Rise in Manhattan," Aug. 4).


Women's Equality Day: A Step Toward Unity
THE 71st yearly celebration of Women's Equality Day will take place tomorrow in White Plains, but without the usual competing ceremonies.
In a decision that may help heal the rift separating county women's groups with differing views on abortion and equal rights, the Westchester County Women's Advisory Board will not sponsor its own event.
Instead, members of the board, who are appointed by the county government, have been urged to attend the noon ceremony celebrating the Woman of the Year and the Project of the Year, honorees chosen by a 35-member coalition of feminist groups in the county.


Old Broadway
To the Editor:
Your story on July 28 headed "The Gloom Persists on Offices" about the dismal Manhattan office rental situations sparked memories, with mention of the office tower at 1540 Broadway presently vacant.
Back in the days when Loew's Inc. meant M-G-M Pictures and Loew's Theaters, 1540 Broadway was home-office address and Broadway-watchers could delight in seeing M-G-M "names" moving through the streets revolving doors.
M-G-M later moved elsewhere in Manhattan and the theater chain underwent ownership shifts that ultimately relocated the chain's offices from Manhattan to New Jersey.
Sic transit gloria . . .
ALLEN M. WIDEM West Hartford, Conn.


Where Nostalgia Plays an Underlying Role
PRIMAVERA'S Italian accent is evident the minute you step into the main dining room of the new restaurant in New Canaan.
Dominating the cozy room is a trompe l'oeil painting of ruins, arches and stones that covers an entire wall.
Framed etchings of Italian scenes are clustered on other walls, which are covered with striped and marbleized wallpaper in varying shades of rose and dubonnet.
In many ways Primavera's decor is more ambitious than its menu, which is mostly of a homey nature, suggesting the kind of old-fashioned, neighborhood Italian restaurant in almost everyone's memory.
In fact, Primavera's most successful dishes are those that play the nostalgia theme.


New Yorkers, etc.
The light dawns slowly.
Sometimes it takes weeks or months.
Then isolated incidents come together and suddenly a pattern emerges, a pattern with a message: There's a lemon in the closet, an item of clothing that attracts bad vibes almost every time it's worn.
How, why and to whom this happens is one of life's mysteries.
The only certainty is that it has nothing to do with personality, character or the supernatural.
Not everyone has a bad-luck item in the closet, and even those who do aren't condemned for life.
They may have a particular scarf, jacket or shirt that attracts minor calamities, but if and when it's discarded, that's the end of it: The untoward experiences stop.
A near-certainty is that the bad vibes aren't contagious.
The mischief doesn't spread to other clothes hanging in the wardrobe.


POSTINGS: After 22 Years of Making Do; A New Church for Co-op City Catholics
Since its founding 22 years ago, St.
Michael the Archangel, a Roman Catholic congregation in the Bronx, has had to make do with commercial basements and storefronts in Co-op City, where most of its parishoners live.
But this fall ground is to be broken for St.
Michael's first real church.
"Basements and storefronts are just not adequate," said the Rev.
William Di Raffaele, the pastor of St.
Michael's congregation of 2,000 families.
"They do not meet our current space needs and commercial space certainly is not satisfying from an esthetic standpoint."


Tea at Home In London
A new organization called Home Hosting arranges for visitors to London to sit down to a traditional English tea -- with sandwiches, scones and jam and clotted cream, and homemade cake, all served with the host's best china and silver -- in private homes in London.
On Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday afternoons a "duty host" is on hand at home to welcome visitors.
The hosts live in central London, mostly in the Kensington section and near Marble Arch.
The cost is $:10 -- about $17.50 -- a person.
The English hosts are chosen because of an interest in travel and meeting overseas visitors, and can offer tips and information about London.
The service, available year round, also provides the opportunity to sample home baking.
Visitors usually stay for between an hour and a quarter and two hours.
Reservations for tea may be made -- preferably a few days in advance -- through Home Hosting, 754 The Square, Cattistock, Dorchester, Dorset DT2 OJD, England; telephone (0300) 20671; fax (0300) 21042.


The Enemy's Weapons
To the Editor:
Rebecca Lieb's article on Nazi progaganda films and particularly "The Eternal Jew"  [ "Nazi Hate Movies Continue to Ignite Fierce Passions," Aug. 4 ]  reminded me of one of the rare American showings of this nefarious film, in 1958 at our Cinema 16 Film Society before 3,000 members.
It almost did not take place, for when the Netherlands Film Museum print arrived here, it was stopped by Customs as Nazi propaganda and only after much to-do admitted "for this one showing only."


Professor Is Retired, but His Woods Teach On
WITH brisk stride and sharp eyes, Dr.
Richard H. Goodwin made his usual way through the Burnham Brook Preserve.
"You hear about the enormous complexity of the tropical forest," he said, "but even this place in our backyard is highly complex." Just a few days earlier, he said, he spotted a flower never before recorded on the preserve.
"There it is," he said, "a ragged fringed lily."
The preserve -- 437 mostly undisturbed acres of woods, fields, streams and rocky outcrops in the southeast corner of East Haddam -- is owned by the Nature Conservancy and dear to Dr.
Goodwin.
A retired botany professor and former officer of the environmental group, he helped establish the preserve 31 years ago.
Ever since, he has looked after it and seen to its use for research and teaching.


MEN AND THEIR SHADOWS
I was amused to read, in Ruth La Ferla's article "Men and Their Shadows" (Men's Style, Aug. 4), that a three-day growth of beard is supposed to represent "a gesture of passive rebellion." In Britain, it is derisively called "designer stubble." Isn't it just another kind of conformity to follow a fashion adopted by models on runways and in print ads?
In any case, I should have thought that the appearance of the heavily shadowed but hardly rebellious Supreme Court Justice David Souter would have killed the fashion once and for all.
DAVID VAUGHAN New York, N.Y.


Deaths on Ontario Lake Fuel Jet-Boat Dispute
Stephen Leacock, a revered Canadian writer who for years lived in a cottage on the shores of Lake Couchiching here, alluded in one of his stories to the "silent pine" and the "long call of the loon" echoing over the lake.
But in this lake country about 100 miles north of Toronto today, there is far less tranquillity, at least in summertime, to bring forth the Muse.
Three-quarters of a century after Leacock left the lake, the view from the gift shop at the Leacock homestead, now a museum, is of the Jet Skis and SeaDoos buzzing and flitting about like waterbugs not far from shore.


Town Debates What to Do on Sunday
This hilly little town's strict blue law bans all work, sports, games and sales on Sunday, harking back to the state's blue law of the Revolutionary War era.
The state law has been relaxed considerably over the last 220 years.
Now Prospect Park's law, perhaps the most rigid in the state, is under court challenge and about to be repealed.
And that has upset many of the residents of Dutch heritage here who, like their Colonial-era ancestors, devote Sundays strictly to worship, rest and family togetherness.


Aguiar Aims To Go Distance
Al Roberts, the Jets' new special-teams coordinator, is a very simple man.
After coming from the Philadelphia Eagles this year -- enabling his good friend Foge Fazio to move over to coach the Jets' linebackers -- Roberts has asked his punters for just two things.
"All I ask of my punters is that they give me 40 yards," he said, "and hang it forever."


Julie A. Barnhorst Is Wed in Capital
Julie Anne Barnhorst, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Donald A. Barnhorst of Lawton, Okla., was married yesterday in Washington to Michael Albert Kaneb, the son of Mrs. and Mrs.
Albert J. Kaneb of Weston, Mass.
Msgr.
Dennis F. Sheehan performed the ceremony at the Church of the Annunciation.
The couple, both 26 years old, graduated from Princeton University.
Mrs.
Kaneb is studying for an M.B.A. degree at Columbia University.
Her father is a cardiovascular and thoracic surgeon in Lawton.


Watching Dr. Jeffries Self-Destruct
Nothing anyone else has said about Dr.
Leonard Jeffries Jr. reveals as much about him as his own words.
A reading of the July speech that got the City College professor in trouble makes clear that he is a confused man whose ramblings are as unintelligible as they are hateful.
The entire speech should be required reading for the full Faculty Senate and officials at City College, who are now reviewing the Jeffries case.
Far from mitigating the troubling impression created by excerpts reported earlier, the full text shows Dr.
Jeffries to be so ill informed that it should be hard for people to take him seriously.


Nadia Dombrowski Weds Harry Carrel
Nadia Ann Dombrowski, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Dombrowski of Export, Pa., was married yesterday to Harry Joel Carrel, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Carrel of Niagara Falls, Ontario.
The Rev.
John McHugh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Clement Chapel in Aquinas House at Dartmouth College.
Prayers and a benediction were given by Rabbi Joseph Gelberman.
Ms.
Dombrowski, who is 29 years old and is keeping her name, is an associate at the New York law firm of Rogers &amp; Wells.
The couple graduated from Dartmouth College, she summa cum laude and he magna cum laude, and were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a diploma in French language and literature from the Francois Rabelais University in Tours, France, where she studied on a Rotary International scholarship, and studied international law at Louis Pasteur University in Strasbourg, France, as a Fulbright scholar.
She received a law degree from Columbia University.


U.S. Rule on Fetal Studies Hampers Research on AZT
Researchers studying ways to treat pregnant women infected with the AIDS virus are running up against a Federal regulation devised in the 1970's to protect fetuses.
And many of the researchers, highly critical of the regulation, are quietly finding ways to circumvent it.
In the process, they are throwing new light on the Government's view of the fetus, which they say is contradictory and insulting to women.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
STRIKES HAVE FOLLOWED ME ALL MY LIFE  A South African Autobiography.
By Emma Mashinini.
Routledge, Cloth, $39.95; Paper, $13.95.


Sharon B. Widrow and Marc Tract Are Married
Sharon Beth Widrow, a daughter of Lee Widrow of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Miriam B. Widrow, was married last evening at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I., to Marc Mitchell Tract, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold M. Tract of East Hills, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph Sternstein officiated.
The bride, 33 years old, graduated from the State University at Albany and received an M.B.A. degree from City University of New York.
She is a senior account executive at Charles Communications, a commercial printing company in New York.
Her father is a commercial artist.


The Democrats Get Their Chance
The Soviet Union came out of this week's coup in the uncertain state that follows peaceful revolution: The institutions of the old order were discredited, but still standing.
The insurgents enjoyed immense moral authority, but did not know who would follow their orders.
This ambiguity could not last.
The gentlemanly coalition between Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin that many experts -- and President Bush himself -- believed would be the best basis for reform began to dissolve almost immediately.


Laura Dougherty Wed To R. P. Diefenbach Jr.
Laura Jean Dougherty, a daughter of Margaret Dougherty of Long Branch, N.J., and the late Gerard W. Dougherty, was married yesterday to Richard Peter Diefenbach Jr., a son of Missy Egan Wey of Larchmont, N.Y. and Mr.
Diefenbach of Novato, Calif.
Msgr.
Henry J. Mansell performed the ceremony in the Chapel at Mount St.
Vincent College in Riverdale, N.Y.
Mrs.
Diefenbach, 26 years old and a graduate of Mount St.
Vincent, is an associate director at Bozell Advertising in New York.
The bridegroom, 29, is a national assignment editor for CBS News in New York.
He graduated from Catholic University of America.


Sanitizing the Past Is No Protection
To the Editor:
That some crackpots still use such films as "The Eternal Jew" for their own anti-Semitic liturgies does not justify the attempt by Sharon Rivo, the executive director of the National Center for Jewish Film at Brandeis University, to sanitize the past for the rest of us, to deny us the opportunity to come to terms with it ourselves.
No one speaks for the dead as confidently as Ms.
Rivo, but we may be sure they did not die calling out "tell what happened, but only let selected scholars see it." She fails her first responsibility as custodian of an archive when she tries also to be custodian over the living for the dead.
That's everyone's job.
RICHARD M. GOLLIN  Mashpee, Mass.
The writer is the former director of the film studies program at the University of Rochester.


'Mansions of Limbo,' Gatherings of Glamour
The vacant Murphy townhouse at Park Avenue and 64th Street had chrome yellow air-conditioning tubes running up the wall and through the windows Wednesday night to cool the stately rooms for the guests at a party for Dominick Dunne's new book, "The Mansions of Limbo." Hosts for the evening were Betty A. Prashker of Crown Books and Tina Brown of Vanity Fair.
On Monday evening Whoopi Goldberg and Cindy Crawford welcomed guests and nine contestants to Revlon's Unforgettable Women contest, a cocktail and buffet party at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
Liz Sanford, a 24-year-old model from Broken Bow, Okla., was this year's winner.


Miss Kennedy Has a Wedding
Therese Elisa Kennedy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kevin P. Kennedy of Port Washington, L.I., was married yesterday to Edward Perry Tolley 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Tolley Jr. of Port Washington.
The Rev.
William J. Gill performed the ceremony at St.
Rosalie's Roman Catholic Church in Hampton Bays, L.I.
Mrs.
Tolley, 28, graduated from the State University at Albany.
She is the director of corporate sales at the United States Flower Company in New York.
Her father is a salesman at the Horan Engraving Company in New York.
Her mother, Margaret L. Kennedy, is a nurse at the Sands Point Nursing Home in Port Washington.


Making a Difference/The Soviet Coup; 300 Pizzas, Cases of Pepsi And One Cold Coup to Go
Tanks and armored personnel carriers rumbled past.
Just a mile up the street, Boris Yeltsin rallied resistance to the junta.
What better time for, say, a pepperoni pizza, a Diet Pepsi and maybe a trip to the salad bar?
Such inclinations among customers kept Moscow's two Pizza Huts as busy as ever last week, said Andrew Rafalat, Pizza Hut's director of operations for Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
Supplies continued flowing despite the barricades.
As with all the other obstacles in their daily lives, he said, "Russians always have a way around."


Produce for Summer Hors d'Oeuvres
SUMMER produce simplifies entertaining.
There is still plenty of time to take advantage of the fresh harvest from local farms.
And the fresher the ingredient, the better the flavor, so elaborate preparation is unnecessary.
Even a platter or bowl of necessary tidbits to buy time before all the dinner guests arrive can be as elemental as fresh vegetables.
Crudites are perennial favorites, for example, but when assembled from the seasonal crop they become more than merely vehicles for creamy dip and are delicious in their own right.


Continental, Still Digesting General Tire, Battles Pirelli
Heinrich Huinink, director of tire research at Continental A.G., boasts about the state-of-the-art computer equipment used to design the company's next generation of tires.
And he's proud of Continental's commitment to spend 5 percent of its sales -- more than most tire companies -- on research and development this year.
But when asked about the tire maker's expenditures for next year, Mr.
Huinink hedges: "That all depends on what happens with our company."
Such reservations are fairly common these days at the world's fourth-largest tire producer.
While consolidation in the $50 billion global tire industry has reduced capacity by 15 percent in the last decade, tire prices have continued to sag.
Continental is still struggling with its 1987 acquisition of General Tire of Akron, Ohio, whose losses cut Continental's earnings by more than half last year, to $62.7 million on sales approaching $6 billion.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
APPALACHIA: The Voices of Sleeping Birds.
By Cynthia Rylant.
Illustrated by Barry Moser.
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95. (Ages 5 and up) The author was raised in West Virginia in the 1960's, the illustrator in Tennessee in the 40's and 50's, and their affectionate collaboration speaks of "dogs named Prince or King living in little towns with names like Coal City and Sally's Backbone."


Grand Jury to Hear Evidence In String of Florida Killings
Evidence against two men in the slaying and mutilation of five college students will be heard by a grand jury this fall, more than a year after the killings, the authorities say.
Danny Rolling of Shreveport, La., and Edward Humphrey, a former University of Florida student from Indialantic, Fla., will be the subject of a Hillsborough County grand jury session that is to begin Nov. 4.
It is expected to last two weeks, State Attorney Len Register said Friday.


A Witness to the Revolution; Across East Europe to Moscow, the Trail of Freedom Reaches Tyranny's Epicenter
FEW sensations can compare with the ecstasy of resistance.
Anyone who has faced a wall of policemen at midnight or stood vigil at a barricade of toppled buses when rumors spread that the tanks are rolling has known the rare elation of righteous rage.
And all who have celebrated the fall of tyranny have known the thrill of victory, the incomparable satisfaction of pulling down the monuments of the vanquished order and the unifying grief of the march behind the casket of a fallen comrade draped in national colors.


Long Island Bound


Lendl Profits from McEnroe's Blunders
John McEnroe's unintentional generosity put Ivan Lendl into Sunday's final of the Norstar Bank Hamlet Challenge Cup.
The fourth-seeded McEnroe doubled-faulted on match point today to give the second-seeded Lendl a 6-3, 7-5 semifinal victory and a crack at top-seeded Stefan Edberg.
It's not the best Edberg that's on display here, but the defending champion is managing to get the job done.
The Swede, ranked No. 2 in the world, squeaked by unheralded Olivier Delaitre of France, 6-1, 7-6 (7-4), in the other semifinal.


Libby Light Wed To David Grimes
Dr. and Mrs.
J.
A.
Light of North Bethesda, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Libby Light, to David MacKenzie Grimes, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald G. Grimes of Bel Air, Md.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Light, 29 years old, is an account executive at the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Amherst College.
Her father is the director of organ transplant services at the Washington Hospital Center.
Her mother, Sharon Light, is a saleswoman in Washington for Prudential Preferred Properties.


Preserving a Flat Roof
FLAT roofs, which are usually built up with layers of roofing felt and asphalt or coal tar, should be recoated every two to four years, unless they are covered by a layer of gravel or other stone chips.
About two times a year, the roofs should also be inspected for blisters, cracks and other flaws that can lead to leaks.
Coating waterproofs and protects the original roofing.
It is available in five-gallon containers as a black or metallic liquid.
The material is thicker than paint, but not as thick as tar.
It is applied with a long-handled brush resembling a small push broom.


Hollywood Screenwriter's Syndrome, Updated
There's a brand-new name for an old sensation: "that Barton Fink feeling," which in the Coen brothers' current film "Barton Fink" is supposed to stand for quality but in fact comes to represent the Hollywood writer's idea of hell.
Writers' purgatory is certainly a familiar subject, especially when that purgatory has something to do with screenwriting, and when the screenwriter is seen as a lofty, literary individual who has temporarily agreed to abandon his principles for Hollywood's sake.
But in the hands of the Coen brothers this idea takes on a haunting new life.
"The writer is king here at Capitol Pictures!" proclaims an ebullient studio head (Michael Lerner) upon meeting the self-important, newly famous playwright for whom the film is named.
In one of several brilliantly nightmarish encounters he has with "Bart" (as he insists on calling him), this studio head exemplifies every imaginable threat that the overbearing mogul can pose to the newly declawed literary lion.


This Week's Numbers
Consensus
Last Period
Estimates*
Tuesday
Consumer confidence
77.7
78.0
Wednesday
Second-quarter G.N.P. growth in percent
0.4
0.7
Thursday
Personal consumer expenditures
0.5
0.3
0.5
0.3
New home sales
7.4
7.0
Leading indicators
0.5
N/A
Factory orders, in percent
-1.4
1.0
Tuesday: Two-year Treasury auction  Wednesday: Five-year Treasury auction *
Corporate profits *
Canadian  wholesale prices  Thursday: Bundesbank council meeting  Friday: Agriculture prices  (Source: I.D.E.A. Inc)


Meg Johnson Wed to Thomas Maloney
Margaret Stuart Johnson, a daughter of Mrs.
Robert E. Gee of Atherton, Calif., and Bruce W. Johnson of New York, was married yesterday in Palo Alto, Calif., to Thomas Buckley Maloney, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
James V. Maloney Jr. of Los Angeles.
The Rev.
Eduardo Samaniego performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas Aquinas Roman Catholic Church.
The bride, who is 27 years old, is known as Meg.
She is an account executive at MCI Telecommunications in San Francisco.
She graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles.
Her father is the president of Source International, an importing company in New York.


Devon Porter to Wed David Fleming 2d
Barbara Mansfield Porter of Wilmington, Del., has announced the engagement of her daughter, Devon Townsend Porter, to David Wilson Fleming 2d, the son of Mrs.
Jerry Kolb and David Wilson Fleming, both of Greenwich, Conn.
Miss Porter, 29 years old, is also a daughter of William Howard Porter of Wilmington.
She is a vice president of Capital Management Sciences, an investment software company in New York.
She graduated from Mount Vernon College.
She is a descendant of George Datesman, the chief engineer who oversaw the construction of the Philadelphia Museum of Art.


Sikkim Trekking
To The Editor: I was happy to read that Daku Tenzing Norgay is still playfully "leaping from boulder to boulder" (Travel, July 28), in Sikkim.
As far as I know, she is the only woman trek leader in the Himalayas, and she is superb.
In 1982 Arlene Blum (who led the first American and all-women ascent of Annapurna), Valerie LaBreche and I organized four Himalayan treks in honor of the French explorer Alexandra David-Neel.
Daku acted as our lead guide for the trek in Sikkim retracing a portion of David-Neel's route that my daughter, Stacy Miller, and I led.
She was in charge of the pony men, porters and cooks.
Practical, merry, tough and devout, Daku exemplifed the Tibetan-Buddihist woman whose independent spirit David-Neel noted nearly 75 years ago.


Editorial Notebook; Low-Income Housing That Works
Some of New York City's most decayed neighborhoods -- mostly in the central Bronx -- are bustling with new construction.
It's the direct result of a decision taken in Mayor Koch's last years, and renewed by Mayor Dinkins, to spend $280 million annually restoring decayed apartment houses for low-income families.
The program has been around long enough to permit two tentative conclusions: The city has found a way to fix buildings.
Just as important, it has found ways to make the fixes last.
Restoring derelict Bronx apartment houses built in the 1920's and 30's isn't easy.
Those abandoned by their owners shelter tenants or squatters who must be relocated so that workmen can replace rotten floor beams, install new plumbing and wiring, re-plaster walls and replace bathroom and kitchen fixtures.


Miss Bilbao Weds Charles Griffith 3d
Jeanne Marie Bilbao, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip F. Bilbao of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Charles Ernest Griffith 3d, the son of Mr.
Griffith Jr. of Rumson, N.J., and the late Susan J. Griffith.
The Rev.
Charles M. Kavanagh officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
John and St.
Mary.
Mrs.
Griffith, 27 years old, was until recently a science teacher at the Browning School in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father, who is retired, was a senior vice president of Merrill Lynch International in New York.
Her mother, Jeanne M. Bilbao, is a silk floral designer in White Plains.


Managing; Global Issues in Every Classroom
Starting this month, 135 business students at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School-- about one-sixth of the entering M.B.A. class -- will become guinea pigs for a new way of teaching global business skills.
They will forgo all international courses.
Instead, their marketing professor will discuss the pros and cons of having one brand name worldwide.
Their operations course will explore foreign distribution systems.
In finance, they'll learn to plan for currency fluctuations.
The program will culminate in a four-week trip abroad.
"There are no purely domestic or purely international decisions anymore," said David J. Reibstein, a Wharton vice dean, who expects the experimental curriculum to become de rigueur in a few years.
"Even a brand manager who never leaves Cincinnati deals with global issues these days."


Making a Difference/The Soviet Coup; Shaken Up by a Hurricane From Moscow
James H. Giffen was sound asleep Monday morning when the manager of the Montauk hotel where he was vacationing woke him to say he had 30 minutes to evacuate because Hurricane Bob was coming through.
Mr.
Giffen switched on the television, to learn of a hurricane of quite a different sort: Mikhail S. Gorbachev was being ousted.
"I drove right through that storm to Manhattan and started calling Moscow," Mr.
Giffen recalled.
Small wonder he reacted so: three years of hard work was threatening to go down the drain.


Priscilla Thurber Is Married on L.I.
Priscilla Anne Thurber, a daughter of Mrs.
A.
Edward Thurber Jr. of Locust Valley, L.I., was married there yesterday to Alfred Camillo Constants 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Constants Jr. of Spring Hill, Fla.
The Rev.
Charles Newbery, assisted by the Rev.
Robert A. Repicky, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Constants, who is 29 years old, is a daughter also of the late Mr.
Thurber.
She was a member of the New York Junior Assembly in 1980.
She graduated cum laude from Wheaton College and is a candidate for a master's degree in education at Long Island University.
Her previous marriage was annulled.


WHAT'S NEXT?
Ask leading designers what lies ahead for fashion.
Their prediction?
Forget, for the moment, silhouettes or hemlines -- the future is about fabric.


The Executive Life; Separating the Fugitives From the Stress Fighters
When it comes to vacations, T. Boone Pickens is a power player.
Win Smith, senior vice president at Merrill Lynch, is a stress fighter.
Barbara Feigin, director of strategic services at Grey Advertising, is a fun worshiper.
"Vacations are like behavioral Rorschach tests," said Dr.
Howard Glazer, a psychologist at New York Hospital.


Taking Revenge From the Mound
To the Sports Editor:
Here we go again.
Another one of those disgraceful episodes when a pitcher goes "inside" after giving up a couple of home runs.
This time Bill Gullickson hit Joe Carter in the head.


The Top 20: The Rose Bowl May Decide Who's No. 1
The 1991 version of The New York Times Top 20 was compiled by Times staffer Michael Sisak, who put out a special issue of the student paper when Temple and Bill Cosby ended a 21-game losing streak.
Sisak, who has been editing college football for 30 years, put Virginia No. 3 but ignored the tri-champion Georgia Tech in his 1990 pre-season top 20.
Coaches' records are for careers.
Since 28 games match ranked teams in a quasi-playoff, the Top 20 weighs those games, which are in boldface type. 1.
WASHINGTON COACH: Don James (155-75-3, 20 years). 1990 RECORD: 10-2.
STRENGTHS: The defense, with seven starters back, will dominate, with Lincoln Kennedy leading the nation's best line.
The Huskies led the nation last year in allowing 1.9 yards a carry.
WEAKNESSES: The defense must compensate until Billy Joe Hobert of Puyallup, Wash., adjusts at quarterback.
He is replacing Mark Brunell, who suffered a spring-practice knee injury.
OUTLOOK: Several analysts had picked Washington No. 1 before Brunell was hurt.
The toughest games are Sept. 21 at Nebraska and, when Brunnell is expected back, Nov. 9 at Southern Cal. 2.
MICHIGAN COACH: Gary Moeller (15-27-3, 4 years). 1990 RECORD: 9-3.
STRENGTHS: The offensive line may be the best in the nation.
Place-kicker J.  D. Carlson is 47 of 47 on extra points.
WEAKNESSES: Three secondary starters will be new, putting early pressure on the defensive line and linebackers.
OUTLOOK: Two tough games (Sept. 14, Notre Dame, and Sept. 28, Florida State) are on the new grass home field, which will slow teams with turf fields.
The other tough game is at Iowa Oct. 5. 3.
FLORIDA STATE COACH: Bobby Bowden (205-74-3, 25 years). 1990 RECORD: 10-2.
STRENGTHS: The Seminoles are the popular No. 1 choice because of their experience and the best freshman recruits.
Casey Weldon was No. 2 in efficiency to Heisman Trophy winner Ty Detmer.
WEAKNESSES: Can Florida State beat opponents with big defensive fronts?
Last year, the Seminoles could not control Miami and Auburn, and were almost overcome by Penn State.
OUTLOOK: In 1988, Florida State was a consensus No. 1 and lost its 1988 opener to Miami, 31-0.
Brigham Young (Thursday) could be troublesome for a green safety, and tough games loom at Michigan (Sept. 28), with Miami (Nov. 16) and at Florida (Nov. 30). 4.
PENN STATE COACH: Joe Paterno (229-60-3, 25 years). 1990 RECORD: 9-3.
STRENGTHS: "The wideouts are the best three we've had at Penn State," said Paterno, who is 10 victories from fourth place behind Bear Bryant, Amos Alonzo Stagg and Pop Warner.
The defense is as talented as the No. 1 teams of 1982 and 1986.
WEAKNESSES: Depth for the rebuilt offensive line and at quarterback is uncertain.
"We can't afford to lose Tony Sacca early," Paterno said of his quarterback.
OUTLOOK: The players voted against Paterno to open with Georgia Tech on Wednesday, knowing other tough games are at Southern Cal (Sept. 14), B.Y.U. (Sept. 21), at Miami (Oct. 12) and Notre Dame (Nov. 16).  5.
OKLAHOMA COACH: Gary Gibbs (15-7-0, 2 years). 1990 RECORD: 8-3.
STRENGTHS: The Sooners are favored to win their first Big Eight title since 1987, and they are the best Oklahoma team since Barry Switzer resigned in 1989.
WEAKNESSES: Having Cale Gundy pass more will add risks.
OUTLOOK: Oklahoma will be the best of the three teams coming off probation and again eligible for all polls.
Houston and Florida are the others.
The tough games are Texas (Oct. 12), Colorado (Oct. 19) and at Nebraska (Nov. 29). 6.
NOTRE DAME COACH: Lou Holtz (162-79-5, 21 years). 1990 RECORD: 9-3.
STRENGTHS: The Irish have the nation's quickest and deepest team as a result of the superb recruiting class in 1990.
Freshman Mike Miller is 3 inches shorter and 15 pounds lighter than Raghib (Rocket) Ismail but will be just as versatile.
WEAKNESSES: Ten starters went to the pros.
The defensive line has one returning starter, tackle George Williams, but he may miss the season, Notre Dame said, due to "personal problems." OUTLOOK: Miami is gone from the schedule, but tough games are at Michigan (Sept. 14), Southern Cal (Oct. 26), Tennessee (Nov. 9) and at Penn State (Nov. 16).
Don't forget Hawaii (Nov. 30)! 7.
FLORIDA COACH: Steve Spurrier (29-15-1, 4 years). 1990 RECORD: 9-2.
STRENGTHS: Shane Matthews is a clone of his coach, the 1966 Heisman winner, at quarterback.
WEAKNESSES: The defense lost six starters after having limited opponents to 85.5 yards a game.
Overall depth could suffer because of the limits probation placed on recruiting.
OUTLOOK: Florida should be 5-0 going into the first big test against Tennessee (Oct. 12).
The other challenges are at Auburn (Nov. 2) and Florida State (Nov. 30). 8.
MIAMI COACH: Dennis Erickson (71-34-1, 9 years). 1990 RECORD: 10-2.
STRENGTHS: Junior Gino Torretta continues the line of quarterback succession.
"He perceives the game better than any quarterback I've had," said Coach Dennis Erickson.
WEAKNESSES: Seven offensive starters are gone.
The line is green except for fifth-year senior tackle Leon Searcy.
OUTLOOK: The Times computer ranking picked Miami No. 1 for 1990.
Two tough games are at home, where the last 36 have been victories, against Houston (Sept. 12) and Penn State (Oct. 12).
The other challenge is at Florida State (Nov. 16). 9.
CLEMSON COACH: Ken Hatfield (91-51-2, 12 years). 1990 RECORD: 9-3.
STRENGTHS: The Tigers will have the best running attack in the Atlantic Coast Conference, led by sophomore tailback Ronald Williams and junior fullback Rudy Harris.
WEAKNESSES: Six starters are gone from the defense that was the best in the nation last year.
OUTLOOK: The two toughest games are Georgia Tech (Sept. 28) and at Georgia (Oct. 5). 10.
IOWA COACH: Hayden Fry (179-139-8, 29 years). 1990 RECORD: 8-4.
STRENGTHS: Seven starters return on offense and seven on defense.
Last year, Matt Rodgers passed for 2,228 yards and 15 touchdowns and had a 60 percent completion rate.
WEAKNESSES: The running backs are inexperienced with Big Ten most valuable player Nick Bell and Tony Stewart gone.
They combined for 1,853 rushing yards and 462 passing yards last year.
OUTLOOK: Success could hang on punt protection because blocked kicks cost Iowa three games last year.
A favorable schedule has the Hawkeyes playing Michigan (Oct. 5) at home.  11.
GEORGIA TECH COACH: Bobby Ross (86-71-2, 14 years). 1990 RECORD: 11-0-1.
STRENGTHS: Junior Shawn Jones is a Don McPherson-type scrambler and a Heisman candidate.
Three first-round prospects play defense.
WEAKNESSES: The backfield had to be rebuilt when tailback William Bell, the top rusher last year as a sophomore, and fullback James Reese were suspended for stealing books.
In a scrimmage, soph tailback Jeff Wright was hurt.
OUTLOOK: Ross could successfully launch United Press International's defending national champion against Penn State on Wednesday.
The other tough games will be at Clemson (Sept. 28) and Georgia (Nov. 30). 12.
TENNESSEE COACH: Johnny Majors (159-99-10, 23 years). 1990 RECORD: 9-2-2.
STRENGTHS: All the defensive starters are seniors.
Dale Carter is a threat as a safety and returner.
WEAKNESSES: Nine offensive players were drafted by National Football League teams last spring, including three in the first round.
The backfield has four converted defensive players.
OUTLOOK: The National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation into alleged recruiting and summer-camp violations could be a costly distraction.
The big games are Auburn (Sept. 28), at Florida (Oct. 12) and at Notre Dame (Nov. 9). 13.
COLORADO COACH: Bill McCartney (57-46-2, 9 years). 1990 RECORD: 11-1-1.
STRENGTHS: The defense will dominate as superb recruiting classes hasten the replacement of 13 starters on the offense, which lost tailback Eric Bienemy, and on the defense.
WEAKNESSES: Quarterback Darian Hagan is expected to start after a knee injury, but he will be vulnerable as a punt returner, which he wants to be as a pro.
OUTLOOK: The schedule for The Associated Press defending national champion is easier.
The Buffaloes could be 5-0 before the tough games at Oklahoma (Oct. 19) and Nebraska (Nov. 2). 14.
AUBURN COACH: Pat Dye (143-51-4, 17 years). 1990 RECORD: 8-3-1.
STRENGTHS: As a freshman last year, Stan White threw for 2,242 yards and 14 touchdowns, and now the Tigers will emphasize passing.
WEAKNESSES: The Tigers lost 11 starters.
The offensive line lacks a dominant starter.
OUTLOOK: Games at Texas (Sept. 21) and at Tennessee (Sept. 28) will determine whether Auburn is a contender.
The last two big games are at home: Florida (Nov. 2) and Alabama (Nov. 30). 15.
NEBRASKA COACH: Tom Osborne (177-41-2, 18 years). 1990 RECORD: 9-3.
STRENGTHS: Nebraska is upgrading its passing to make the I-back offense less predictable, but Mickey Joseph is only a 43 percent passer and walk-on Tom Haase could start.
WEAKNESSES: Six defensive players went to the N.F.L.
Tailback Leotis Flowers, 15th in the nation in rushing last year, quit the team.
OUTLOOK: The first big test is Washington (Sept. 21).
The next ones are at Colorado (Nov. 2) and Oklahoma (Nov. 29). 16.
TEXAS A&amp;M COACH: R. C. Slocum (17-7-1, 2 years). 1990 RECORD: 9-3-1.
STRENGTHS: Senior option quarterback Bucky Richardson averaged 6.9 yards a carry.
Senior Kevin Smith needs 11 interceptions for an N.C.A.A. career record.
The secondary could be the best in the Southwest Conference.
WEAKNESSES: Tailback Darren Lewis is gone.
The offensive line is inexperienced with only one starter back.
OUTLOOK: A favorable schedule brings home the biggest challenges: Houston (Oct. 19) and Texas (Nov. 26). 17.
SOUTHERN CAL COACH: Larry Smith (101-67-5, 15 years). 1990 RECORD: 8-4-1.
STRENGTHS: Junior Mazio Royster, the Pacific-10's top returning rusher with 1,168 yards last season, could be one of the top tailbacks in the nation.
WEAKNESSES: The secondary needs to be rebuilt.
The quarterbacks will alternate, creating risks, with scrambling Reggie Perry and Curtis Conway, who is also a flanker and receiver.
OUTLOOK: Todd Marinovich's departure to the Raiders was a plus in removing a distraction, but a minus in representing the loss of a quarterback who could have won the Heisman.
The challenges are Penn State (Sept. 14), at Notre Dame (Oct. 26) and Washington (Nov. 9). 18.
HOUSTON COACH: John Jenkins (10-1-0, 1 year). 1990 RECORD: 10-1.
STRENGTHS: With the run-and-shoot offense led by David Klingler, the Cougars set or tied 33 N.C.A.A. records last season.
Klingler could win the Heisman with a repeat performance.
WEAKNESSES: Can the defense do better than last year's, which allowed 690 passing yards in
one
game and 27.5 points a game?
OUTLOOK: The tough games are at Miami (Sept.  12), at Texas A&amp;M (Oct. 26) and Texas (Nov. 9).
Texas A&amp;M coach R. C. Slocum accused Jenkins of running up scores. 19.
TEXAS COACH: David McWilliams (33-24-0, 5 years). 1990 RECORD: 10-2.
STRENGTHS: Eight starters return on defense.
Butch Hadnot is the third Longhorn in 14 years to gain 1,000 yards.
WEAKNESSES: Steve Clements, the backup to quarterback Peter Gardere, left for B.Y.U.
Three gifted wide receivers went to the N.F.L.
OUTLOOK: Will the Longhorns be scarred by Miami's taunting humilation last Jan. 1?
The challenges are Oklahoma (Oct. 12), at Houston (Nov. 9) and at Texas A&amp;M (Nov. 28). 20.
BRIGHAM YOUNG COACH: LaVell Edwards (175-59-1, 19 years). 1990 RECORD: 10-3.
STRENGTHS: In two seasons, Ty Detmer has set 24 N.C.A.A. passing records.
He won the Heisman with 5,188 passing yards and 41 touchdowns.
But he ended 1990 with two separated shoulders.
WEAKNESSES: The line that allowed Hawaii (59-28) and Texas A&amp;M (65-14) to manhandle Detmer had to be rebuilt.
Can it keep him healthy in the first three games, all on the road?
OUTLOOK: After Florida State on Thursday, Detmer has showdowns with Tommy Maddox at U.C.L.A. (Sept. 7) and Tony Sacca at Penn State (Sept. 21), who beat Detmer in 1989.
B.Y.U. could be 0-3 and Detmer could be a Heisman also-ran.


Black Players Honored
From ALTHEA GIBSON, who in 1950 became the first black player in the United States National Championships, to 15-year-old CHANDA RUBIN, who made her first appearance in the United States Open last year, a total of 54 black players have made it to the championships or the successor Open.
All of them were honored Friday night at a reception sponsored by the Black Tennis &amp; Sports Foundation.
Only about half of the 51 living players made it to the Doral Inn Hotel, but one who couldn't be kept away was the foundation's chairman, ARTHUR ASHE, who won the first Open, in 1968, and who has devoted almost all of his time since then to efforts to help pave the way for young black players.


The Region; Ready or Not, Here Comes the Income Tax
Jan. 1: Lowell Weicker takes office as the state's first Governor since the Civil War to be independent of both political parties.
Although during the campaign he neither clearly advocated nor opposed an income tax, he appoints as his chief budget adviser one of his early opponents, William J. Cibes Jr., who ran on a platform calling for an income tax coupled with a cut in the 8 percent sales tax.
Mr.
Weicker's predecessors, William A. O'Neill Jr. and Ella T. Grasso, had sworn for 15 years that they would never enact an income tax.
In 1971, an income taxhad been passed at 4 A.M. in the waning days of a legislative session during yet another budget crisis.
But it provoked such public outrage that it was repealed less than two months later, before it went into effect.


Donald Robinson, Writer, 77
Donald Robinson, a writer on health care for The Reader's Digest, Parade and other national publications, died on Saturday at Misericordia Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Robinson died of cancer complicated by pnuemonia, said a long-time friend, Kermit Berylson of New York.


22 Immigrant Couples Renew Marriage Vows at Synagogue
FORTY-SEVEN years ago Vladimir and Sophia Fraden were married by a Soviet Government official in a dry, five-minute civil ceremony in the city of Sverdlovskin the Urals.
There was no mention of Jewish customs or tradition, and no friends or relatives were present.
"I don't remember much about it," Mrs.
Fraden said recently.
But Mrs.
Fraden said she will never forget June 9, the day she and her husband were married again in a Jewish ceremony at Congregation Bnai Jacob in New Haven, along with 22 other Soviet-Jewish emigre couples.
They made their vows under a traditional marriage canopy in front of 700 friends and relatives.


Three to Four Applicants For Each Partnership House
THE Long Island Housing Partnership, which helps provide affordable housing for first-time buyers, has had three to four applicants for every house it has built since it began in 1988, according to its president, Jim Morgo.
Three-quarters of the houses, all new and priced from $56,000 to $76,000, have been financed with state mortgages.
"We intend to sell only to people who could not otherwise -- without us -- buy a home," said Mr.
Morgo.


Michelle McGuirk Weds J. D. O'Connor
Michelle Connely McGuirk, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Terrence McGuirk of Loudonville, N.Y., and Stuart, Fla., was married yesterday to James David O'Connor, a son of Mrs.
David O'Connor of Albany and the late Mr.
O'Connor.
The Rev.
William E. McConville, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the chapel of Emma Willard School in Troy, N.Y.
Mrs.
O'Connor, 26 years old, is the home-furnishings advertising manager of Town &amp; Country magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father retired as the president of Knight-Ridder Broadcasting in Miami.


Broadly Beethoven


On the Streets, a Shrug at a Falling Star
Mikhail S. Gorbachev's final turn against the Communist Party received repeated approval tonight from residents of the capital, who said they had long ago tired of the party yoke.
"All our lives, all our reality, has led to this moment," said one Muscovite, who stood stunned at first, then almost serene as he adjusted to the news on a moonlit night.


Bias Is Found at 6 U.S. Bases in Europe
After touring six American military bases in Germany, the chairman of the United States Civil Rights Commission said he found evidence of pervasive racial discrimination.
The chairman, Arthur A. Fletcher, told senior Pentagon officials on Friday that the discrimination was occurring in the hiring and promotion of both enlisted personnel and civilian defense employees.
He also said racial discrimination was endemic in the schools for employees' children.


A Late Bloomer Comes Home to Direct the Neuberger
CONCERNED about the future of your indecisive offspring?
Worried about some young one's lack of direction?
Meet Lucinda Heyel Gedeon, the new director of the Neuberger Museum at the State University of New York here.
She calls herself a late bloomer, and her career history should help many a doubting parent keep the faith.
Ms.
Gedeon is a 43-year-old native of the county who has spent much of her adult life out west.
Ms.
Gedeon wasn't sure what she wanted to do after graduating from Pleasantville High School, so she took a job with a wine-import company and that led to an interest in wine and a trip to Europe to visit vineyards.


Zapped!
THREE BLIND MICE
How the Networks Lost Their Way. By Ken Auletta. 656 pp. New York:  Random House.


WHAT THEY'RE WEARING
Legs are it, judging from what's being seen about town.
Short and  sexy, dresses for evening often have a  flip to the skirt.
And when not in the expected black, they shimmer with brilliant, vibrant colors.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Our house has cedar siding that had been stained.
Two years ago, the stain started to peel, and so we had the siding restained.
The cedar boards on the southern side of the house are peeling again.
How can we correct the problem?
A.
A true stain does not peel, because it soaks into the wood and leaves no surface coating that can peel.
What was apparently used on your siding is one of the so-called heavy bodied stains or opaque stains that are more like paint than stain.
It would be best to remove all of it and apply a true semitransparent shingle stain.
If you do not remove the old finish, then you will have to continue applying the same type of coating used before.
The peeling problem is most likely caused by moisture inside the outer walls, which can be corrected by installing small louvers or vents in the outside siding, enabling trapped moisture to escape.


Dancing On in 'On Your Toes'
WHEN "On Your Toes" made its Broadway debut in 1936, this musical romance by the American theater giants Richard Rodgers, Lorenz Hart and George Abbott broke new ground by integrating classical ballet into the tap, soft-shoe and swing choreography of the musical theater.
The plot, which is feather-like fluff at its most substantial and preposterous the rest of the time, concerns a music teacher, Junior Dolan, who persuades a Russian ballet company to stage an American dance starring himself.


Argentina
To The Editor: Travelers to Argentina should be aware that traveler's checks and credit cards are not accepted if one wants to obtain cash at most banks and they are not accepted for goods and services at most other Argentine locations, but of the two, credit cards are more useful than traveler's checks.
EVANS C. JOHNSON De Land, Fla.


HIM ALONE
It was no surprise to read that Hughes strikes a chord with "Mr. Everyman." When an Italian family was visiting us recently, one of their first requests was to see (along with the Sears Tower and Michigan Avenue) the red-brick "Home Alone" house.
As we were getting out of the car to take a picture, another group of excited tourists with cameras pulled up -- they were from Japan.
BARBARA JOYCE Winnetka, Ill.


POSTINGS: U.D.C. in the Neighborhoods; Aid Sprinkles
The New York State Urban Development Corporation is more often identified with giant undertakings than neighborhood-sized projects.
But under its 10-month-old Urban and Community Development Program, $5 million is to be awarded to "highly distressed areas" for storefront improvements, feasibility studies and project planning.
Among the latest recipients are the Canarsie Neighborhood Development Association in Brooklyn, which has been awarded up to $50,000 to study improvements to the Rockaway Parkway, Glenwood Road and Flatlands Avenue commercial strips.


Weaver Helps Recapture an Indian Skill
ALTA R. TURNER, who is 91 years old, used to braid traditional belts for her American Indian friends to wear.
In the 1970's she wrote "Finger Weaving: Indian Braiding" to help Indians perpetuate this technique for themselves.
Mrs.
Turner, a Verona resident, wanted her book to be clear, accurate and cheap, so that "any Indian could afford to buy it," she said.
"I didn't intend to tell Anglos how to do Indian things."


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE DAY THAT ELVIS CAME TO TOWN
By Jan Marino. 204 pp. Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $14.95. (Ages 10 and up)


Warriors in Accord
The Golden State Warriors said yesterday that VICTOR ALEXANDER, one of their first-round draft picks, has signed a five-year contract.
Salary terms were not disclosed, but the Warriors' president, DAN FINNANE, said that veteran forward JIM PETERSEN had agreed to a lower salary for the coming season, enabling the team to remain under the salary cap with the signing of Alexander. (AP)


Wall Street; Growing With the Paper Flow
Vice President Dan Quayle may advocate reining in the nation's lawyers, but at least one public company could not be more pleased with the legal profession's prodigious output of paper.
The Ameriscribe Corporation is in the booming business of selling photocopying and related services to the paper-intensive legal profession.
The average lawyer still has a 5,000-page-a-month habit, according to H. Sean Mathis, its president.
"That's why you got to love a business like this," rhapsodizes Mr.
Mathis, who calls it a "little gem."


Arafat Message To Gorbachev
Yasir Arafat has congratulated President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union on his return to power, the Palestinian press agency WAFA reported Friday.
Mr.
Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, said in a message to Mr.
Gorbachev that he was confident the Soviet Union would press on with its efforts to help convene a Middle East peace conference, the agency said.


The Original Merchant of Yonkers
To the Editor:
For a greater historical perspective on the character Dolly Gallagher Levi in "The Matchmaker"  [ "By Golly, It's Dolly," Aug. 11 ] , Ruth Gordon originated the role in the London production in the 1954-55 season; it was then brought to Broadway by David Merrick, long before it was reborn as a musical.
Originally conceived as "The Merchant of Yonkers," Thorton Wilder wrote it with one actress in mind to play the role of Dolly -- his lifelong friend, Ruth Gordon.
BARRY WELLS  New York


Cynthia Lao Wed To David L. Gitter
Cynthia Yung-ping Lao, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Yan-shuan Lao of Upper Arlington, Ohio, was married yesterday to David Lindsay Gitter, a son of Barbara Gitter and Richard Gitter, both of New York.
Rabbi Richard Sobel performed the ceremony at Hildene, the Robert Todd Lincoln estate in Manchester, Vt.
The bride, 26 years old, is an editor at Running Press Book Publishers in Philadelphia.
She graduated cum laude from Princeton University.
Her father is a professor of East Asian languages and literature at Ohio State University in Columbus.
Her mother, Niann Ing Lao, is a law librarian at the Supreme Court of Ohio in Columbus.


Gov. Hunt Pays Alabama for Disputed Trips
Gov.
Guy Hunt has written the state a $1,750 personal check after ethics questions were raised about his use of a state airplane to preach at churches in Georgia and Virginia where he accepted cash offerings.
Aides said the payment, disclosed on Friday, was the amount Mr.
Hunt received in offerings from Primitive Baptist church members at two appearances this year.


Elizabeth H. Jacks, Graduate Student, Weds Alfred Scott, Investment Banker
Elizabeth Hunter Jacks and Alfred Lincoln Scott were married yesterday at St.
George's Episcopal Chapel in Long Cove, Me.
The Rev.
Dr.
David St.
George, a brother-in-law of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony.
The bride, who is 50 years old, was a widow.
She is a daughter of Robert Lee Hunter of Chicago and the late Elizabeth Bond Corey Hunter and is a stepdaughter of Laura Hunter.
Her father, who is retired, was the Presiding Judge of the Divorce Courts of Cook County, Ill.


Holding Individuals Accountable . . .
To the Editor:
Jack Sheinkman raised many interesting issues in "How to Solve the Health Care Crisis." .
Unfortunately, as H. L. Mencken stated, for every problem, there is a solution that is neat, simple and wrong.


Convicts Enlisted in Recycling Effort
WHILE some residents of this rural Hunterdon County township worry that convicted criminals are traveling around their neighborhoods casing houses, the only loot they are walking away with is people's garbage.
But some residents do not want them to take even that.
Twice a month, a yellow recycling truck stops at the residents' homes, many of which are surrounded by green fields.
A couple of workmen dressed in tan pants, bright orange safety vests, work boots and gloves scoop up the trash left at the roadside and throw it into bins at the back of the truck.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Mahwah 157,500
130 Johnson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, over 50 year-old colonial; pool, natural woodwork, deck; taxes $1,758.
Ramsey 365,000
7 Twinbrook Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; remodeled kitchen and bathrooms, fireplace, Florida room; taxes $5,250.
Ridgewood 152,500
582 Spring Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 50-year-old ranch; porch, new kitchen and bath, full basement; taxes $3,515.
Waldwick 219,000
146 Lindberg Parkway 5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 33-year-old split level; laundry and mud room, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $4,684.
West Milford 221,000
32 Bordeaux Terrace  3-bedroom, 2.5-bath, 8-year-old contemporary; parquet floors, deck, whirlpool, steam room; taxes $6,308.
Wyckoff 381,000
355 Stratton Court  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 20-year-old colonial; brick patio, alarm system, fireplace; taxes $5,814.
OTHER AREAS Old Lyme, Conn. 95,000
69 Rogers Lake Trail  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 22-year-old ranch; fireplace, walk to lake, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,598.
Larchmont, N.Y. 340,000
89 West Brookside Drive  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 56-year-old colonial; fireplace, breakfast area, family room; taxes $7,389.
Kings Park, L.I. 126,000
10 Raleigh Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, family room; taxes $3,100.


New Home for Glyndebourne
Construction is scheduled to begin this fall on a new opera house for Glyndebourne, on the South Downs in England's county of Sussex, 54 miles from London.
The new opera house, due to open in 1994, will seat 1,150 people compared with the present 830.
The current auditorium will stay in use for next summer's opera festival, which will start and finish earlier than usual -- early May to late July -- after which it will be taken down.
There will be no festival in 1993; the first in the new opera house will take place in the summer of 1994.
Sir George Christie, chairman of Glyndebourne Productions, said the new, larger auditorium would retain "the intimacy necessary for the repertory that we would continue to aim for." The new building will generate more income from the increased seating, provide improved facilities for the audience and for employees, and help meet "the excessive ticket demand," he said.
The cost for the work is expected to be about $56 million, of which 75 percent has already been raised.


Don't Pronounce the Democrats Dead Just Yet; Proud to Be a Liberal
To the Editor:
Your report on Senator Tom Harkin's New Hampshire speeches (front page, Aug. 5) makes him sound awfully good.
I hope he becomes a Presidential candidate.


Tigers Pull Even With Jays As Fielder Hits 36th Homer
Cecil Fielder hit his major league-leading 36th homer and drove in three runs as the Detroit Tigers beat the Seattle Mariners, 7-2, today for their fifth victory in a row.
The victory moved Detroit into a first-place tie with Toronto as Seattle lost its fifth game in a row.


On Language; Through a Cocktail Glass, Darkly
IF YOU THINK IT'S tough to get a decent dry martini, try tracking down the origin of the word.
Or for that matter, getting the real story behind any cocktail -- not only long-forgotten rip-snorters like the fog-cutter, the snap-neck and the leg tangle but also bona fide classics.
At every turn, the student of bacchanology faces the bewildering blend of misinformation, lore and legend that constitutes barroom etymology -- a pseudoscience bearing the same relation to real etymology that barroom philosophy bears to the thought of Hegel.


Anne Mitchell Weds Alexander Vitale
Anne Camille Mitchell, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
F.
N.
Mitchell of Bristol, Va., was married yesterday in Hendersonville, N.C., to Alexander Francis Vitale, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander Vitale of Woodbury, L.I.
The Rev.
Michael H. Cogsdale officiated at the Episcopal Chapel of the Transfiguration at the Kanuga Conference Center.
The bride, a graduate of the University of the South, is 29 years old and is keeping her name.
She is the creative merchandising manager for color and textiles at the Associated Merchandising Corporation in New York.
Her father, a retired physician, was the clinical research director of the Beecham pharmaceutical laboratories in Bristol.
The bridegroom, 41, is a partner in the New York law firm of Freehill, Hogan &amp; Mahar.
A graduate of Tufts University, he received a law degree from Fordham University.
He is a lieutenant commander in the Navy Reserve.
His first marriage ended in divorce.
His father was a justice of State Supreme Court in Mineola, L.I.


Miss Schacht Wed To George Bilicic
Laura Becker Schacht, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Brewer Schacht of Columbus, Ind., was married yesterday in Hilton Head, S.C., to George William Bilicic Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bilicic of Charleston, W.Va.
The Rev.
Holland B. Clark performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
The bride, 27 years old, is a preschool teacher at the Parkside School in New York.
A graduate of Denison University, she received a master's degree in special education from George Washington University.
Her father is the chairman of the Cummins Engine Company, a manufacturer of diesel engines in Columbus.


Political Talk
Sounds of Silence
Although New York City has been convulsed in recent days by the racial tension in Crown Heights, it was only a few weeks ago that attention was focused on similar problems in the Canarsie section of Brooklyn.
Through a month's worth of headlines about racial incidents, including the firebombings of homes and a local real-estate office, the elected officials of Canarsie remained largely silent.
Now, these four -- Representative Charles E. Schumer, City Councilman Herbert E. Berman, State Senator Howard E. Babbush, and Assemblyman Anthony J. Genovesi -- who have reputations as being among the most liberal white politicians in Brooklyn, are being criticized in the community for their inaction.


Art or Schlock: Is TV Suitable for Framing?
It is the first major new museum to open in New York in 25 years, and last week, as masons scrambled to chisel on the finishing touches, even the swirling dust could not obscure its sedate elegance.
Beyond its white dolomite facade and past its marble threshold lie 72,000 square feet of polished space, including starched white walls for exhibitions, two spacious theaters for lectures and study rooms lined with English brown oak.
Here's the rub: one exhibition will feature photographs of Danny Thomas, the lectures will include a discourse on car commercials, and among the subjects of study will be 58 episodes of "I Love Lucy" stashed in the new museum's basement.


Editors' Note
An article on July 14 about problems caused by errors in computer programs reported that in the mid- 1980's, electromagnetic interference from power lines, radio towers and other sources was blamed for software malfunctions in the Army's UH- 60 Blackhawk helicopters.
Citing as its source "The Day the Phones Stopped," a book by Leonard Lee, the article said that the interference caused an accident in which 12 crew members were killed and that the same problem was possibly responsible for nearly two dozen other Blackhawk accidents.
But the article, unlike Mr.
Lee's book, did not acknowledge that the Army rejects this explanation for the accidents.
In fairness the article should have included a comment from the Army.


M. C. Hefter Wed To Ellen Roberts
Ellen Roberts, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
Richard Roberts of Kings Point L.I., was married last evening in New York to Michael C. Hefter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ira Hefter of New York and Atlanta.
Rabbi Jerome K. Davidson performed the ceremony at the Pierre.
The bride graduated from the University of Michigan and received a law degree from the American University.
She was until recently a legal analyst assistant at the Coca-Cola Company in Atlanta.
Her father is a senior adviser in the investment banking department of Prudential Securities in New York.


Tennis; Breakfast With Boris: A Fire Burns Anew for U.S. Open
He is faintly freckled, lightly bearded, and even in repose by the pool after a thunderous practice session on the tennis court next door, his ego, an earned ego, shimmers in the afternoon heat like an aura.
Big thoughts, big achievements, and big ambitions are colliding beneath the jaunty white cap that's keeping his coppery hair wet, his head cool.
He grins his signature boyish grin, the one that offsets a stare that paralyzes like a laser, when he admits that silences, whether internal or external, do not become him.
In fact, they bore Boris Becker the way tennis was beginning to bore him until an unanticipated defeat at Wimbledon last month first tore him apart and then snapped him to attention with such vehemence that he is, almost in spite of himself, "excited" by the prospect of tangling with the calendar's final Grand Slam, the United States Open, where he is the top-seeded player this week.  'Got My Motivation Back'
"I hit the ground head-first, it was like smashing into stone, and it hurt so bad I didn't know how to react," Becker says of his numbing loss to his countryman, underdog Michael Stich, in Wimbledon's final.
"But from that loss, I got my motivation back. If I had won, it would have been much closer to the end for me and my tennis. Everyone needs a reason to get up and have breakfast in the morning, and until that happened, I'd forgotten mine."


Preserving a Flat Roof
FLAT roofs, which are usually built up with layers of roofing felt and asphalt or coal tar, should be recoated every two to four years, unless they are covered by a layer of gravel or other stone chips.
About two times a year, the roofs should also be inspected for blisters, cracks and other flaws that can lead to leaks.
Coating waterproofs and protects the original roofing.
It is available in five-gallon containers as a black or metallic liquid.
The material is thicker than paint, but not as thick as tar.
It is applied with a long-handled brush resembling a small push broom.


CRIME
Pull up a chair and name your game -- Pass the Trash, Stalingrad, Dr.
Pepper, Woolworth or the classicist's seven-card stud.
Timothy Waverly, the ace gambler who cut a fresh deck in Tom Kakonis's "Michigan Roll," is dealing this hand, so every card's a wild one.
The overeducated poker pro resurfaces, more contemplative and fatalistic than ever, in DOUBLE DOWN (Dutton, $19.95).
He has two strong reasons to play a brilliant game -- a $300,000 debt to a Chicago mobster and an implacable assassin monitoring his moves to make sure he antes up.
Waverly's prospects are pinned to a marathon poker session in Florida with an Arab prince and his Palm Beach associates in a dodgy real estate venture.
But these boys play like sharks, and the odds look grim.
Waverly's jumpy partner sums up the situation for them both: "So what you're sayin' here is don't go buyin' any green bananas."


Metro Datelines; Pilot of Small Plane Dies in Airport Crash
A single-en gine plane crashed Friday on approach to the Marlboro Airport, killing its pilot shortly after he radioed that he was having problems with the aircraft.
The Cessna 150 two-seater was destroyed when it hit ground about quarter of a mile short of the runway, said Bob Fulton, a spokesman for the Federal Aviation Administration.


Marie Figge and Wade Layton Marry
Marie Carolyn Figge and Wade Eric Layton were married yesterday at the Episcopal Church of the Redeemer in Bryn Mawr, Pa., by the Rev.
Dr.
Margaret Ann Fohl, a Presbyterian minister.
The bride, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
John L. Zabriskie of Haverford, Pa., and Fredric J. Figge of Charlotte, N.C.
The bridegroom, 28, is a son of Albert F. Layton of Columbus, Ohio, and the late Naomi Layton.


WEATHERING PREJUDICE
I was troubled by the decision of Carter and his wife not to have children because they "didn't want them subjected to the taunts offspring of interracial parents often endure."
This rationale is flimsy.
With parental support, "different" children can prosper.
Black children have been suffering major taunts for centuries.
Where would African-Americans be today if parenthood were avoided, based on the Carters' criterion?
Extinct.
ALVIN F. POUSSAINT, M.D.
Associate Professor of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School Boston


Making a Difference/The Soviet Coup; Getting the News By Electronic Mail
When Esther Dyson got to her Manhattan office early last Monday she found a fax from friends in Siberia saying that despite the political situation, their trip was continuing.
Ms.
Dyson, publisher of Release 1.0, a leading computer industry newsletter, didn't think anything of it until she got an electronic mail message a few minutes later referring to the dramatic turn of events in Moscow.
Then she decided she had better read the newspapers.
Ms.
Dyson has a particular stake in the continuing success of Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost and perestroika.


A Theft in France
To the Editor: I would like to alert your readers to our unfortunate experience on a recent visit to France.
Leaving Geneva, we drove to nearby French towns.
Making one-night stops in several villages, we divided our clothing into two suitcases.
The heavier case of warm clothing was locked in our car trunk and the lighter one was brought to our room each evening.


Style Makers; Ellen Pekarsky, Lingerie Designer
A year and a half ago Ellen Pekarsky, 63 years old, saw a woman her age being mugged on Madison Avenue.
She remembered a homemade project she had stitched years earlier: a slip with hidden pockets to carry keys and valuables while she was traveling.
"I decided then," she said, "that every woman needed a slip like mine."
So she formed her own company, Hidden Assets.
It makes a half-slip with three zippered pockets hidden behind a five-inch lace hem.


THE GREAT ALASKA DEBATE
A concern for the environment does not mean that we must limit oil development.
Drilling platforms like those off of Mobile Bay in Alabama and wells in the National Audubon Society's Paul J. Rainey Wildlife Sanctuary in Louisiana demonstrate that environmental damage need not be a necessary part of oil drilling, if the right measures are taken.
Oil-drilling platforms are much smaller than the ones used when drilling occurred at Prudhoe Bay, and waste-management techniques at all stages have improved over the past two decades.
The likelihood of spills has been reduced, and directional drilling techniques allow oil platforms at one location to extract oil from other more ecologically sensitive areas nearby.
JONATHAN H. ADLER Washington


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 25, 1991
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $5.95.) The ordeals of a female cop assigned to track down a Florida con man.
2
4
THE FIRST MAN IN ROME, by Colleen McCullough. (Avon, $6.95.) The rivalry of two men in the Roman Republic in 110 B.C.
3
14
THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $5.95.) An attorney tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death.
4
6
LADY BOSS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $5.95.) A woman schemes to get control of a movie studio.
5
1
THE WOMEN IN HIS LIFE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The rise of a tycoon, from Nazi Berlin to London and New York, and his relationships with five women.
6
9
SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St. Martin's, $5.99.) Guests from many parts of the world get together in a small Scottish town.
7
31
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.95.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their immigrant mothers.
8
9
THE VOICE OF THE NIGHT, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $5.95.) A reprint of a 1980 novel about a shy boy and his evil best friend.
9
1
TIME BOMB, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $5.99.) A child psychologist tracks down the perpetrators of crimes spawned by hatemongers in suburban Los Angeles.
10
45
THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS, by Thomas Harris. (St. Martin's, $5.95.) An F.B.I. man and woman track a serial killer.
11
6
THE PRIZE, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.50.) In 1066, a Saxon woman marries a Norman warrior.
12
2
BURY ME DEEP, by Christopher Pike. (Archway/Pocket, $3.50.) The eerie experiences of a teen-age girl vacationing in Hawaii.
13
3
SPY SINKER, by Len Deighton. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.95.) The adventures of a woman torn between her family and her duties as a spy.
14
5
TEXAS!
CHASE, by Sandra Brown. (Fanfare/ Bantam, $4.99.) The romance of a widower and an old friend who was involved in his wife's death.
15
3
THE ENCHANTED LAND, by Jude Deveraux. (Avon, $4.95.) A novel, originally published in 1978, about the romance of a Kentucky plantation owner's daughter and a Texas rancher.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
14
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
2
9
THE EDUCATION OF LITTLE TREE, by Forrest Carter. (University of New Mexico, $10.95.) An orphaned boy goes to live with his Cherokee grandparents.
3
6
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France, as described by an Englishman.
4
407
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist. (LP)
5
92
ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
6
47
THE ROAD FROM COORAIN, by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $8.95.) A historian remembers her childhood on an Australian sheep farm.
7
7
DON'T KNOW MUCH ABOUT HISTORY, by Kenneth C. Davis. (Avon, $10.95.) A collection of questions and answers about American history.
8
2
MICHAEL LANDON, by Aileen Joyce. (Zebra, $4.50.) The sweet and sour life of the late television writer, producer, director and actor.
9 *
23
IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.
10
13
COMPOSING A LIFE, by Mary Catherine Bateson. (Plume, $8.95.) The lives of five contemporary women whose careers are distinguished and rewarding.
11 *
1
THE DOCTOR, by Edward E. Rosenbaum. (Ivy, $4.99.) A physician's experiences as practitioner and patient; originally published in 1988 as "A Taste of My Own Medicine."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
56
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
2
36
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
4
THE FAT-BURNING WORKOUT, by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.95.) A program designed to trim the body and tone muscles.
4
13
RAND McNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $7.95.) The 1991 edition.
5
2
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) Some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


Where Victoriana Means More Than an Overstuffed Parlor
"The 19th century in Maine has not yet been discovered," says Wilmont M. Schwind Jr., an antiques dealer in Yarmouth, who claims that most collectors come to the state in search of bargains in 18th-century painted chests, highboys and Windsor chairs.
To be sure, with private fortunes amassed in shipbuilding and lumbering, Maine emerged from the pre-Civil War building boom with a reputation for 19th-century decorative arts.
The New England trait -- of not throwing anything away -- has also meant that houses have survived with many furnishings, originally purchased in Boston or New York, intact.


The Accidental Convert
SAINT MAYBE
By Anne Tyler. 337 pp. New York:  Alfred A. Knopf. $22.


Mixed Reviews for Royal Shakespeare's New Theater
One London theater critic described its facade as possessing a "forbidding ugliness," but the Royal Shakespeare Company's newest theater is so far "turning up a winner," says the company's artistic director.
"I'm absolutely thrilled with it," said Adrian Noble of the Other Place, a 240-seat, $3 million theater and rehearsal space that opened earlier this month as an adjunct to the company's two other Stratford houses, the Royal Shakespeare Theater and the Swan.
Mr.
Noble said theatergoers have been flocking to the Other Place to see "The Blue Angel," Trevor Nunn's production of a new musical play by the English writer Pam Gems.
And the company's actors are enthusiastic about the theater's generous rehearsal and dressing-room space.
Not an Extravagance
Although cash shortages forced the Royal Shakespeare Company to close its two theaters in the Barbican Center, its London base, for four months last winter, Mr.
Noble insisted that spending money on a third theater in Stratford was not an extravagance.
"We can't sit on our laurels," he said.
"We have to invest in the future." The capital to build the Other Place was generated by the sale of company-owned land, said a spokeswoman for the company.


In Utah, Prosperity Is Making Room for Diversity
In recent years, Utah has become a darling of corporate employers, who cherish its labor pool: young, well-educated, non-union and reared with the hard-work ethos of the pervasive Mormon faith.
But a funny thing has happened on the way to the economic boom here.
As newcomers have discovered life at the foot of the Wasatch Range and decided to stay, the region has become much more diverse.


Sunday Menu; A Quick Red Lentil Salad With Goat Cheese
Red lentils, the fast-food version of yellow lentils, cook in 10 minutes.
A few seconds too long, and your nice red lentils will turn to mush.
While this summertime version of a red lentil salad calls for goat cheese, it would be just as easy to make the dish with bits of ham instead.
You would use the same amount of either.


Salt Lake Looks Great in the Hopeful
The Hopeful, a race for 2-year-old colts hopeful of embarking on a career, was won today by D. Wayne Lukas's Salt Lake with a wire-to-wire dash that buried the favorite, Caller I.D., and seven other colts straining to embark on careers.
It was the third time in four starts that Salt Lake had won, and his timing was flawless.
Two weeks ago, on a sloppy track, he ran sixth and last in the Sanford Stakes at Saratoga Race Course, 26 lengths off the lead, while Caller I.D. was romping home in front.
But on this clear and dry afternoon, Salt Lake restored the shine to his image and did it with a sizzling ride by Mike Smith that left Slew's Ghost nine lengths back in second place in a photo finish with Caller I.D., who finished third by a head.


Miss Rokous Wed In Massachusetts
Frances Elizabeth Rokous, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph R. Rokous of North Andover, Mass., was married yesterday in the Cochrane Chapel at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., to E. Gates Garrity, a son of Ann Garrity of Cambridge, Mass., and Thomas Garrity of Conifer, Colo.
The Rev.
Alexandra Scott-Evoy, a Unitarian minister, assisted by Fletcher Harper, an Episcopal deacon, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Garrity-Rokous, who is 29 years old and is known as Beth, graduated from Phillips and magna cum laude from Smith College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is studying for a law degree and a doctorate in clinical psychology at Yale University, where she is an editor of The Law and Policy Review Journal.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon.


Experimental Cleaning of Hudson Is Under Way
A multimillion dollar experiment to show that toxic PCB's can be removed from the bottom of the Hudson River by using river bacteria is under way here, about 190 miles north of New York City.
Scientists from the General Electric Company began the experiment on Aug. 9, a few miles south of the company's two manufacturing plants that caused the problem by dumping PCB's in the river from 1946 to 1976, when they were banned.
The bacteria breakdown of PCB's, or polychlorinated biphenyls, is intended as an alternative to dredging.


Elizabeth Anne Butcher Plans to Wed
The engagement of Elizabeth Anne Butcher to Matthew Baird 2d, the son of Mrs.
A.
Sydney Roberts of Palm Beach, Fla., and Charles H. Baird of Laverock, Pa., has been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
McBee Butcher of Bryn Mawr, Pa.
A June wedding is planned.
Miss Butcher, 25 years old, is an actress.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and the William Esper Acting Studio in New York.
Her father is the chairman of the Philadelphia investment banking firm of Butcher &amp; Singer, which was founded by her great-grandfather the late Howard Butcher Jr.


Keeping the Bridge To Ellis Island
The article about Ellis Island struck a responsive chord.
Our visit last April subjected us to inefficient, inconsiderate and overpriced service provided by the ferry operator.
Official attempts to explain why the bridge access is closed make no sense whatever.
The bridge was built with public funds and was strong enough for construction trucks.


Portland, Me.
To the Editor: Cynthia Hacinli's article on Portland, Me. (Travel, July 7) was a welcome change in travel reviews because she included more than just "the usual suspects" in her list of places to go and things to do.
In updating her list, one new restaurant that deserves both mention and praise is Jordan's Lobster House in Westbrook (Exit 8 off Interstate 95).
This eatery provides the best available moderately priced seafood in the area.
The Jordan family is setting a standard of food and service that will be hard to beat, even in coastal Maine where seafood reigns supreme.
RAYMOND P. NEVEU Portland, Me.


Message of Hate Spread Further
To the Editor:
Although Rebecca Lieb focused her article on Nazi propaganda films on "The Eternal Jew," it should be noted that the anti-Semitic production "The Rothschilds" was the only one of these films to be theatrically re-released after the war.
During the 1950's, an export branch of the Soviet Union's Government-controlled film industry offered "The Rothschilds" to theaters in Arab nations.
Thus, despite the fall of Nazi Germany, the film's producers succeeded in passing their message of hate and prejudice to a vast new audience.
PHIL HALL  Bronx


When the Queen Speaks, People Listen
To get to Queen Latifah's house in Jersey City, you wind past the shadows of monster chemical plants, decaying overpasses, strip malls and bodegas.
Queen Latifah, at age 21 a major figure in the rap world, lives in this poor, sprawling town that reverberates with the sounds of immigrant cultures.
Dressed in bike shorts and a T-shirt, Latifah seems relaxed amid the trappings of this, a temporary house, not far from East Orange, where she grew up.
There is a television set tuned to music videos, stacks of horror-movie videocassettes, some rolled-up rugs, tapes, CD's and a few sticks of furniture.
She soon will move into a recently purchased home in a new development in nearby Wayne.
Spacious, with woods at the back, it looks out at the Kittatinny Mountains.


Italy, Land of Art Treasures Just Out of Visitors' View
Several times this summer, the usual throng of Japanese, German and American tourists has made the pilgrimage from Rome to Tivoli to see the villa of the Roman emperor Hadrian only to be turned away by a sign saying: "Closed for lack of personnel." Although there are 43 guards assigned to the villa, the staff had trouble mustering the minimum of seven needed to open the gates.
The same scene has been played out across Italy this summer at dozens of major monuments and museums.
Even the Roman Forum, the heart of ancient Rome, has been forced to shut its gates on occasion.
As the weather heats up and the tourists arrive in force, the guards needed to watch over Italy's art treasures simply vanish.


The Region; As Blacks Clash With Hasidic Jews In Crown Heights, Who's in Control?
IN a crucial moment during an angry rally of blacks in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, last week, about 300 youths peeled off from the main march and ran to the headquarters of the Lubavitch Hasidic sect.
In the face of a phalanx of riot-helmeted police officers, they slashed to tatters a homemade Israeli flag and hurled rocks and bottles at the police and the Hasidic Jews behind the phalanx.
At another moment, there were so few police officers in front of a school where the Mayor was meeting with neighborhood youths that they had to retreat through the gates and into the school when a mob approached, attacking television vans and flipping over police cars.


Battered Alien Spouses Find a Way to Escape an Immigration Trap
A young woman who came to New York City from a village in South China three years ago says her husband beat her so fiercely that she feared for the safety of their unborn child.
But she was even more afraid to report the abuse to the police.
Like many other immigrants, the woman, who is 24 years old and said her name is Raco M., came to this country with "conditional residence" as the wife of an American citizen.
Until the Immigration Act of 1990, Raco was faced with the choice of remaining with an abusive husband or risking deportation.


Miss Clark Marries R. S. Reynolds 4th
Marietta Brogdon Clark, a daughter of David McKenzie Clark of Greensboro, N.C., and the late Martha Early Clark, was married yesterday to Richard Samuel Reynolds 4th, the son of Sally Owen Reynolds and Mr.
Reynolds 3d, both of Richmond, Va.
The Rev.
Jerrold D. Shetler performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Greensboro.
Mrs.
Reynolds, 29 years old, graduated from the University of Tennessee.
She is a retail leasing specialist and until recently was with Smithy Braedon, a real-estate brokerage in Washington.
Her father is a managing partner in the Greensboro law firm of Clark, Wharton &amp; Berry.


Ideas &amp; Trends; When a Nuclear Accident Doesn't Go by the Book
WHEN it comes to nuclear reactors, nature seems to behave like a troubled teen-ager, the kind that goes through parking lots trying every door handle, looking for an unlocked car to take joy riding.
Every once in a while, chance can't help but succeed, as it did 12 days ago with a sudden failure at the Nine Mile Point 2 reactor in Scriba, N.Y., which quickly became one of the most serious accidents since Three Mile Island in 1979.
The plant, like all American reactors, has rugged components and a deep array of protective systems and back-up systems, a kind of industrial Maginot line.
But with over 100 plants running, eventually anything that can fail probably will.


After a Long Slump, Home Sales Rise
SALES of houses, co-ops and condominiums in the New York metropolitan area, still near the bottom of a slump that has been longer and deeper than any since before World War II, have improved steadily since the spring in what analysts say is the beginning of a slow recovery.
Throughout the region, real estate executives say sales volume surged in March, reflecting a decline in interest rates and a sense of economic euphoria that accompanied the resolution of the war in the Persian Gulf.
Sales for April, May and June were sharply higher than the year earlier.


New Economic Chief: Darling of Old and New Guards
Ivan Stepanovich Silayev, who was named today to head a committee overseeing the Soviet economy, is a Communist-turned-reformer who in 14 months as Prime Minister of Boris N. Yeltsin's Russian government has been the fluid intermediary between the old and new guards.
When Mr.
Yeltsin selected the gray-haired aviation expert as his Prime Minister, the choice was applauded as a masterstroke of political pragmatism.


A PLAGUE AWAITS
I have read few articles as depressing as the one about the looming AIDS crisis in Thailand, "A Plague Awaits," by Steven Erlanger (July 14).
That massive numbers of people will die largely because men think it is their right to "buy" women (and girls) for the purpose of low-cost sexual adventures is the height of human, in this case male, folly.
C.
M.
STERN New York, N.Y.


Testimony on Tyson
Authorities say that about 20 witnesses have testified before the Indianapolis grand jury investigating an accusation of rape against MIKE TYSON.
According to aides of the Marion County prosecutor, JEFFREY MODISETT, Tyson has been notified that he is a target of an investigation that began when an 18-year-old contestant in a Miss Black America pageant charged that the former heayweight champion raped her in a hotel room on July 19.
The the six-member grand jury was formed on Aug. 12, and Modisett has said he hopes it can decide this week whether to issue an indictment. (AP)


Tax Collectors Lean On the Out-of-Towners
TRAVELERS who sense that their vacation dollars are sliding out of their wallets faster than planned are not suffering a delusion.
An economical $50 hotel room in the United States actually costs an average of $54.20 with tax, and that does not count a sales tax on the video you rented or an 8.5 percent tax on the four breakfasts you put on the room bill.
Across the country, every travel expense costs 2 percent to 19 percent more than is listed on the rate card, menu or ticket.
The residents of a city pay its sales taxes, of course, but visitors' sensations that everyone is taking a bite as they swim by is not incorrect: surcharges, surtaxes and extra fees fall heavily upon nonresidents, who are not likely to see huge signs: "Welcome to Columbus, where you'll pay 15.75 percent tax on your hotel room."


Sunday Brunch; Chinatown Dim Sum: A Meal You Build Yourself
Dim sum remains one of the popular brunch choices downtown, and Chinatown is responding with more dim sum restaurants than ever.
Over time, aficionados of this genre get to know particular restaurants, each of which has particular dim sum specialties.
Some diners hop from place to place in constructing a meal.
Here are four good examples of Chinatown's dim sum styles.


NEWS SUMMARY
The Soviet Turmoil
After the Coup 8-11


Mutual Funds; More Eggs, in Balanced Baskets
Investors, if you're agonizing over which mutual fund to buy, relax: Picking a single fund isn't nearly as important as building a solid portfolio of funds.
Funds, investing as they do in various securities, are diverse by nature.
Putting your money in a variety of them, then, just adds to the diversity, smoothing out rough market ups and downs.
The two keys: allocating assets to suit your wants and needs, and taking the long view -- a particularly important exercise as volatility becomes a fixture in the financial markets.


Making a Difference/The Soviet Coup; The Kremlinologist of Oil
The coup in Moscow last week briefly revived Kremlinology, the pre-glasnost art of interpreting the Soviet Union from the scattered clues that emerge from a totalitarian facade.
One of the experts to whom the American press and the business community turned for guidance was Thane Gustafson, a Georgetown University professor of government.
Mr.
Gustafson said that he began his study of Soviet politics in 1964, the year Khrushchev fell, and as a result, "I felt right at home" last week.


Nancy Schmertz Is Engaged
Nancy Schmertz and Dr.
Lawrence Steven Gerson plan to marry in October.
Miss Schmertz, a fashion merchandiser, is a daughter of the late June Schmertz of Monmouth Beach, N.J., and the late Robert Schmertz of New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
The future bridegroom is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Gerson of Livingston, N.J.
He is a resident in radiology at the State University Health Science Center in Brooklyn.
A graduate of the University of Virginia and a member of Phi Beta Kappa, he received an M.D. degree from New York University.


In the Region: Connecticut and Westchester; A Brisk Market in Small Office Buildings
A minimarket in office buildings under 100,000 square feet is emerging in Fairfield County, spurred by banks and financial institutions that have taken over many and resold them at fire-sale prices.
Most are bought for cash by owner-users who establish their business headquarters there, make cosmetic and mechanical renovations, then rent out what they don't use.


All About/Compact Disks; Recordings Off? CD's Miss the Message
With the long-playing album market falling further into oblivion, the standard cassette tape fading fast and DAT, or digital audio tape, nearly dead on arrival, it looks like compact disks are here to stay.
But accompanying the rapid rise of CD's is a growing debate about what to do about their wasteful packaging and how to bring down their prices.
The answer to the packaging problem should begin appearing by next summer.
But the question of when the cost of the newest CD's will start to come down is harder to answer.


THE GREAT ALASKA DEBATE
Timothy Egan's article "The Great Alaska Debate: Can Oil and Wilderness Mix?" (Aug. 4) was excellent.
Drilling for oil in the Arctic isn't the real issue -- the real issue regards the American spirit.
At what cost will we further destroy the delicate and fragile beauty of the planet?
We must seriously investigate alternative and renewable energy sources.
It's no secret that time is running out.
ALEXANDRA ELLEN APPEL Jay Peak, Vt.


Style Makers; Christopher Durham, Egg Decorator
"Most people don't like to work with eggs because they are very fragile," Christopher Durham said, "but they are a lot easier to work with than most think."
Mr.
Durham, a self-taught artist, decorates ostrich eggs that open to display antique jewelry, pocket watches and tiny music boxes.
He paints some in motifs from Mother Goose tales and "Alice in Wonderland." Others have Victorian designs.


Chess
Two grandmasters, Michael Rohde of Westfield, N.J., and Vladimir Akopian, an Armenian, tied for first place in the United States Open Championship July 28 to Aug. 9 at the LAX Marriott Hotel in Los Angeles.
Each was awarded a $4,000 prize for his 10-2 score in the 635-player, Swiss-system tournament.
Rohde also received the champion's Fidelity Cup because the selection of opponents he faced was slightly tougher than the group Akopian was paired with.


New Mortgage Rules Help New Buyers
THE softening real-estate market and low-interest mortgages are making it easier for first-time buyers to buy houses on the Island.
"Smaller starter houses are what's moving," the chairwoman of the Affordable Housing Committee at the Long Island Board of Realtors, Barbara Roberts.
Ms.
Roberts is also a broker at the John Flynn Realty Corporation in Kings Park.


A Fallen Calvinist Pursues His Vision Of True Heroism
In a loft as sweltering as the Russian steam bath a few blocks away, Paul Schrader films what resembles a tableau of Manhattan social life in the years before crack and AIDS.
His oxford shirt unbuttoned to the waist, the director guides an ensemble of 20-year-olds clad in spandex and black leather through the gyrations of a dance party.
A record by Live Skull tops a stack; tequila and imported beer fill the bar.
Mr.
Schrader, however, is shooting neither a documentary nor a period piece.
The only anachronism in this scene from "Light Sleeper," which just completed filming and will be released next spring, is the drug courier named John LeTour, portrayed with haggard anomie by Willem Dafoe.


Bernard Castro, Inventor, 87, Dies; Founder of Convertible Sofa Chain
Bernard Castro, the man who "conquered space -- living space, that is" -- by inventing and then selling more than 5 million Castro Convertible sofas, died yesterday at his estate in Ocala, Fla.
He was 87 years old.
Mr.
Castro died of cardiac arrest, said his daughter, Bernadette, who became famous in New York as the little girl who opened the sofa with the "feather-lift mechanism" in commercials during the early days of television.


Without Smiling, to Call Floridian a 'Cracker' May Be a Crime
For more than a century, many native Floridians have affectionately referred to one another as "crackers." But the police and prosecutors here are now arguing that a term some consider a badge of honor can also be a racial epithet, and that to utter the word in anger is a crime.
Earlier this summer in this town of 7,000 people about 20 miles north of Fort Myers, a white police officer, Stephen Keyes, was called to a domestic disturbance at the home of Michael Hamm, who is black.
"As I tried to make contact with Mr. Hamm, he became verbally aggressive towards me and stated, 'I'll shoot you white cracker,' " Officer Keyes wrote in his report.


TAIWANESE TO END USE OF DRIFT NETS
Taiwan has promised to comply with a United Nations ban on fishing with drift nets in the North Pacific Ocean, winning cautious praise from United States officials.
The Taiwanese Government, under threat of American trade sanctions, announced Friday that it would end the use of the nets, which stretch as far as 30 miles and snare all marine life in their path, beginning next July 1.


Canadian Is Attacked for Remarks on Soviet Coup
A storm has risen here over comments by the External Affairs Minister, Barbara McDougall, suggesting the day before the Kremlin coup collapsed that Ottawa could work with the new Soviet leadership.
Her remarks in Ottawa on Tuesday before leaving for an emergency meeting of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Brussels appeared to set her apart not only from President Bush and most other Western leaders, but her own Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney.


Denise Toole Is Wed To James A. Ringer Jr.
Denise Ann Toole, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward D. Toole of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to James Arlen Ringer Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ringer of Saint Joseph, Mo.
The Rev.
Douglass Ray performed the ceremony at Saint Luke's Parish Episcopal Church in Darien, Conn.
Mrs.
Ringer, 28 years old, graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in psychology from Columbia University.


Amanda Barhite Married to Capt. Steven Carter
Amanda Sarah Barhite, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Barhite of Clinton Corners, N.Y., was married yesterday to Capt.
Steven Whitney Carter, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Whitney Carter of Hudson, Ohio.
The Rev.
Richard Camp, a Methodist minister, performed the ceremony in the Cadet Chapel at the United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y.
Mrs.
Carter, 26 years old, is an associate at J. P. Morgan in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received an M.B.A. degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
Captain Carter, 32, is an admissions officer at the Academy, from which he graduated.
He received master's degrees in engineering and business from the University of Pennsylvania.


Taiwan Runs Away With Another Title
Taiwan won its 15th Little League World Series championship today, using Pan Chih-Chang's 14 strikeouts and Lin Wei-Chu's grand slam to rout the team from San Ramon Valley, Calif., 11-0.
The California starter, Kevin Graham, stifled Taiwan with 78-mile-an-hour fastballs in the first and second innings, but Fang Sheng connected for a 240-foot home run in the third that triggered the onslaught.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Throgs Neck
ON a recent summer afternoon in the Bronx, a young man walked out of his condominium onto a private beach and dove into the wide expanse of Eastchester Bay.
On shore, mothers relaxed at a beach-club pool as their children played nearby.
If not for the Throgs Neck Bridge looming nearby, this could be a resort on Long Island or at the Jersey Shore.


Yanks Puts Blame Aside and Win
The Yankees are not really involved in a pennant race, which has been made clear by things they have said lately.
The shortstop is so concerned with attaining a $25,000 incentive for games played that he chastises the manager for resting him once.
Then he realizes he added up the number of games incorrectly.
Other players privately blame the manager, Stump Merrill, for everything else, and one suggested today that he should be fired.


Tracy Hellinger To Marry in Fall
Mr. and Mrs.
Gary Hellinger of Greenwich, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Tracy Lynn Hellinger, to Michael Barnett Freedman, a son of Sara Lee Schupf of Greenwich and Walter G. Freedman of Chicago.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Hellinger, 25 years old, graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University.
Her father is the president of Gary Plastics Packaging in New York.
Her mother, Marilyn Hellinger, is the vice president of Gary Precision Products in Greenwich.


And Offering Some Key Choices
To the Editor:
Business and labor will not solve the health-care crisis until they recognize that insurance and the linking of health coverage to employment will not work.
The only feasible solution is to roll back all health-care prices to 1969 levels, giving consumers the ability to pay.
Let consumers, or perhaps their employers or union representatives, shop for the lowest cost care, but leave the control of money to the recipient or family.
I do not want health insurance or care forced on me.
I want to be able to pay for what I need.
JOHN H. MAULDIN  Pueblo West, Colo., Aug. 3


Streetscapes: Mount Morris Park; The Days Dwindle For Victorian Vestiges
THERE must be some golden proportion for urban squares.
The size and landscaping of some seem to be in absolute harmony with their surroundings, while others divide rather than unify.
Take Mount Moris Park, between 100th and 120th Streets, running from Madison Avenue to a line just west of Fifth Avenue.
The western edge of the square is still largely residential, but the eastern edge is now down to two lone rowhouses as North General Hospital expands, eliminating what had been a solid block of century-old brownstones.


Miss Godvin Weds Dr. G. R. Deysine
Michele Louise Godvin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David L. Godvin of Rumson, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Gaston Rocque Deysine, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Maximo Deysine of Garden City, L.I.
The Revs.
Joseph W. Hughes and John L. Collins officiated at Holy Cross Roman Catholic Church in Rumson.
The bride and bridegroom are 29 years old and 1984 graduates of Boston College.
She is a manager at Coopers &amp; Lybrand, accountants in New York.
Her father is an investment banker.


Cheli English Weds Dr. Kelson Figaro
Cheli Elizabeth English, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. English of the Bronx, was married yesterday at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in the Williamsbridge section of the Bronx to Dr.
Kelson Michael Figaro, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert A. Figaro of Uniondale, L.I.
The Rev.
Franklin L. Reid, the rector of St.
Luke's, and the Rev.
Dr.
Simon P. Montgomery, a Methodist minister who is an uncle of the bride, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 27 years old, is keeping her name.
She is an associate in the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.
She graduated from Yale University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father, who is retired, was an investigator for the State Department of Labor in New York.
Her mother, Elizabeth Shell English, who is retired, taught business education in the New York City school system.


They Made Manhattan
SKYSCRAPER DREAMS
The Great Real Estate Dynasties of New York.
By Tom Shachtman. lllustrated. 354 pp.
Boston:  Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.


European Trains
To the Editor: I have been operating out of Paris for the past several months and found the article comparing European rail service with airlines for short distances very interesting (Travel Advisory, June 2).
A significant cost of air travel was omitted: taxis to and from the airports in Paris cost about $25 each way, or an additional $50 for air travel.
The comparison was for first-class both for plane and train.
Second class on the T.G.V. is more comfortable than first class on most small planes.
PIERRE CORDELL-REEH New Orleans


Q and A
Ireland on Horseback
Q.
I recall reading an article about horseback riding from town to town in Ireland.
Can you give me details? -- Nora Maddicks, Rochester
A.
The article you probably had in mind dealt with two treks run by Willie Leahy of County Galway -- the Coast Trail and the Connemara Trail.
The Coast Trail roughly follows the Atlantic coast road (L102) from Ballyconneely, south of Clifden, to Cashel, south to Carna, then goes north and inland past the village of Oughterard on Lake Corrib to Barna, about 10 miles from Galway City.
The Connemara Trail takes riders on an inland course from Barna, to Maam Cross, past Ballynahinch Castle and ends up in Clifden.
Both treks are offered May through October.


Moscow Mourns And Exalts Men Killed by Coup
The funeral of three young men killed on the streets of Moscow Tuesday night turned into a massive display of solidarity today, as throngs of people filled the center of the city to pay homage to the casualties of this week's failed coup with flags, flowers and pledges to see justice done.
Appearing before a crowd for the first time since his return to Moscow, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev told thousands of people jammed into the giant Manezh Square outside the Kremlin: "Those who participated in the coup will get what they deserve. There will be no mercy for them."


BEST SELLERS: August 25, 1991
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war, and a floundering President may not be able to cope.
2
2
24
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
1
9
THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her life.
4
3
4
MAXIMUM BOB, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $20.) A woman probation officer pursues the people trying to kill a redneck Florida judge. (LP)
5
6
5
OUTER BANKS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) An interior decorator comes to terms with herself at a college reunion.
6
5
14
HEIR TO THE EMPIRE, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $15.) The survival of the "Star Wars" galaxy is menaced by new forces.
7
8
16
LOVES MUSIC, LOVES TO DANCE, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.95.) Two Manhattan women, doing research into personal ads, get caught in the snare of a serial killer.
8
4
5
PASTIME, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) The private eye Spenser learns much about his own past while helping a young man track down his mother, who has disappeared.
9
9
9
PARADISE, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $19.95.) The heirs of two family dynasties find true love when one of their businesses is threatened.
10 *
7
9
BEAST, by Peter Benchley. (Random House, $21.) The disappearance of a couple off Bermuda raises a question: is a creature from the deep responsible?
11
14
74
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
12
10
5
SKY MASTERS, by Dale Brown. (Fine/Putnam, $21.95.) The United States Air Force comes to the aid of the Philippines in a war with China in 1994.
13 *
11
16
AS THE CROW FLIES, by Jeffrey Archer. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) Inspired by his grandfather, a London vendor, a man strives to create the biggest store in the world. (LP)
14
12
3
TEXAS!
SAGE, by Sandra Brown. (Doubleday, $18.) A young woman who has always been able to wrap men around her finger meets her match on a visit to her hometown.
15
14
"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) The private eye Kinsey Millhone on the trail of two perpetrators of an insurance scam.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
10
PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal Government.
2
3
5
WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of travel suffered in all parts of the world.
3
1
10
CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in America, past, present and future.
4
4
40
IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various cultures.
5
5
8
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who moved there.
6
6
15
FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher explores the changing role of the male in today's society.
7
7
7
BOSS OF BOSSES, by Joseph F. O'Brien and Andris Kurins. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.95.) The downfall of the mobster Paul Castellano.
8
8
8
A QUESTION OF CHARACTER, by Thomas C. Reeves. (Free Press, $24.95.) A biography of John F. Kennedy.
9
9
15
THE COMMANDERS, by Bob Woodward. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) How the President and his high military commanders made their decisions during the first two years of the Bush Administration.
10
11
8
DAVE BARRY TALKS BACK, by Dave Barry. (Crown, $18.) A collection of columns by the syndicated humorist.
11
13
ILLIBERAL EDUCATION, by Dinesh D'Souza. (Free Press, $19.95.) A critical account of the way matters of race and sex are treated on campus.
12 *
10
2
AND THE BEAT GOES ON, by Sonny Bono. (Pocket, $19.95.) The veteran pop star and current Mayor of Palm Springs, Calif., recalls his roller-coaster career with and without Cher.
13
2
THE BEAUTY MYTH, by Naomi Wolf. (Morrow, $21.95.) An argument against our society's emphasis on the importance of women's physical appearance.
14 *
14
7
UNDER THE INFLUENCE, by Peter Hernon and Terry Ganey. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.95.) An unauthorized account of the Anheuser-Busch beer dynasty.
15
13
12
WOODY ALLEN, by Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) The life of the film director, writer and actor.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
2
FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.) The case for euthanasia in instances of terminal illness and ways to accomplish it.
2
7
DO IT!
LET'S GET OFF OUR BUTS, by John-Roger and Peter McWilliams. (Prelude/Bantam, $20.) How to cope with the human condition.
3
5
42
WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) An illustrated book in which the game is to find a hitchhiker named Waldo.
4
4
29
FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he travels from ancient Egypt to the present.
5 *
2
85
THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A book of illustrated games.
These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets.
The figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
LP indicates that a book is available in large print.
AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)
ANNE SEXTON: A Biography, by Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Ms.
Middlebrook, a professor of English at Stanford, gives a balanced, insightful, intelligent account of how a poorly educated, mentally ill woman became a poet of distinctive and original gifts.
ENTRANCES &amp; EXITS: A Life in and Out of the Theatre, by Norris Houghton. (Limelight, $29.95.) A consistently amusing, pertinent and touching book of memoirs at 81 by the illustrious producer, director, artistic director and conscience of Off Broadway.
AFRICAN SILENCES, by Peter Matthiessen. (Random House, $21.) Three extended essays on Africa by a distinguished nature writer whose environmental warnings and descriptions of destructive social forces are as urgent and relevant as ever.
CLOSING ARGUMENTS, by Frederick Busch. (Ticknor &amp; Fields, $19.95.) Mr.
Busch's 15th book of fiction is a tight, dense, dark, complicated novel about child abuse, sex, violence, war and law.
WAITING FOR THE WEEKEND, by Witold Rybczynski. (Viking, $18.95.) A slim, relaxed and graceful excursion, by the author of "Home," into the social history of how we live and why we do it differently on some days than on others.
RIVETHEAD: Tales From the Assembly Line, by Ben Hamper. (Warner, $19.95.) A roughshod, vehement autobiographical essay that conveys the atmosphere and the malaise of a generation that cannot find satisfaction or self-esteem in factory work.
THE NIGHT TRAVELLERS, by Elizabeth Spencer. (Viking, $21.95.) Personal relationships, not historical events, hold together this strong novel that deals with civilians who felt obliged to resist the Vietnam War, even unto violence.


Eliza Holt to Wed Edward Clarke Jr.
October wedding plans for Eliza Rutledge Holt and Edward Dean Clarke Jr., a son of Mrs.
George Starret of Rochester Hills, Mich., and Mr.
Clarke of Stockbridge, Mich., have been announced by the prospective bride's parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold R. Holt of Cos Cob, Conn.
Miss Holt, 31 years old, is a hazardous waste specialist and a registered environmental health specialist for Orange County in Santa Ana, Calif.
She graduated from San Diego State University and was presented at the Bachelor's Cotillon in Baltimore.
Her father is an industrial designer in Cos Cob, where her mother, Ellie Holt, is a sales agent for Coldwell Banker Schlott real estate.


Miss Richards, Student, Marries
Catherine Coolidge Richards, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Richards 2d of Andover, Mass., was married there yesterday to Ayres Stockly, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ayres Holmes Stockly of Falmouth, Me.
The Rev.
J.
Philip Zaeder, a Presbyterian minister, officiated in Cochran Chapel at Philips Academy.
The couple are both 27 years old.
Mrs.
Stockly graduated from Harvard University and is studying for a master's degree in education at Leslie College.
Her father teaches history at Phillips Academy.
Her mother, Carol C. Richards, teaches at the Andover Community Child Care Center.


Quality L. I. Food and Wine Producing Distinctive Cuisine
JUST as wine-making regions the world over are known for food, so was the evidence unmistakable last week that a distinctive Long Island cuisine is emerging.
At the second annual Barrel Tasting and Barbecue co-sponsored by The Wine Spectator, a biweekly publication, and the Long Island Wine Council, nearly 1,300 people turned out at the Bedell Cellars in Cutchogue to taste red and white wines produced by 13 wineries and to sample dishes prepared by 19 chefs.


Jean Dzaluk and Raymond Turro Are to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Francis Dzaluk of Port Chester, N.Y., have announced November wedding plans for their daughter, Joan Pendleton Dzaluk, and Raymond Anthony Turro, a son of Jean Turro of Mahwah, N.J., and Anthony Turro of New York.
The couple, both 27 years old, are with Lehman Brothers in New York; she is an assistant vice president in the corporate trading department and he is a mortgage bond trader.
The prospective bride graduated cum laude from Providence College and studied business and French at L'Universite de Fribourg in Switzerland.
Mr.
Turro graduated from Bucknell University.


Samuel Schwartz Wed to Ms. Kohl
Deborah Caroline Kohl, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Kohl of North Woodmere, L.I. was married last evening in Lawrence, L.I., to Samuel Howard Schwartz, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Elias Schwartz of Elkins Park, Pa.
Rabbi Morris Friedman officiated at Temple Israel.
Mrs.
Schwartz, 27 years old, graduated from Dartmouth College and is studying for an M.B.A. degree at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Her father is the vice president of the Mars Fudge and Fruit Company, a manufacturer of bakery supplies in Brooklyn.
Her mother, Elayne Kohl, is the coordinator of the latchkey program in the Lawrence public schools.


Produce for Summer Hors d'Oeuvres
SUMMER produce simplifies entertaining.
There is still plenty of time to take advantage of the fresh harvest from local farms.
And the fresher the ingredient, the better the flavor, so elaborate preparation is unnecessary.
Even a platter or bowl of necessary tidbits to buy time before all the dinner guests arrive can be as elemental as fresh vegetables.
Crudites are perennial favorites, for example, but when assembled from the seasonal crop they become more than merely vehicles for creamy dip and are delicious in their own right.


Metro Datelines; Convicted Rapist Captured in Nevada
A convicted rapist who was mistakenly freed from a New Jersey prison because of a "clerical oversight" was arrested in a hotel parking lot in Las Vegas, the authorities said.
The man, Kenneth Arnold Yarter, 40 years old, of Easton, Pa., is also wanted by the authorities in Florida who believe that he raped two Canadian women in St.
Petersburg, Fla., earlier this month.


Bridge
When the first in the modern series of world championships was played in Bermuda in 1950, Iceland was represented: a pair from that island was part of a combined European team.
The Icelanders have had to wait 41 years for their next Bermuda Bowl appearance, which will take place in Yokohama, Japan, in October.
An expanded competition will include four teams from Europe, and Iceland took the crucial fourth position at the European Championships in Killarney, Ireland, last month.
They finished behind Britain, Sweden and Poland, but ahead of such favored squads as Italy, the Netherlands, France and Germany.
A notable portent for the future was the seventh position achieved by the Soviet squad.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 25


John Gerow Gazley, Professor, 96
John Gerow Gazley, a retired professor of European history and international relations at Dartmouth College, died on Tuesday at his home in Hanover, N.H.
He was 96 years old.
He died of cardiac arrest associated with Parkinson's disease, his wife, Elizabeth T. Bassett Gazley, said.


C. D. Chace Wed To Miss Rennolds
Margaret Blythe Rennolds, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John K. B. Rennolds of Richmond and Pawling, N.Y., was married yesterday to Christopher Dean Chace, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dean W. Chace of Princeton, N.J., and Canada Lake, N.Y.
The Rev.
Robert M. Taylor, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at Christ Church on Quaker Hill in Pawling.
The bride, 30 years old, is the assistant managing editor at the Harry N. Abrams publishing company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University.
Her father is a vice president of Davenport &amp; Company, a stockbrokerage in Richmond.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
INTERVIEWS WITH SPANISH WRITERS  By Marie-Lise Gazarian Gautier.
Dalkey Archive, $24.95.


College Football; Life in the Eye of the Hurricanes
It seemed such a perfect time to be at the University of Miami.
A once woeful football program had achieved so much success throughout the 1980's that the power and influence of the Miami Hurricanes had to be acknowledged by the sport's establishment even if their trash-talking dance parties would never be embraced.
The university's decision to abandon its traditional but risky independent status and become the jewel of the odd new Big East football conference had seemed to expand Miami's horizon, affix the program to millions of lucrative television sets in the Northeast, and define the start of a more secure era.


Gail Niemitz Is Married
Gail Elizabeth Niemitz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry E. Niemitz of Maplewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Peter Bailey Fritzinger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Noel C. Fritzinger of Weston, Vt.
The Rev.
John T. Race performed the ceremony at the Clifford Baptist Church in Crystal Lake, Pa.
The bride, 32 years old and a graduate of Smith College, is the chief of staff at MicroGeneSys, a biopharmaceutical company in Meriden, Conn.
The bridegroom, 33, graduated from Amherst College.
He is a vice president and the treasurer of the Louis Dreyfus Energy Corporation in Wilton, Conn.


Wine; Oregon's Gold Coast
Oregon is a state of individualists.
Oregonians like to kid that the earthworm is their state animal and the mosquito their state bird.
They don't like it when you call their state ARE-a-gone.
They call it OR-y-gun.
And they don't like it when you compare their wines unfavorably with the stuff made by those effete Californians.
"We're different," they insist.


Brickbats and Cap'n Billy's Whiz Bang
THE brickbats, leavened by an occasional plaudit, continue to drizzle in.
Here, edited for brevity, is a smattering from the mailbag:
Dear Etc.,


Salomon's Errant Cowboy
Wall Street bond traders have two theories about what happened at Salomon Brothers Inc.
One is the conspiracy theory.
The other involves Paul W. Mozer.
The conspiracy theory contends that Salomon was deliberately trying to manipulate the Treasury market for its own gain and that if the top brass, including the firm's crusty chairman, John H. Gutfreund, didn't actually encourage it, they at least looked the other way.
They did so because the practice had the potential to earn immense profits for Salomon.


Don't Pronounce the Democrats Dead Just Yet; Iowa's Earlier Populist
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 5 front-page article on Senator Tom Harkin's testing of the waters for a Presidential campaign quotes both sides of the political aisle in measuring him up as a George McGovern with hair and a man with "a Hubert Humphrey-type message that speaks to people's needs." You also note Mr.
Harkin's own words in New Hampshire about populism.
Probably the last great progressive American populist who thought and spoke like Mr.
Harkin was another Iowan, Henry A. Wallace, who served four years as Secretary of Agriculture and two terms as Vice President under Franklin D. Roosevelt.


Quotation of the Day
"All our lives, all our reality has led to this moment." -- Valentin Sergeyevich of Moscow.  [ 1:3. ]


The Strange Case of the Czech Crown
To the Editor:
News media reports imply that politicians in Czechoslovakia are holding up conversion to a free-market economy for fear of being tossed out of office.
I recently made a one-week trip for a scientific conference in Prague (where I studied medicine 50 years ago) and saw a different and far more complex reality.


Result Plus
TENNIS  Sanchez Wins Title With Ease


Miss Stein Wed To Todd Kumble
Jennifer Diane Stein, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Alfred M. Stein of Williamsville, N.Y., was married last evening in Buffalo to Charles Todd Kumble, a son of Barbara K. Kumble of Hartsdale, N.Y., and Steven J. Kumble of New York.
Rabbi Martin Goldberg performed the ceremony at the Hyatt Regency Hotel.
The bride, 25 years old, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Michigan and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is an associate in the New York law firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft.
Her father is an internist and hematologist and a clinical professor of medicine at the State University in Buffalo.
Her mother, Nadine Stein, is the regional coordinator for the New York State Mentoring Program, an educational counseling agency in Buffalo.


Despite the Rain, Plants Need More Water
EVEN though the region has had thunderstorms and some rainfall, this is not the time to ignore plants, especially those with woody stems.
The rainfall helped the shallow-rooted crops, herbaceous plants and annuals, but many of the big ornamentals supported by large root systems need help.
A finger poked deeply into the soil will reveal how little moisture really soaked into the ground.
Keep the hose out, and allow water to trickle slowly for 15 to 20 minutes a plant, so it reaches deep to the root zones.
A good soaking once a week or every 10 days should be adequate.
There are small attachments for the ends of hoses that allow this gentle trickle of water to seep directly into the ground.
This type of watering conserves valuable moisture for the purpose intended, and the water is not lost to evaporation as is often the case with sprinkler attachments for garden hoses.


Instant Monument
IWO JIMA
Monuments, Memories, and the American Hero.
By Karal Ann Marling and John Wetenhall.
Illustrated. 300 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.


November Bridal For Ms. Perera
November wedding plans for Caroline Faith Perera and Kevin Arnold Barry, a son of Mrs.
Thomas B. Barry of Manhasset, L.I., and the late Mr.
Barry, have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence T. Perera of Boston.
Ms.
Perera, 26 years old, graduated from Middlebury College and was presented in 1982 at the Boston Cotillion.
She is the recruitment coordinator for the law firm of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius in New York.
Her father is a partner in the Boston law firm of Hemenway &amp; Barnes.


Powerful Indian Art From the Northwest
NORTHWEST coast tribal art is neither gentle nor polite.
Eerie, supernatural figures with grotesque or comically emphasized features inhabit masks, entwine on totem poles or parade across boxes, textiles and jewelry.
Centuries before contact with Europeans, the eight Northwest coastal tribes developed distinctive art forms used to create religious objects or decorate everyday items from halibut hooks to storage chests.
The most common pieces were three-dimensional cedar carvings, painted in bold primary colors, and bas-relief designs where human and animal body parts were artistically rearranged to fit the available space.
Much of the work evokes a surreal duality, a dreamlike world where animal and human figures merge into each other: a beaver's ears are actually miniature human faces, a man's protruded tongue is also a frog's head.


WEATHERING PREJUDICE
It seems a shame that two talented people like Carter and his wife should not have had children because of their lack of faith in society.
I am one of five children of an interracial marriage.
My siblings and I grew up in a rough neighborhood in Queens.
Our mother, who is white, is the assistant director of a Brooklyn medical center; our father is black, a retired postmaster.
They have been married 37 years.
Despite the so-called problems that interracial children are supposed to have, we managed to grow up healthy, happy and successful.


Fresh Air Fund Teaches Campers Job Skills
On the crest of a hill in the Catskills, New York City youths are learning how to find and keep a job when they return home from the Fresh Air Fund Career Awareness Program.
In a role-playing exercise to teach that lesson, Gwendolen Hardwick, of the Creative Arts Team -- a project at New York University that sends actors to schools, prisons and camps -- plays an employee who comes to work late at a fast-food restaurant and moves slowly when customers beckon.
A camper plays the manager.


Giants Crumble Under Patriots
If the Giants, as Super Bowl champions, are the best team in pro football and if the New England Patriots, fresh from a 1-15 season, are the worst, how do you explain today's debacle?
In the last preseason game for both teams, the Patriots often seemed to move the ball at will as they routed the Giants, 24-3.
The Giants appeared lethargic, uninterested, unemotional.
They seemed to be going through the motions.
Their performance was embarrassing.


Soccer Matches Out of Yugoslavia
European Cup soccer matches will be moved from Yugoslavia because of what the Union of European Football associations described Friday as the precarious security situation in the country.
The U.E.F.A. said the Yugoslav clubs would have to play their home matches in a neutral country.


The News in Beauty Is That Longer Is Better
Skirts stay short, but hair and eyelashes go to even greater lengths.
For fall, tresses are likely to be tousled and tumbling, lashes dark and dramatically sweeping.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Fashions of The Times/Magazine Part 2


Food; The Little Sleep
When people ask me what I'm doing in Santo Domingo, I always tell them, half jokingly, "Researching the siesta." But nobody ever laughs.
Here in the Dominican Republic, nap capital of the Caribbean, people take their siesta seriously.
Or rather, their lunch-and-siesta.
The sleepy, steamy, three-hour calm between coffee-hopping Dominican mornings and rum-infested Dominican nights is excellent proof of the symbiotic relationship between food and human biological rhythms.
Take away the plates heaped with glistening white rice, the bowls of burgundy-red habichuelas rojas, the golden Creole soups chunky with white yams and cassava, and hammock-swinging Santo Domingo afternoons would suddenly begin to bustle with appointments, marketing strategy sessions, three-way phone calls.
To put it more simply, in this part of the world, beans become dreams.
And what dreams!
There is an exquisite, almost hallucinogenic state that starts to take over toward the end of these Caribbean lunches -- an earthy nirvana of languor and garlic, inner peace and crispy fried plantains.
Dominicans, I found out, have a word for this digestive ecstasy:
pavito
-- the little turkey (because you're stuffed).
The causes and origins of pavito are a subject of much debate.
One skeptical lunch companion of mine dismisses it as borderline drunkenness, the result of too much cerveza with the meal.
Others take a more scientific approach.
"When you eat so much good food, all the blood rushes to your stomach," explains my friend Pedro.
"It has to come from somewhere, so it runs down from your brain." Hence the visions, the disorientation, the slow slip from reality into spicy, garlicky fantasies.
Gabriel Garcia Marquez, I am absolutely certain, gets pavito every day.


For Now, It's Wait Till Next Year
It ended not with a bang for big-hitter Marco Cacopardo, but with whimpering backhand returns and a silly change of shirts.
Cacopardo, only one victory from earning a berth in the United States Open tennis championships, yesterday found himself undressed, quite literally, on court 3 against Michiel Schapers of the Netherlands.
The 21-year-old National Amateur champion from Forest Hills lost his final qualifying match, 6-3, 6-3, while becoming embroiled in a sideshow fashion controversy.


Before Abandoning And Adopting Pets
I was very disappointed by your article "Love for Animals Runs Deep on L.I."  [ July 28 ] .
Thousands of dogs and cats have to be euthanized by Long Island's municipal shelters each year, because pet owners were not responsible and did not spay or neuter their animals.
As a result, wave after wave of kittens and puppies are born outside and live ferally.
These are no longer pets; they're wild animals and they're subjected to the dangers of living outside.
Very frequently, people adopt dogs or cats without fully considering the responsibilities.
After a few months, or less, they decide they can't be bothered.
The animal is then dumped and left to fend for itself.


BLASTER BIJOUX
They're big, they're bold, they're brassy.
This season's fashion accessories make  statements by themselves, and they look even better when loaded on lavishly.


A New Sight in Wichita: Rallying for Abortion Rights
For six weeks, the words and deeds of a militant anti-abortion group have cast a shadow over this city and dominated the national debate about abortion.
Today, the other side stepped out of that shadow.


For the Seville Fair, the Old Geodesic Dome Trick
In the best of all possible worlds, the United States pavilion at Expo '92 in Seville would be an elegant and sophisticated building.
It would be a graceful bow from the leading nation that rose from the lands Columbus discovered when he set sail from Palos de la Frontera 500 years ago.
But that building is not going to appear.
A design that met those requirements has been scrapped in favor of two tired geodesic domes that have been retrieved from a Government warehouse and plunked down on the United States site.
Writing about it in The Wall Street Journal, the American reporter Amy Gamerman said: "Expo watchers are laughing up their sleeves at the cheapo hybrid pavilion, dubbing it 'Twin Peaks.' It will look especially mingy on the enormous U.S. site."
While Spain will hold center stage as host of the world's fair, beginning next April, the United States is the designated guest of honor.
It would seem that the country would have seized the moment.
Yet all signs point to a potential national embarrassment, with plans for America's presentation of itself botched and compromised by bureaucratic bungling and a lack of vision.


Wall Street; When Chaos Brought a Country-Fund Christmas
Some panic sellers never learn.
When hard-liners in the Soviet Union seized control of the Government on Monday, traders raced for the exits at three country funds that have ties to the Soviet economy.
Then by late Wednesday, when the political threat had abated, all three funds were at or above their Friday closes, and value-oriented traders who had bought shares were counting their profits.
"It was like Christmas," said Thomas J. Herzfeld, the president of a Miami investment firm that specializes in closed-end funds.
Since the country funds are, in his view, the least efficient sector of the closed-end fund industry to start with, political bombshells tend to widen the discount that typically exists between prices and the funds' underlying asset values.
"People overreact on the downside and the upside," Mr.
Herzfeld said, suggesting that the opportunity to trade against the crowd may not be over.
"Now you have people reasoning if the hard-liners are out of the picture, reforms can go forward at a faster pace."


The New Revolution; A Chance to Remake the Soviet Union
THERE seems no end to the treachery of the state against the people here; the habit is darkly historic.
Plot follows upon ambition, crisis upon despair, and all the free-floating stealth of the centuries roosts again at the Kremlin, as if deceit were the only familiar instrument of governance.
The one encouraging facet in the early hours of last week's eerily frightening coup d'etat was its sense of the antique.
Here were eight tired Communists, looking lost in the present and frightened of the future, turning hungrily to the sepia methods of the past when the Kremlin was the citadel of fear.


Bold Images That Show Why the 20's Roared
The Chrysler Building rose above the streets of New York and the Bugatti Royale cruised the streets of Europe.
Lindbergh flew solo in his single-engine "Spirit of St. Louis" across an ocean plied by a new generation of gigantic luxury liners.
Spectacular utopian dreams were conceived to rejuvenate a continent ravaged by a war of unprecedented brutality.
From London and Vienna to New York and Chicago, the working masses who had transformed the cities of the 19th century into the metropolises of the 20th called for widespread social reforms.
At the same time, a wave of conservatism resounded in the French "rappel a l'ordre," or call to order, and in the Neo-Classicism of artists like Picasso and de Chirico.
Only an exhibition as enormous and ambitious and exhilarating as "The 1920's: Age of the Metropolis," here at the Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, through Nov. 10, could begin to do its sprawling subject justice.


JOHN McCORMACK; Backing Into A Role
To the Editor:
Will Crutchfield ends his review of a videotape of John McCormack  [ "John McCormack as Film Star, Sort of," Aug. 4 ]  by lamenting that the cameo appearance of Andres de Segurola did not include a song by the veteran bass, though he notes that "operatic history buffs" will be pleased by the singer's appearance in the McCormack movie.


Dr. Jennifer Lawrence to Marry Dr. Kevin Horan
October wedding plans for Dr.
Jennifer Marie Lawrence and Dr.
Kevin Francis Horan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Horan of New City, N.Y., have been announced by her parents, Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Lawrence of Long Lake, Minn.
Dr.
Lawrence, 26 years old, is a pediatric resident at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset, L.I.
She graduated magna cum laude from Middlebury College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.D. from Dartmouth College.
Dr.
Horan, 29, is an anesthesiology resident at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
A graduate of Johns Hopkins University, he received an M.D. from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine of the City University.


Politically Correct, Morally Wrong
To the Editor:
We who teach must have access to notorious films if we are to understand how visual propaganda moves or fails to move us.
Denying access to "The Eternal Jew" because of its virulent anti-Semitism has the same aura of political correctness that surfaced in 1970 concerning D. W. Griffith's "Birth of a Nation." Vigilantes in the American Historical Association demanded that the film be removed from the classroom because it was a racist document.
It is, but "Birth of a Nation" is also a brilliant film, and its racism is a part of this country's past, just as "The Eternal Jew" shapes our understanding of the outer limits of anti-Semitism in Germany, 1940.
DAVID CULBERT Professor of History, Louisiana State University Baton Rouge, La.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
DEADLY WEEKEND  A True Story of Obsession and Murder. By John Dillmann. Putnam, $21.95.


Gorbachev Statement on Party
Following is the text of a statement issued today by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union through the Russian language service of the Soviet press agency Tass, as translated by The New York Times:
Gorbachev's Statement


Campus Life: UConn; Ex-Cheerleader Presses Her Fight On Weight Limits
For several months the University of Connecticut has wrestled with whether to revise a rule that cheerleaders not weigh more than 125 pounds.
Last week, after a 130-pound student charged the school with discrimination for dismissing her from the squad, the university dropped the weight requirement.
But the student, 20-year-old Michele Lynn Budnik, of Newington, Conn., continued to press her charge with the state Human Rights and Opportunities Commission.


RECORD BRIEFS
Corigliano: Symphony No. 1
Chicago Symphony Orchestra conducted by Daniel Barenboim. Erato 2292-45601-2; CD.


Senior Classes
"REVERTING to the university at 40, one immediately recaptured all the crushing melancholy of the undergraduate condition." So wrote Anthony Powell in the opening sentence of "Books Do Furnish a Room," one of the novels in his series, "A Dance to The Music of Time." If he had waited until he was 60 or more, he might have danced to a different tune.
Some 50 years after graduation, I returned to five campuses recently and found the atmosphere exhilarating rather than melancholy, expansive rather than crushing.
My wife and I were among the 215,000 men and women who enrolled last year in a fast growing vacation-study program for people over 60 years old operated by Elderhostel, a nonprofit organization based in Boston.


Sunday Outing; U.S. Open Agenda: Watching, Strolling and Eating
For two weeks near the end of summer, the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens is transformed from an arena for amateurs to a grand stadium for the best players in the world.
Beginning tomorrow, the United States Tennis Association sponsors the fourth of the prestigious Grand Slam tournaments: the United States Open.
"The U.S. Open turns New York into the tennis capital of the world for two weeks," said Robert A. Cookson, chairman of the event.


Ideas &amp; Trends; Sometimes Those Bare Necessities Include Yacht Docking
MOST Americans would probably assume that filing for personal bankruptcy would crimp anyone's lifestyle.
No more dinners at Le Cirque while one is on a court-approved allowance, for instance.
And vacation might be a nice campout in a state park.
But if life didn't prove Fitzgerald right when he supposedly told Hemingway "the rich are different than you and I," bankruptcy court might.
Take, for instance, Peter Kalikow, the real estate magnate and owner of The New York Post, who put himself and one of his real-estate partnerships into bankruptcy on Tuesday.
Court papers he filed showed that he may have a richly different notion of the bare necessities of life.


Two Men Held in Two Killings
Two men who were sought by the police for a murder and the abduction of a Methodist priest in Brooklyn on the same night were arrested on Friday, the police said yesterday.
The men, Marc Asher, 31 years old, of Bay 35th Street in the Bensonhurst section of Brooklyn, and Richard Springer, 38, of 252 51st Street in the Sunset Park section, were charged with killing a taxi driver and attempting to murder the priest on July 31.


Elizabeth Fielden Marries
Elizabeth Lialetta Fielden, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Fielden of Wayne, Pa., was married yesterday to James William Stevens, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William K. Stevens of Upper Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Clyde Griffith performed the ceremony at the Rosemont Presbyterian Village Terrace in Rosemont, Pa.
Mrs.
Stevens, 21 years old, and her husband, 28, are studying voice.
She is a teacher's aide at the Ithan Elementary School in Radnor, Pa.
The bridegroom graduated from the University of Texas at Austin.
He is an engraver at Wayne Sporting Goods in Wayne, Pa.


Dutchess Man Indicted For Death of His Wife
A chiropractor has been indicted by a grand jury on charges that he had beaten his wife to death during a two-month period in 1990, law-enforcement authorities said.
The chiropractor, Herbert Feldman, 65 years old, of Amenia, was charged with second-degree murder and first-degree manslaughter in the death of his wife Frances, 62, on Aug. 11, 1990.


In Hosiery, Newest Neutrals Go to Work
No longer are stockings the silent partner in business attire.
These days, hosiery overtly complements clothing.
Neutral tones are still stylish, but now they include a broader palette, numerous textures, densities and prints.


Water at Shore Is Called 'Very Safe'
A SPECTACULAR view of the Jersey Shore from a helicopter, hovering 100 feet above the Atlantic, seems to give the lie to anything negative said about these bathing beaches and pollution.
The sparkling surf appears tropical, a jade green punctuated by frothy white breakers.
Farther out, pleasure boats, fishing vessels and an occasional shoal of dolphins or porpoises look like toys on a tranquil deep blue lake.


Answering The Mail
Q.
Our house has cedar siding that had been stained.
Two years ago, the stain started to peel, and so we had the siding restained.
The cedar boards on the southern side of the house are peeling again.
How can we correct the problem?
A.
A true stain does not peel, because it soaks into the wood and leaves no surface coating that can peel.
What was apparently used on your siding is one of the so-called heavy bodied stains or opaque stains that are more like paint than stain.
It would be best to remove all of it and apply a true semitransparent shingle stain.
If you do not remove the old finish, then you will have to continue applying the same type of coating used before.
The peeling problem is most likely caused by moisture inside the outer walls, which can be corrected by installing small louvers or vents in the outside siding, enabling trapped moisture to escape.


The New Revolution; The West Must Be Quick on Its Feet
IN the last five years, the United States has had to refashion the central tenets of its foreign policy as the cold war came to an end and a new kind of Soviet Union began to evolve.
But until last week, that formidable task was eased by one constant element in the rapidly changing equation -- the unitary if frequently troubled leadership of Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
The tumult of the last six days has ended Mr.
Gorbachev's primacy and with it, apparently, a thousand-year tradition of concentrating absolute power in one man or woman.
For policy makers in Washington and other Western capitals, the problem now is how to deal with yet another radically different Soviet Union, one whose very shape, whose policies and principles are unclear, but whose complexity is assured by the success of the Russian people for the first time in substituting the popular will for the tyranny of czar and dictator.


Catering to Older Travelers
NOW that the baby boom generation is preparing to hit 50, more and more travel organizations are paying closer attention to the so-called "mature traveler" -- either 50 or 60 plus, depending on who is doing the defining.
Those already in that category -- there are some 65 million Americans aged 50 or over, about one-quarter of the population, according to census figures -- do more than their share of traveling.
Harold H. Norvell, travel industry liaison for the American Association of Retired Persons, estimates that "at least, if not more than, one-third of all leisure travel is done by people over 50." More free time, more discretionary income and, increasingly, more education leading to a healthy curiosity about what lies beyond local borders are all factors that help explain why travel has become part of growing older.


Produce for Summer Hors d'Oeuvres
SUMMER produce simplifies entertaining.
There is still plenty of time to take advantage of the fresh harvest from local farms.
And the fresher the ingredient, the better the flavor, so elaborate preparation is unnecessary.
Even a platter or bowl of necessary tidbits to buy time before all the dinner guests arrive can be as elemental as fresh vegetables.
Crudites are perennial favorites, for example, but when assembled from the seasonal crop they become more than merely vehicles for creamy dip and are delicious in their own right.


Kicking Off The Big East
It took more than 30 years of talk but only three months of action to put together a major Eastern football league, the Big East.
"Need did it," said Charles Theokas, athletic director at Temple and a longtime advocate of consolidation.
"When there is common need, something happens. When there isn't you get politics, some people trying to take advantage."


Canon's Proposed Move Upsets Brookville
IN 1940, Nassau County had 439 farms.
Today there are six, five of them north of Jericho Turnpike.
The vast farming region called Cedar Swamp has gone from farmland to home for horse breeders and yacht owners.
Now the Village of Brookville, one of 11 incorporated villages that make up Cedar Swamp, faces a crossroads.
Canon U.S.A.
Inc., the Japanese-owned camera and electronics company, is negotiating to buy 100 acres of choice property on Northern Boulevard from the financially strapped New York Institute of Technology for its headquarters.


Bush Low-Key on Soviet Moves and Aid Pressure
The White House offered a strikingly low-key response to the events in the Soviet Union today, as the Bush Administration tried to ward off pressure from Europe to consider increases in Soviet aid.
President Bush, who received briefings on the news from Moscow from his top aides while devoting much of the day to golfing and boating with his weekend guest, Arnold Palmer, shrugged off suggestions that the collapse of the Communist Party warranted major increases in aid.


Preserving a Flat Roof
FLAT roofs, which are usually built up with layers of roofing felt and asphalt or coal tar, should be recoated every two to four years, unless they are covered by a layer of gravel or other stone chips.
About two times a year, the roofs should also be inspected for blisters, cracks and other flaws that can lead to leaks.
Coating waterproofs and protects the original roofing.
It is available in five-gallon containers as a black or metallic liquid.
The material is thicker than paint, but not as thick as tar.
It is applied with a long-handled brush resembling a small push broom.


POSTINGS: 15 Years in Queens; Outdoor Market Getting Indoor Home
A 15-year-old Queens institution, the Outdoor Farmers Market, held three days a week in downtown Jamaica, is about to get a permanent indoor home.
A 26,000-square-foot building scheduled for completion in November will house its produce, plants and flower sellers, as well as a 300-seat, two-story food court with 14 outlets.
The project is on 160th Street just north of Jamaica Avenue.
It is being financed with $4.3 million in public and private funds raised by the New York City Economic Development Corporation and a private group in Jamaica, the Greater Jamaica Development Corporation, which will operate the market.


Lynn Grobman, Teacher, Is Wed
Lynn Grobman, a daughter of Debora Grobman Berkman of New York and Bob Grobman of Stockbridge, Mass., was married last evening to Dr.
Mark Klaiman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel Klaiman of Toronto.
Rabbi Moses Birnbaum performed the ceremony at the Whitehall Club in New York.
The bride, 26 years old, teaches kindergarten at the Dalton School in New York.
She graduated from the New School for Social Research.
Her mother, known professionally as Debora K. Grobman, is an associate with the New York law firm of Kramer, Levin, Nessen, Kamin &amp; Frankel.
Her father is a business consultant.
Her grandfather the late Joseph Kottler was an actor and four-term New York State assemblyman from Brooklyn.


Correction
An article in the Headliners column last Sunday about a confessed serial murderer, Donald Leroy Evans, misstated the number of killings found to have been committed by a man in an another series of cases, Henry Lee Lucas.
It was 11; he admitted only one killing.


Campus Life: UConn; Ex-Cheerleader Presses Her Fight On Weight Limits
For several months the University of Connecticut has wrestled with whether to revise a rule that cheerleaders not weigh more than 125 pounds.
Last week, after a 130-pound student charged the school with discrimination for dismissing her from the squad, the university dropped the weight requirement.
But the student, 20-year-old Michele Lynn Budnik, of Newington, Conn., continued to press her charge with the state Human Rights and Opportunities Commission.


Corrections
Because of a producer's schedule change, a classical music listing on page 27 of the Arts and Leisure section today and a picture and caption on page 19 of the section are outdated.
The pianists who are to perform at the Hampton Summerfest on Friday, besides Ilana Vered, are Horacio Gutierrez and Jeffrey Biegel.
Vladimir Feltsman and Alexander Toradze will not appear.
On Saturday, Mr.
Gutierrez, not Mr.
Feltsman, will play a solo recital.


The Soviet Coup and Its Aftermath: A Recap
Aug. 19
Tass says Vice President Gennadi I. Yanayev has taken over as President because President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is ill.


What Fall Offers on Concert Circuit
EVEN though the Labor Day weekend gets an early August start this year, it is not too early to make concert plans for fall, remembering that season subscribers not only pay less for tickets but also assure themselves of better seat locations and usually get newsletters, ticket-exchange privileges and other benefits.
"We're very excited about our 1991-92 season," said Rachel Thompson, marketing director for the Performing Arts Center at the State University of New York at Purchase.
"We've added two new series, American Music and New Dance. We've increased the number of performances to 35, and our subscription-renewal response so far has been terrific."


WHAT'S DOING IN: Basel
Every now and then newspaper readers learn that the central bankers of the major free-market nations have met in Basel over the weekend to discuss why the United States dollar is too weak or too strong, andhow to restore global currency equilibrium.
But the prosperous old city on the elbow of the Rhine River does not seem to care for the periodic conclaves of the monetary high priests.
Neither does it stress its role as the seat of some of the world's biggest chemical-pharmaceutical corporations, although their high-rise headquarters loom on the outskirts.
Instead, Basel wants to be known, according to its official slogan, as "the cultural heart of Switzerland." It's a peripheral heart: France and Germany are just a streetcar ride away.
The city of 200,000 is, at any rate, a beacon of the visual arts, and has a vibrant theatrical life.
It has more than 30 public collections.


Credit Crunch? Tax the Corporation
To the Editor:
We could initiate steps to reverse the credit crunch ("The Grim Shortage of Global Capital," Forum, July 28) by amending the underlying philosophy of our corporate tax legislation, which allows corporate borrowers to deduct 100 percent of their interest payments.
By limiting this deduction to 50 percent, for example, and excluding the deduction of interest for leveraged buyouts and other noneconomic forms of restructuring, future junk bond binges would be less likely.


Avi Kaner to Wed Elizabeth Sloan
Mr. and Mrs.
Morton J. Sloan of Manhasset, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Ellen Sloan to Avi Kaner, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Israel Kaner of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sloan, 25 years old, is a portfolio administrator at Globe Finlay, a New York investment management firm.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father owns a chain of supermarkets in the New York region.
Her mother, Judith Sloan, is an administrator in the grants office of the Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New Hyde Park.
He grandfather the late Harry Silverson was the author of a pension plan for the self-employed that became the Keogh Bill in 1962.


Affairs of State
To the Sports Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's article was excellently written and researched.
However, his selection of Presidents as examples of "cheating husbands" was a bit skewed.
All were Democrats.


Montana, 49ers Split On Injury
The San Francisco 49ers still won't rule Joe Montana out of the team's season-opening game Sept. 2 against the Giants, even though Montana indicated Friday night that it is unlikely he will be available.
Montana has been out for most of the last two weeks because of what the team calls tendinitis, but a team source told The San Francisco Chronicle that the quarterback has a torn tendon in his right elbow and could be out for several weeks.


Lewis Rides Track Like a Strong Wind
Carl Lewis blazed to a wind-aided time of 9.80 seconds in the second round of the men's 100 meters today here at the world track and field championships.
It was the third-fastest time ever recorded in the event.
But Lewis's time today won't be recognized as a record because the wind was clocked at 4.3 meters a second.
Leroy Burrell of the United States holds the world record at 9.90.


UP &amp; COMING: Melissa Joan Hart; The Melissa Inside Clarissa Explains It All for Us
A 14-year-old girl is the smartest person in the world.
She is wiser than her parents and cooler than her siblings.
She knows everything about dressing, and even more about music.
And no one keeps closer track of her family's most mortifying habits, everything from Dad's burping to Mom's public appearances in curlers.
Parents!
This is why "Clarissa Explains It All for You," Nickelodeon's sitcom about just such a 14-year-old girl and her family, provides not only entertainment but a public service for a country full of Clarissas who must suffer the nightly indignity of setting the dinner table instead of club-hopping with Madonna.
The show airs on Sundays at 12:30 and 6:30 P.M.


Sondra B. Jaspan Is Married on L.I.
Sondra Beth Jaspan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur W. Jaspan of Oceanside, L.I., was married last evening to Brett David Nussbaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel N. Nussbaum of Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
Rabbi Ephraim Rubinger performed the ceremony at the Oceanside Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Nussbaum, 24 years old, is a speech and language pathologist at the Howard A. Rusk Institute of Rehabilitative Medicine in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst and received a master's degree in communication disorders from Adelphi University.
Her father is the senior partner in the law firm of Jaspan, Ginsberg, Erhlich, Schlesinger, Silverman &amp; Hoffman in Garden City, L.I.
Her mother, Linda Jaspan, owns Lawson Travel in Oceanside.


After the Joy, Winter
Shock and fear dissolved with dazzling speed into triumph and joy last week.
And now Mikhail Gorbachev has resigned as head of the Communist Party.
The Soviet Union suddenly seems poised for monumental transformation, once faithless officials have been rooted out and Mr.
Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin rebalance the scales of post-Communist power.
Amid all the relief and pride, it seems almost sullen to recall an enduring question.
Still, within weeks, the joy of August will turn into Soviet winter and it is a question that people in the West are obliged to ask:


Noted With Pleasure
Fighting Fear and Silence


Campus Life: Alabama; Integration Is at Hand For Fraternity System
The Governor has not shown up and the National Guard will not be needed.
Yet history is being made once again as the University of Alabama quietly takes another step on the road to integration.
This time the target is the campus's Greek system, which includes only 21 percent of the student population but dominates the campus's social and political life.


After Inroads by Inkatha Rivals, a South African Township Fears to Sleep
As the Malinga brothers told it later, their night of terror began when the raiders arrived in a police armored car shortly before midnight on July 26.
They threw firebombs into the Malinga home, smashed windows and kicked in the door.
Belesia Malinga, their mother, hid under her bed.
She was dragged out and shot to death.
Sibusiso Malinga, who is 21 years old, scrambled atop a rickety wardrobe but was stabbed with a spear.


Ann Marie McNamara Marries Matthew Massie
Ann Marie McNamara, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John L. McNamara of Clinton, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Matthew H. Massie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sam F. Massie Jr., of East Grand Rapids, Mich.
The Rev.
Gerald Platz, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Hamilton College Chapel.
Mrs.
Massie, 31 years old, and her husband, 33, are vice presidents at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from William Smith College and received an M.B.A. degree from Cornell University.
He graduated from the University of Michigan and received an M.B.A. degree with distinction from New York University.


Penitent
In the name of serving God, Jim Bakker did things for which he is now serving time.
But last week he received a sharp sentence reduction that will make him eligible for parole before the millennium.
A Federal judge in Charlotte, N.C., cut 27 years off the 45-year sentence Mr.
Bakker got in 1989 for defrauding his followers of $158 million.
Prosecutors called him a con man who used tearful televised pleas to sell vacation time-shares at his Heritage USA Christian theme park; the facilities were often overbooked or nonexistent.
The judge who issued the original sentence, which was thrown out in February, said that Mr.
Bakker lacked remorse.
Last week, he showed considerable contrition.
"I ask all that I have hurt to please forgive me," he said.
"I have asked Heavenly God to please forgive me and now I ask this court for human forgiveness." Under his new sentence, 18 years, Mr.
Bakker will be eligible for parole in 1995.


Nora L. Gleason Wed on Shelter I.
Nora Lucille Gleason, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis J. Gleason of Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert Graham Leary, the son of Susan Leary of Brooklyn and Robert G. Leary of Enfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Peter MacLean performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Episcopal Church on Shelter Island, L.I.
Mrs.
Leary, 30 years old, is an associate counsel at Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York.
She graduated from Colgate University, and she and her husband received law degrees from Fordham University.
Her father, who is retired, was the vice chairman and a director of the Schering-Plough Corporation in Kenilworth, N.J.


Ellen Molotsky, Track Coach, to Marry
Mr. and Mrs.
Irvin D. Molotsky of Washington have announced the engagement of their daughter Ellen Judith Molotsky to Charles Troy Carpenter 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Carpenter Jr. of Kings Mountain, N.C.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Molotsky, 26 years old, is an assistant track coach at Central Michigan University in Mount Pleasant.
She graduated from Oberlin College and received a master's degree in sport psychology from the University of North Carolina.
Her father is an editor in Washington for The New York Times.
Her mother, Iris F. Molotsky, is the membership development director of the American Association of University Professors.


Heidi James Bride of Carlo Baravalle
Heidi Michele Nathalie James, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas S. James of Wilmette, Ill., was married yesterday to Carlo Antonio Baravalle, a son of Enrico Baravalle of Turin, Italy, and the late Maria Baravalle.
The Rev.
Gilbert W. Bowen performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Kenilworth (Ill.) Union Church.
Mrs.
Baravalle, 27 years old, is a consultant in Paris for A. T. Kearney, a management consulting concern.
She graduated from Harvard University, and she and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from the European Institute for Administrative Studies in Fontainebleau, France.
Her father is the associate general counsel of Amoco in Chicago.


Piling on the Perals


The Executive Computer; A Dilly of a Little Modem Called Worldport 9600
Portable computers and modems go together; there is little debate about that.
The question is whether the modem should be installed inside the portable PC, or whether it is better tagging along on the outside, a cowboy's sidekick.
Modems are devices that allow two or more computers to exchange information over telephone lines.
Most of the modems used with desktop personal computers are the size of a hardback mystery novel and come with an AC power adapter.


Weaver Fills Her World With Color
EDJOHNETTA MILLER jingles when she walks.
It's the bracelets, about 20 of them, encircling her wrists.
Copper, silver, beaded, they combine to announce her with a cheery sound.
"I wear all of my jewelry every day," said Ms.
Miller, who runs the Blue Hill Senior Center in Hartford.
"I learned that from my seniors. You should enjoy what you have."


Praise for Two Giants
They are the Super Bowl champions, after all, so it should be no surprise that members of the Giants family should receive an honor or two now and then.
Last week it was the team's co-owner, WELLINGTON MARA, and newly designated starting quarterback, JEFF HOSTETLER, who were on the receiving list.
Although it was a close call, Mara may have gotten the better of it.
He received the 1991 Pete Rozelle Award, named for the former National Football League commissionr and given by the Touchdown Club of New Orleans for outstanding contributions to professional football and the N.F.L.


Three Nights, Three Moods in the Streets
Over the first three nights of the crisis in Crown Heights, the texture of the anguish changed.
On Monday night, in the hours after the traffic accident that killed 7-year-old Gavin Cato, the blacks who gathered reflected the broader community: Young and old and male and female were there.
Many believed that blacks had been grieviously slighted once again as word spread that a Jewish ambulance had tended to the Hasidic driver while ignoring the two black children who had been hit.
From the crowds came comments like "those poor children" and "How could they take the Jew away and leave the kids bleeding on the street?"


Assessing Good and Evil
To the Editor:
After years of teaching and writing, and of working at the Anti-Defamation League as director of European Affairs (1969-76), I have developed a simple formula for assessing the good and evil of anything -- whether the Nuremberg Laws or Joseph Goebbels's films.
To wit: If something may lead to harm and death, it's wrong and should be treated accordingly.
Having seen "The Rothschilds" as part of my work, I can tell you these old Nazi films are up to no good and in fact could be deadly.
They should never be publicized.
OWEN S. RACKLEFF New York


Ms. Eskow Weds Jonathan Himoff
Lisa Royce Eskow, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Eskow of New York, was married last evening to Jonathan Himoff, the son of Elizabeth Himoff and Robert Himoff, both of New York.
Rabbi Ira S. Youdovin performed the ceremony at the New York Academy of Art.
Ms.
Himoff, 26 years old, is the associate director of publicity and promotion at the Workman Publishing Company in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father, a director who won an Obie award for the 1960 production "Fly Blackbird," retired as chairman of the theater department at the High School of Performing Arts.
Her mother is an actress known as Libi Staiger..


Deborah Smith Marries Daniel Abbasi
Deborah Verplanck Smith and Daniel Rhame Abbasi were married yesterday at Christ Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Terence L. Elsberry performed the ceremony.
He was assisted by the Rev.
Andrea Smith, an aunt of the bride.
The bride, 26 years old, is a daughter of Mary V. T. Cattan and F. Clawson Smith, both of Cos Cob, Conn.
The bridegroom, 27, is the son of Susan R. Fletcher of Bethesda, Md., and Ajmal Abbasi of Emporia, Kan.


Parting Ways With Zola
To the Editor:
In John Russell's essay "The Poet Who Kick-Started a Stalled Cezanne"  [ July 28 ] , the reference to Cezanne's having been abandoned by Emile Zola, his lifelong friend and supporter, is true as far as it goes.
It might have gone a bit further, though, and revealed why the coldness developed between the author of "J'accuse" and the anti-Dreyfusard painter.


NO PROGRESS SEEN IN SIEGE AT PRISON
For the second time since 121 Cuban prisoners here took over a cellblock and seized 10 hostages Wednesday, negotiators came face to face with some of the inmates and some of the hostages today when medical workers were allowed to provide routine medications.
Roger Scott, warden of the 909-inmate Talladega Federal Correctional Institution, said that medical workers saw six of the hostages and "several of the Cuban detainees" and added, "There are no signs that any of the hostages seen by the medical staff have been harmed."


Despite the Rain, Plants Need More Water
EVEN though the region has had thunderstorms and some rainfall, this is not the time to ignore plants, especially those with woody stems.
The rainfall helped the shallow-rooted crops, herbaceous plants and annuals, but many of the big ornamentals supported by large root systems need help.
A finger poked deeply into the soil will reveal how little moisture really soaked into the ground.
Keep the hose out, and allow water to trickle slowly for 15 to 20 minutes a plant, so it reaches deep to the root zones.
A good soaking once a week or every 10 days should be adequate.
There are small attachments for the ends of hoses that allow this gentle trickle of water to seep directly into the ground.
This type of watering conserves valuable moisture for the purpose intended, and the water is not lost to evaporation as is often the case with sprinkler attachments for garden hoses.


Amelia Sheftall Has a Wedding
Amelia Wimberly Sheftall, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mordecai George Traylor Sheftall of New York, was married yesterday to Frank Albert Wilk, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Antoni Wilk of Sudbury, Ontario, Canada.
The Revs.
Brenda Husson and Dawson Teague performed the ceremony at St.
James's Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Wilk, 26 years old, is the group sales manager for the Westbury Hotel in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father, who is retired, was a vice president and director of overseas operations of Metropolitan Insurance Companies in New York.
Her mother, Louise Kimsey Sheftall, also retired, was the administrator for the executive vice president and medical director of Beth Israel Hospital in New York.


Review/Music; Some Old Hands Return To Mostly Mozart Stage
Nostalgia was rife at Mostly Mozart on Thursday evening.
The festival, which is celebrating its 25th anniversary, brought back performers who had appeared in its initial season: the Guarneri String Quartet and the pianist Claude Frank.
The Guarneri, which was only two years old when it appeared in 1966, has never changed members: Arnold Steinhardt and John Dalley, violinists; Michael Tree, violist; David Soyer, cellist.
It would be pleasant to report that the group recovered some of its early vitality on this occasion.
And in fact, the playing was generally tighter and better tuned than any this listener has heard from the Guarneri in recent years.


Notre Dame Scored a $38 Million Touchdown on Its TV Deal
When the University of Notre Dame football team opens its season against Indiana University on Sept. 7, the Fighting Irish will again have to prove itself deserving of its customary elite national ranking.
But Notre Dame will already have proved its elite business ranking: the game will be the first tangible manifestation of the Irish's landmark $38 million deal that places all its home games on NBC through 1995.


SOVIET TURMOIL: A Coup Gone Awry/Behind a Classic Soviet Failure/A special report; GORBACHEV QUITS AS PARTY HEAD; ENDS COMMUNISM'S 74-YEAR REIGN: Plotters Who Had  Handcuffs But a Poor Sense of History
The abortive coup that finally broke the Communist Party's grip on the Soviet Union was a spasm of desperate nostalgia by a committee of men who saw themselves as patriots of an endangered order.
In its genesis and failure, it was the most Soviet of coups, the scheme of a gray collective against the new politics of the popular hero.


Morgantown Journal; Urban Planners Glimpse Future on Rural Campus
While outsiders might think of the coal train as this state's contribution to the transportation arts, a visit to West Virginia University brings a surprise.
Snaking around the sprawling campus is a state-of-the-art people mover, a 3.3-mile stretch of electric cars run by computers that nearly 20 years after its groundbreaking continues to draw oohs and aahs and would-be imitators from around the world.


Tech Notes; Closing In on Sea Power With a Three-Armed Bandit
A Canadian inventor has come up with new life for a dream that has intrigued scientists, engineers and inventors for eons: harnessing the movement of ocean waves to produce energy.
"No one has done it right yet," said John Berg, a 65-year-old Nova Scotia inventor.
But he thinks his device, dubbed Waveberg, can.


Ghislaine Chavez-Pirson Is the Bride Of Gustavo Arnavat, a Fellow Lawyer
Ghislaine Celsa Madeleine Chavez-Pirson was married yesterday to Gustavo Arnavat at the Roman Catholic Church of the Transfiguration in Tarrytown, N.Y., by the Rev.
Albert Pirson, an uncle of the bride.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arturo Chavez-J. of Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y., and Santiago, Chile.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gustavo R. Arnavat of Hialeah, Fla.
Ms.
Chavez de Arnavat, 27 years old, graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a law degree from Columbia University, where she was a Harlan Fiske Stone scholar and an editor of The Law Review.
She is to join the New York law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell next month.


The Prairies
To the Editor: Travelers on Interstate 35 in Kansas can enjoy 30 miles of spectacular prairie scenery as they travel through the Flint Hills between El Dorado and Emporia.
As for Suzanne Winkler's assertion (Travel, June 23) that good food and prairies are seldom found together, she and other travelers will find great chili and even better pies at Susie's Chili Parlor at 117 West Second Street in El Dorado.
WILLIAM GALVANI Gales Ferry, Conn.


How Can We Save New York City?
Ron Silver Actor and president of the Creative Coalition.


SYMBOLS OF STYLE
It's all or nothing  with accessories this fall.
You can go all the way and the options abound: cascading chains and piles of pearls, flashy feather boas to fling, sleek studded gauntlet gloves to flaunt, the baseball cap dressed up, and short, sexy ankle boots.
And let a simple zipper be the only thing to add a little zing.


Q and A
Veterans' Tax Exemptions Question: New York State gives veterans a partial exemption on property taxes.
But I have been told that it is not available on co-ops.
Is this true, and if so is it a law or a matter of interpretation of the law? . . .
Edna M. O'Hern, Brooklyn Answer: A 1979 counsel opinion from the New York State Division of Equalization and Assessment determined that a shareholder of a co-op unit is not entitled to the partial exemption from real estate taxes that qualified veterans enjoy.


Data Bank/August 25, 1991
New Orders for Durable Goods
June
May
April
Monthly percent change
10.7
-1.0
2.0
Steel Production
Aug. 17
Aug. 10
Aug. 3
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
1,654
1,588
1,625
Electric Power
Millions of kilowatt hours, weekly total
62,775
64,086
63,847
Auto Production
Aug. 23
Aug. 16
Aug. 9
In units, weekly total
105,794
100,623
87,901
Municipal Bonds
Yield in percent
6.98
6.98
7.05
30-Year Treasury Bonds
Yield in percent
8.12
8.08
8.22
Coal (Bituminous)
Aug. 9
Aug. 2
July 26
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
20,583
19,119
20,036
Weekly Jobless Claims
In thousands
430
408
400


The Perils of Pig Farming Touch Man and Beast
In the hot nursery, where the temperature is kept around 80 degrees, pigs are raised from weaning to a weight of 40 pounds, and in the adjacent, cooler nursery they grow to 100 pounds.
As Dean Holderness, who raises the pigs, steps out of the building, the doorknob rattles.
"Door knobs last a year, year and a half," Mr.
Holderness says.
Gases produced by the pigs' urine and feces corrode metal, he explains.


Silence Reigns in a Sculpture Garden With an Air of Mystery
THE Quietude Garden Gallery here is not frivolously named.
Silence reigns over this grove of trees and sculpture; even the birds -- and there are many of them -- go about their business noiselessly.
Apparently, it is a spell that came with the estate, which Sheila and Edward Thau acquired 14 years ago but have only recently given over to sculpture.
Entering between gateposts in the form of stone dogs, the visitor follows a lane leading through the woods to a quasi-Colonial house.
A building that is brick back and front and clapboard at each end, it has a more or less classical portico in wood painted white, some exceptionally large windows and, at the rear, a deck dotted with potted plants and gardening implements.


Health Care: Getting Down to Detail . . .
To the Editor:
"How to Solve the Health-Care Crisis" (Forum, July 28) is only partially accurate because it is too abstract.


When a Coup Is a Window of Opportunity
It was a rerun of 1990, mercifully condensed.
The bad guys took control of a major oil producer, and world markets plunged.
Then the good guys won, and markets leaped to record highs.
The difference is that the process took more than seven months to complete when Kuwait was the country.
In the Soviet Union, which among other things is the world's largest oil producer, it took three days.


WEATHERING PREJUDICE
I am one of those "omnipresent gray-haired grandmothers" Carter refers to in his article.
However, I welcomed my black-skinned daughter-in-law to my heart years ago.
Carter must guard against the view that he is somehow above prejudice.
ANNA LEE CULP Bronx


Biagi's Resignation Halts Mansion Inquiry
HOURS before he was to answer legislative charges last week that he had abused his power and position, the deputy county executive, Roger Biagi, announced that he would resign in November, thus effectively halting the inquiry.
His announcement came as the Committee on Public Officers and Departments of the Board of Legislators was preparing to question Mr.
Biagi, the highest-ranking appointed official in county government, about his personal use of the county-owned mansion at Lasdon Park in Somers.
The mansion had not been made available to the public.


Court Upholds Disqualification in Queens District Attorney's Race
A New York State appeals court has upheld a lower-court decision that removed Vincent F. Nicolosi from the race for Queens District Attorney.
Mr.
Nicolosi was one of the two main candidates in this year's special election for the post, and unless he can gain reinstatement through an appeal to a higher court, the election will almost certainly be won by Richard A. Brown, who is serving as interim district attorney.


U.S. Proposes $20 Fee Increase For Passports
The State Department's Bureau of Consular Affairs has proposed a $20 increase in the cost of a United States passport, from $35 to $55.
Passports for those younger than 18 would be raised from $20 to $30.
First-time applicants, children under 16 and those who haven't had a passport for at least 12 years will pay an additional $10 execution fee, up from $7.
Passports are good for 10 years.
The increases, if approved, go into effect Nov. 1.
The bureau is soliciting comments from the public before it makes a final decision.
Comments may be submitted through Aug. 30 to the Office of Executive Director, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Department of State, Washington, D.C. 20520.
Travelers can contact the nearest passport agency or post office for passport application information.


The Mets Surrender, This Time To Rijo
The Mets would be hard pressed to state which segment of their game looked more anemic yesterday: their starting pitching, which continued to offer little resistance to the Cincinnati Reds' bats, or their hitters, who slipped further into a funk while facing the nearly unhittable Jose Rijo.
Rijo, terming it his most dominating performance of the season, limited the Mets to a pair of singles, the first coming after four and two-thirds innings, the latter in the ninth.
That wasn't close to being enough to offset even one Reds bat-around, and Cincinnati cruised to a 7-0 victory at Shea Stadium.


Before Abandoning And Adopting Pets
In early December 1990, I went to North Shore to adopt a kitten.
Much to my dismay, there were very few kittens to adopt.
Mostly, there were older cats.
However, one was found.
One of my criteria for adopting was that the cat had to be already neutered.
The following week, I brought the kitten to my local veterinarian.
My doctor told me the kitten was not four months old but at least six months old and, most importantly, he was not neutered.
I called North Shore, asked to speak to a supervisor, and was told no one was there.
I explained what had happened to me and was told that I could bring the kitten back and then she abruptly hung up.
Bringing the kitten back was never a consideration.


College Being Sold For Hospital Unit
ACROSS Northern Boulevard from the New York Institute of Technology in Old Brookville, the New York Chiropractic College is selling its 52-acre campus to St.
Francis Hospital for $135,000 an acre.
The contract is signed, and the institutions hope to close the deal next month, a spokeswoman for the hospital, Donna Cattano, said.
St.
Francis will first seek a justification-of-use permit.
"We are waiting on word from the Zoning Board," Ms.
Cattano said after a zoning meeting on Aug. 13.


Indian Art In Virginia
Eighty native American objects from more than 20 museums and private collections are being exhibited in "Images of Earth and Sky" at the Jamestown Settlement in Williamsburg, Va., through March 22.
A Pawnee ghost dance dress, a Chitimacha cane basket, a pre-Columbian mask found in Virginia, a headdress, a saddle and jewelry are in the display, which opened Aug. 1.
The exhibition examines the relationship of North American Indians to nature as expressed in their decorations, designs and belongings.
Examples of modern work demonstrate the evolution of Indian art forms.
Admission to the Jamestown Settlement, a museum telling the story of America's first permanent English colony and the native Americans of coastal Virginia, includes the gallery where the exhibit is presented.
The cost is $7.
The museum, (804) 229-1607, is open daily from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.


RECORD BRIEF
Vaughan Williams: Symphonies Nos. 3, 5
London Philharmonic conducted by Sir Adrian Boult. London 430 060-2; CD (mono).


C. H. Lefcourt, 47, Lawyer and Fighter For Women Is Dead
Carol H. Lefcourt, a prominent New York City lawyer and women's rights advocate who drafted much of New York's landmark child-support legislation, died yesterday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 47 years old.
She died of breast cancer, said Harriet N. Cohen, a lawyer and the co-chairwoman of the Coalition on Women's Legal Issues, which Ms.
Lefcourt co-founded in 1986.


New Croatia Strife After Bonn Warning
Deadly new clashes between Croatia's militia and the republic's rebel Serbs backed by the Yugoslav Army erupted today, hours after Germany's Foreign Minister warned the Yugoslav Government that Bonn may recognize Slovenia and Croatia if the violence does not cease soon.
Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher on Saturday warned Yugoslavia's Ambassador to Bonn, Boris Frlec, that Germany would seriously study recognizing Croatia and Slovenia within their present borders if the fighting in Croatia continued.


Immediate U.S. Recognition Of Baltic States Is Expected
The Bush Administration expects the Baltic states to be granted independence as early as Monday and is prepared to respond immediately by giving the new countries official recognition and naming envoys, American officials said today.
Brent Scowcroft, the President's national security adviser, said Washington had been told that a motion granting the Baltics independence would be introduced in the Soviet national Parliament, which convenes Monday, and other American officials said they had assurances that the proposal would be adopted.


Topics of The Times; Mr. Dole's Ploy on Honorariums
The Senate pay raise just signed into law by President Bush is a bargain for the public.
In exchange for an above-board $23,200-a-year salary increase, senators agreed to forgo speaking fees from special interests -- the same honorable swap the House agreed to in 1989.
But, in what may be record time even for Congress, Senator Robert Dole, the minority leader, is already proposing to weaken this ethical breakthrough.
Under the new law, senators may no longer pad their bank accounts with honorariums from tobacco and banking interests, military contractors or others with a stake in legislation.
But the law still permits members of Congress to direct up to $2,000 per speech to charities, an unfortunate loophole.
Why let lobbyists finance the donations lawmakers typically spread around their districts to curry political support?
And now Mr.
Dole has introduced a mischievous resolution to allow
unlimited
charitable honorariums.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 26


Dinkins Calls For Healing In Brooklyn
Summing up a week of strife in racially torn Crown Heights, Mayor David N. Dinkins visited a black Baptist church and the leader of the Lubavitcher Hasidic sect in the Brooklyn section yesterday, pledging that his administration would be fair to both communities and urging them to find in the recent deaths there "the seeds of redemption."
"There will not be one brand of justice for one community and another for another community," Mr.
Dinkins told a clapping congregation at a morning service at the First Baptist Church of Crown Heights on Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn, just a few blocks from where he withstood rocks and bottles lobbed by an angry crowd of black youths last week.


Flushing Journal; Fashion in the Stands: 2 Contests at U.S. Open
This is the time of year when parts of Queens take on the look of a tennis colony, right down to the gleaming white cushion-soled Ellesse socks and shock-absorbing Silicone Formula K-Swiss sneakers.
Over the next two weeks, the United States Open will draw a half-million people to Flushing, many of them willing to go to great lengths, and expense, to be in fashion.


Youths Trampled in Peru's Gold Rush
Alex Tite Huarsaya had just turned 13 last March when he left his Andean home, fleeing an abusive father, and came to this frontier outpost deep in the Amazon to seek his fortune panning for gold.
But like thousands of children trucked into the Peruvian jungle every year, recruited by shady employment agencies in their hometowns with promises of riches, Alex saw no glitter.
Instead, Huaypetue became a nightmare, an example of how the exploitation of child labor has become a way of life in Peru and an integral component of the country's struggling economy.


Jordanian King Confers With Arafat; New Talks for U.N. Chief
The United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, arrived here today for a three-day visit that diplomats say may include another and perhaps definitive round of secret talks on efforts to free the Western hostages held in Lebanon.
Mr.
Perez de Cuellar's agenda includes a speech on the environment, a meeting on humanitarian efforts in Iraq and a visit with representatives of the Polisario group, which is fighting for autonomy in the Western Sahara.


A Peril Reborn: Mercury in the Environment -- A special report.; Ancient Hazards of Mercury Re-Emerge
Two decades after the Government thought the problem had been put to rest, mercury is accumulating in fish in thousands of lakes across the United States and Canada, poisoning wildlife and threatening human health.
Twenty states, including New York and Connecticut, have warned people to limit or eliminate from their diets fish they catch in certain lakes because of dangerous levels of mercury.
Canadian scientists have found elevated levels of mercury in fish caught in 95 percent of the lakes tested in Ontario.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Bank of New York Co. is offering $220 million in 7.5 percent convertible subordinated debentures, due in 2001, at a price to yield 7.5 percent, through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The issue is callable in five years and is rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
Investors can convert the debentures into common stock at a price of $39.10 a share.


Pamela Kolinsky Weds J. M. Peck
Pamela Amy Kolinsky, the daughter of Sally and Robert Kolinsky of New Hempstead, N.Y., was married yesterday to Joshua Magence Peck, a son of Shulamit Peck of Cambridge, Mass., and Dr.
Harris B. Peck of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Rabbi David Chanofsky performed the ceremony at the Jewish Community Center in West Hempstead, L.I.
The bride, 28 years old, is a psychiatric social worker at Bronx Municipal Hospital Center.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Stony Brook and received a master's degree in social work from Boston University.
Her father is a real-estate developer in Newburgh, N.Y.
Her mother is co-owner of Nails Naturally, a shop in Millburn, N.J.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of Aug. 26, 1991:  MONDAY Bre Pptys Inc Detroit Edison San Diego Gas &amp; Elec Standard Prods Watkins Johnson


Ms. Shen Marries William Alford
Yuanyuan Shen, a lawyer, and William Alford, a law professor at Harvard University, were married yesterday at the bridegroom's home in Belmont, Mass.
Associate Justice Paul Chernoff of Massachusetts Superior Court officiated.
The bride, 34 years old, is a graduate of People's University in Beijing and Harvard Law School and is studying for a doctorate in law at the University of Wisconsin.
She taught law at People's University, from which she received law degrees.
She is the daughter of Yimei Zhang and Zulun Shen of Hangzhou, China.
Her father was a governor of Zhejiang Province, of which Hangzhou is the capital.


Opposition 'New Face' in Paraguay City Hall
Until recently, Dr.
Carlos Filizzola's closest contact with city government was a police billy club crashing on his longish hair as punishment for unionizing hospital workers.
But in late June, the 31-year-old physician trimmed his hair, put on a silver-black suit and gamely shook hands with Asuncion's departing Mayor, an army colonel in a bristle-cut crewcut.
Then Dr.
Filizzola assumed office as the first elected Mayor in this capital's 454-year history.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Purtzer Takes Playoff Tom Purtzer let victory escape him in regulation play but secured it with a playoff par yesterday in the World Series of Golf at Akron, Ohio.
Purtzer's two-putt on the second hole of a sudden-death playoff defeated Davis Love 3d and Jim Gallagher and made Purtzer only the fourth double-winner of the year on the PGA Tour.
Purtzer, Gallagher and Love all finished regulation with scores of one-under-par 279 on the old Firestone course. (AP)


He Paces Pack In a Blazing 9.86
For all the amazing races and remarkable long jumps, the gold medals, records, titles and honors that have defined Carl Lewis's life in track and field, little of the past could have foretold his stunning performance tonight in the 100-meter final of the world championships.
And, certainly there was nothing in the past to match it.
Enduring growing doubts about his ability to run faster and questions about his age, now that he is seven weeks past his 30th birthday, Lewis won the fastest race in history, setting a world record of 9.86 seconds.


Made for TV: Orwell Meets an Israeli Malaise
For a brief moment the other day, it seemed that Israelis might become embroiled in a controversy that -- unusually -- had nothing to do with war, peace, the Arab world or religion.
Well, almost nothing.
In a society dominated by big issues of faith and survival, this one seemed small but nonetheless compelling: it concerned television license fees and a new campaign by the authorities to collect them, even if that means breaking down doors and confiscating television sets to persuade their owners to pay up.


Smashing Service Is Their Business
Sure, BORIS and MAC and IVAN have big serves.
But the most potent servers in tennis history will not be among those playing when the United States Open starts today.
Don't agree?
Then argue with SIDNEY B. WOOD Jr ., who has played against most of the finest players in an international career that began in the 1920's.
For his money, Wood places ELLSWORTH VINES and FRANK SHIELDS -- stars of the 1930's -- on a different level than today's players.


School Boards Reach Out To Elderly for Support
Each year in the Riverside school district in New Jersey, the elderly converge on the schools for Senior Citizens Day.
They sample food from the cafeterias, watch students sing and dance and learn about the academic programs being financed with their tax dollars.
In Westchester County in New York, the Pelham schools have begun issuing gold cards that give the elderly there free entry to all sports events, while in nearby North Tarrytown members of the Board of Education visit groups of older people during the budget season to assure them that the fat is being trimmed from the budget.


CBS for Breakfast, but Does 'Marcy' Like It?
Take a closer look at the next cereal commercial you watch on CBS.
It might not be a cereal commercial at all, but a commercial for "CBS This Morning."
In an unusual new advertising campaign for that program, which continually finishes third in the early-morning ratings, CBS is running spots that spoof the kinds of cereal pitches that have been bombarding television viewers since Tony the Tiger growled his first "G-r-r-r-r-r-eat!"


Networks Team for Total Coverage, Minus a NetCam
And so, the United States Open Tennis Championships kicked off yesterday at 2 P.M. with the Teen Spirit Challenge: the controversial exhibition between Gabriela Sabatini and Jennifer Capriati in which the two received tidy appearance fees.
Teen Spirit is an adolescent deodorant made by Mennen, which has a better sense of public relations than the paid-off players.
Teen Spirit will make a donation to the March of Dimes.
Until Friday night, neither of the players, only one of them a teen-ager, had made public a similarly charitable impulse.


'Cheers' and 'L.A. Law' Top Emmys
"Cheers" was the big winner in the 43d Annual Prime-Time Emmy Awards tonight, picking up four Emmys, for best comedy series, actress, supporting actress and director.
"I said we were good, but now we're venerable I guess," said the series's director, co-creator and co-executive producer, James Burrows, who also won the comedy directing trophy.


Elizabeth Leslie Manson Is Married To J. E. Boasberg in New Hampshire
Elizabeth Leslie Manson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James G. Manson of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday in New Hampshire to James Emanuel Boasberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Emanuel Boasberg 3d of Washington.
The Rev.
Bradford Abernethy, a Baptist minister, officiated at the Old Meeting House in Francestown.
The bride, 25 years old, is keeping her name.
She was an associate at J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York and is to join the San Francisco office of the MAC Group, a management consulting concern in Boston, in October.
She graduated from Yale University and received an M.B.A. from Stanford University.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in Cambridge and Boston.
Her mother, Mary Manson, is an English teacher at the Winsor School in Boston.


Political Memo; Coup Pre-empts Democrats' Agenda
Like the war in the Persian Gulf, the crisis in the Soviet Union has given President Bush another chance to stride the stage as Commander in Chief and has consigned the Democrats to the wings, a hapless chorus struggling to change the subject.
In some ways it was a striking replay of the party's experience last summer: The Democrats seemed to be forcing the debate onto domestic issues, where Mr.
Bush is widely perceived to be vulnerable, when world events suddenly pre-empted their script.


Cowboys Acquire Raiders' Beuerlein
The Raiders traded quarterback Steve Beuerlein to the Cowboys today for an undisclosed 1992 draft choice.
Beuerlein, 26 years old, was vying with Vince Evans for the backup spot to Jay Schroeder throughout the exhibition season.
Rookie Todd Marinovich, a first-round draft choice, is the Raiders' No. 3 quarterback for 1991.


Giants, a Bit Battered, Now Look to the 49ers
The Giants have survived an embarrassing 24-3 loss to the New England Patriots on Saturday in their final preseason game.
Today, with the players off, Coach Ray Handley started planning for the season opener, a Monday night game here Sept. 2 against the San Francisco 49ers.
For this meeting of the last two Super Bowl champions, Handley said he expected the 49ers' quarterback to be Steve Young, the mobile backup, and not Joe Montana, the ailing superstar.
Handley also said he did not know if Eric Dorsey, Erik Howard and Rodney Hampton would be well enough to play against the 49ers.


Market Place; Strange Contrast In Japan Economy
The contrast between the buoyant economy, perhaps the world's most vigorous, and the sickly stock market is stark.
Does the ailing market know something the economy does not?


Ms. Porten Is Married To James L. Gussen
Lillian Paula Porten, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Porten of New York, was married yesterday in Belmont, Mass., to James Leo Gussen, the son of Dr.
Ruth Gussen of Los Angeles and the late Dr.
John Gussen.
Rabbi Sally Finestone performed the ceremony at Habitat, a historic house.
The bride, 30 years old, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Harvard University and is a doctoral candidate in French literature there.
Her father is the chief financial officer of the IBJ Schroder Bank and Trust Company in New York.


Schwenksville Journal; Woodstock Generation In the Land of Peter Pan
Most of the people who throng to the Philadelphia Folk Festival came of age in the 1960's, when turning 30 meant one was over the hill, out of touch, not to be trusted.
Now, the festival itself is turning 30.
The first folk music festival sponsored by the Philadelphia Folk Song Society was in 1962; the 30th annual one started Friday and closes today.
Robert Siegel, chairman and co-founder of the event, said he never expected it to be more than "a one-or-two-shot thing."


WEST RECONSIDERS CASH FOR MOSCOW
The cascade of political changes in the Soviet Union is forcing the West to consider greater financial aid, but Bush Administration officials and economists are uncertain which measures are most practical.
Before tanks rolled into downtown Moscow last Monday, the debate over how to help the Soviet economy was mired in the question of what policy changes were needed first to keep aid from being wasted by the Kremlin.


The Missing Reform in Mexico
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari fumbled his own potential triumph in last week's Mexican mid-term elections.
President Salinas has enjoyed three years of spectacular success in building a modern Mexico.
His policies have helped check inflation, reduce foreign debt and open much of the economy to wider competition.
Negotiations are now under way for a free-trade agreement with the U.S.


London Journal; Make Way for the Meanest Mallets on the Thames
There is Mozart in the dining room and tea on the porch, served by waiters in black ties.
Outside, against the long sweep of emerald lawn, men in Panama hats and women in light dresses recline in canvas chairs, roused every so often by a hoarse but sharp cry of "Well played!"
It is a dozy summer afternoon at Hurlingham, the 122-year-old sporting club on the banks of the River Thames, and the site of next month's World Croquet Championship, the game's premier international event.
Soon, players from Britain, the United States, Japan and five other nations will gather here, crisply outfitted in their game whites, on lawns cropped close as putting greens.
Dominated by Britons
While the scene will have changed little since the last century, when croquet was devised as a polite summer diversion for proper Victorian ladies and gentlemen, the game at the tournament level bears little resemblance to its more genteel past.
These days the playing fields of Hurlingham are no place for the slow or the meek.


Stress Doesn't Cause Teen-Age Pregnancies
To the Editor:
Contrary to the theory that young teen-agers who become pregnant are responding to an evolutionary reproductive strategy ("Theory Links Early Puberty to Childhood Stress," Science Times, July 30) is the evidence that young teen-agers are not successful reproducers: their infants are at high risk of low birth weight, which increases the risk of illness and death in the period after birth and the risk of neurological abnormalities.


NEWS SUMMARY
AFTER THE COUP A10-13
The unraveling of the Soviet Union gained speed, with one republic after another joining the rush to independence or laying claim to powers of the central government.
Page A1
The secession of the Baltic states was recognized by Denmark, Norway and Finland.
Their action paved the way for the rest of the world to embrace Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania as sovereign equals.
A1
The Administration plans to respond immediately to the expected granting of independence to the Baltic states by giving the new countries official recognition and naming envoys, American officials said.
A13
As Ukrainians uproot party, Communists head for the hills A11
The giant puzzle of the Soviet coup began to fall into place from interviews and other reports.
Each piece confirmed how great the danger was, and how incredible the bungle.
A1
Sergei F. Akhromeyev; Complete soldier, well liked in West A13
News analysis: Boris Yeltsin has argued that his plans for a radical economic overhaul could succeed without the old order.
That order is gone, but it is unclear how much he can change and sustain unity.
A11
Soviets drank at their kitchen tables, the traditional place where families focused their honest emotions in seven decades of Communism.
They toasted the death of the party and the future of the nation.
A10
The West is rethinking Soviet aid, but Bush Adminstration officials and economists are uncertain on what measures to increase help to Moscow would be most practical.
A13
Chinese aides see slowing of renewed Soviet ties A13
Coup barely slowed these U.S. investors D1 INTERNATIONAL A3-9
Fierce new clashes in Yugoslavia between Croatia's militia and the rebel Serbs erupted, hours after Germany warned that it may recognize Slovenia and Croatia if the violence does not cease soon.
A3
King Hussein met with Yasir Arafat to discuss peace prospects, but a senior P.L.O. official said no agreement was reached on a joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation to send to the planned peace conference.
A6
Made for TV: Orwell meets an Israeli malaise A5
A major block to peace in El Salvador is the guerrillas' demand that some of their members be incorporated into the national armed forces, President Alfredo Cristiani said.
He dismissed the idea as impractical.
A3
Youths trampled in Peru's gold rush A8
Opposition "new face" in Paraguay city hall A7
New charges of torture vex South African rebels A9
London Journal: Meanest mallets on the Thames A4 NATIONAL A14-17, B5
Elevated levels of mercury in fish have been detected across the United States and Canada.
Two decades after the problem was declared solved, mercury is again threatening wildlife and human health.
A1
A major new market for credit cards is college students, who are popular with card-issuers because their parents often bail them out.
But for some, easy credit becomes bad credit while they are still in school.
A1
Mayor Art Agnos of San Francisco, hailed as a hero after the earthquake, finds himself in a bruising campaign for re-election, blamed by a cranky electorate and challengers for urban problems that won't go away.
A14
The struggle over abortion in Wichita continued, but this time between 25,000 abortion opponents in a football stadium and a small airplane pulling a sign that said: "Go Home. Wichita is Pro-Choice." A14
Schwenksville Journal: Woodstockers in land of Peter Pan A14
A Milwaukee police officer suspended for returning a 14-year-old Laotian boy to Jeffrey L. Dahmer, who has admitted killing 17 people, said he had agonized over how he might have prevented the boy's death.
A15
Political Memo: The Soviet crisis, like the war, has given President Bush another chance to stride the stage as Commander and Chief and has confined Democrats to the wings, trying to change the subject.
A16
Accord in Detroit would let girls attend all-boys school A16
U.S. transfers inmates from troubled Alabama prison A16
The free-trade system could be killed by the regional trading blocs that are emerging in Europe, North America and Asia, economists at a Federal Reserve conference said.
D1
Publicity obsession pays off for suicide book publisher D1
Buffet picks top lawyer for Salomon D1
A bet Chrysler can't afford to lose D1
Stampeding the buckyball to market D1 REGIONAL B1-4
The bitter struggle in Connecticut to overhaul its revenue system and impose an income tax has placed it in front of what could be a wave of such battles in states from Texas to New Hampshire, economists say.
A1
Woman now says she was beaten but not raped on videotape B2
A 10-year overhaul of the subways, bus lines and commuter railroads will come to an end this year.
Now transit officials are scrambling to convince New York legislators that more rebuilding is needed.
B1
Mayor Dinkins visited Crown Heights and, summing up a week of strife in which two died, went to a black church and called on a Hasidic leader.
He urged the area to find "seeds of redemption" in the deaths.
B1 The grand rabbi of the Lubavitchers has not spoken directly about the violence in Crown Heights.
Some members of the black community say that Rabbi Menachem Schneerson should have played a more visible role.
B3
Salesmanship among the candidates, most of them unknown, will make a major difference in the City Council elections in New York, whether they campaign at subways or buy computerized mailing lists.
B1
"Taught" by TV and friend, boy loads rifle and sister dies B2
Educators are courting the elderly across the New York region in an effort to win their support for school budgets.
Their efforts recognize that more and more taxpayers do not have children in school.
B1
Flushing Journal: Status aces the stands at U.S.
Open B3 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Arts/Entertainment
Changes in SoHo's art world C13
El Gran Combo on the road C13
Music: Farewell Mostly Mozart C13
"Madama Butterfly" C15
Robert Palmer at the Beacon C15
Word and Image: The Emmys C18
Books: "How We Know What Isn't So" C18
Robert Motherwell documentary C18 Sports C1-11
Baseball: Tigers keep pace with Blue Jays in A.L. East C4
Cards complete 3-game sweep of Dodgers C4
Gooden to miss a turn; Mets win C5
Yanks still scramble to sign No. 1 pick C5
Football: Jet defense makes progress C2
Horse Racing: Housebuster wins C2
Tennis: Is fame too much for Sampras?  C1
TV networks team for total coverage C8
Lendl's game too hot for Edberg C8
Track and Field: Lewis sets world record in 100 meters C1
Big spill for Joyner-Kersee C11 Obituaries B7
Bernard Castro, founder of convertible sofa chain
Abel Kiviat, runner Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A18
The parties, after the party
The missing reform in Mexico
New York, the jury holdout
Topics: Titanic talent


Toby L. Schwartz Is Wed To Julius Birnbaum on L.I.
Toby L. Schwartz and Julius Birnbaum were married yesterday at the Swan Club in Glen Cove, L.I.
Louis I. Kaplan, a retired justice of State Supreme Court, presided.
The bride is the head librarian at Abraham Lincoln High School in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Brooklyn College and received a master's degree in library science from Pratt Institute.
She was a widow.


The Elderly Deserve a Real Estate Tax Break
To the Editor:
Owners of commercial property may be able to handle rising real estate taxes and a high level of interest on delinquent amounts without abandoning their buildings ("Tax Delinquencies in New York Rising Again," news article, Aug. 9).
But if we are to avoid a "wave of the abandonments that destroyed neighborhoods" in the 1970's, we must deal with the problems created by the "dreadful shape" the real estate market is in.


A Bet Chrysler Can't Afford to Lose
Designing a car from scratch is an immense financial bet, and one an auto maker must be strong enough to lose.
The Chrysler Corporation may not have that luxury with its latest car project, which is being hurried toward completion next summer.
Chrysler's new family of midsize cars, which has been given the code name L/H, will sell for $15,000 to $22,000.
The cars will contain Chrysler's first all-new configuration of body and chassis since the plucky K-car of a decade ago, when the company was near bankruptcy.


SoHo Adapts to Leaner Times With a Changing Gallery Scene
At a time when SoHo's eulogy has been written more than once, New York City's primary contemporary art gallery area is showing new signs of life, partly as a byproduct of problems that seemed to signal its decline.
Last season, a number of SoHo galleries succumbed to the pressures of high overheads and declining art sales: among them Petersburg, Gracie Mansion, Althea Viafora, Lang &amp; O'Hara and Massimo Audiello.
Still, as the new season approaches, it seems that more galleries are opening in the area than are closing, and they are being helped by a softened rental market caused by the recession.


Several Issues in This Week's U.S. Sales
The tentative schedule of Treasury financings for the week include the regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills today, followed by a two-year-note auction tomorrow and a five-year-note auction on Wednesday.
By late in the day Friday, the outstanding three-month bill was bid at 5.38 percent, and the six-month bill at 5.46 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was offered at a price to yield 6.43 percent, while the five-year note was at 7.39 percent.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are scheduled for this week:
&lt;biEzcorp, 1.8 million non-voting shares. Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.


Review/Opera; A 'Madama Butterfly' Without the Silliness
Frank Corsaro's staging of "Madama Butterfly," a staple of the New York City Opera repertory since 1967, is a production Christopher Keene has earmarked for demolition, his plan being to let Mr.
Corsaro take a fresh look at the work.
The production has served the company (and Puccini) well some years, poorly others, depending on how the stage direction has been tweaked and, of course, on what the company's ever-shifting singers have brought to their roles.
The production returned to the repertory on Saturday evening for what may be its final run, and it looks as if it may have a dignified death.
Many of the inconsistencies of the staging have been swept away.
It seems, too, that the exaggerated silliness with which City Opera singers have portrayed minor Puccini characters, like Goro in "Butterfly" and the sacristan in "Tosca," have at long last been banished from the New York State Theater.


World Economies


Amy Ruth Sheon, Researcher, Weds
Amy Ruth Sheon, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Sheon of Toledo, Ohio, was married yesterday to Marvin Krislov, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph M. Krislov of Lexington, Ky.
Rabbis Jonathan Maltzman and Micah Halpern performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth El in Bethesda, Md.
The bride, 30 years old, oversees epidemiological research on women and AIDS at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda.
A doctoral student in health policy at Johns Hopkins University, she graduated cum laude from Cornell University and received a master's degree in public health from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a rheumatologist at the Toledo Clinic and a clinical professor at the Medical College of Ohio.


Using Credit Cards, Students Learn a Hard Lesson
As a freshman at the University of Houston, Alicia Perez signed up for classes and, in the cafeteria, for credit cards.
She had no job and no credit history, but she soon had three Visa cards, a Sears card, a Discover card, two gasoline company cards and a local department store card.
Today, Ms. Perez, a junior, has no cards but $6,800 worth of credit card debt.


Quotation of the Day
"Hey, I didn't think at 24, 25 or even 28 that I would have run my fastest at 30. I can still hang there with the young boys." Carl Lewis, after he broke the 100-meter world record  [ C11:3. ]


Donald Heller Is Wed to Anne Simon
Anne Simon, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Simon of Bass Harbor, Me., was married yesterday in Lee, Mass., to Donald Heller, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Heller of Madison, Conn.
Judi Patti, a justice of the peace, performed the ceremony at the bride's home.
The bride, 30 years old, graduated from Boston University and received a master's degree in school administration from Wheelock College.
She is to begin teaching special education at the Lincoln-Sudbury High School in Lincoln, Mass., next month.
Her father, who is retired, was a partner in the New York law firm of Taylor, Ferencz &amp; Simon.
Her mother, Doris Simon, owns Once Upon a Time Antiques in Bass Harbor.


Continental Air Holds Talks
Continental Airlines has held discussions with Northwest Airlines and USAir about a possible merger, a spokesman for the Houston-based airline said yesterday.
Art Kent, the Contentintal spokesman, while confirming that talks had taken place, said, "These are not negotiations, these are very preliminary discussions."


A Celebration of Pakistani Heritage


Joyner-Kersee Still Winning Despite Big Spill
Not 30 minutes after the United States celebrated a sweep in the men's 100-meter final of the world championships Sunday night, a near disastrous moment occurred in the women's long jump.
Jackie Joyner-Kersee misjudged her run-up in the fourth round and injured her right ankle, trying to adjust.
After several moments of immobility and pain, she managed to stand and walk away on her own.
Later, after passing on the fifth round, she jumped again in the sixth.


Topics of The Times; A Titanic Talent
Eugene O'Neill completed "A Moon for the Misbegotten" in 1943, when Colleen Dewhurst was still in school.
Even so the role of Josie Hogan might have been written with her in mind.
"She is more powerful than any but an exceptionally strong man," he said, ". . . but there is no mannish quality about her. She is all woman.


Publicity Obsession Pays Off For Suicide-Book Publisher
The stunning success of "Final Exit," a guide to suicide, is just the latest exploit for Steven Schragis and his successful Carol Publishing Group, an innovative publisher whose obsession with marketing and publicity may point the way to the industry's future.
"Look, this floor is all publicity people," Mr.
Schragis said last week, gesturing expansively to several offices in his Madison Avenue headquarters.
Indeed, Carol Publishing has eight publicists, compared with just six editors, an unusual ratio reflecting Mr.
Schragis's conviction that selling books is largely about "making it easy for reporters to write about them."


U.N. Praise for Gorbachev
The United Nations Secretary General said today that the world should not forget what President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had accomplished by opening the way for change in the Soviet Union.
"Everybody is in the process of making more or less unflattering comparisons regarding Mr. Gorbachev," the Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, told reporters on returning from a weeklong vacation.


New York, the Jury Holdout
After a day of stressful, inconclusive deliberations, jurors on criminal cases long for a home-cooked meal and a familiar bed.
In New York they get to eat a greasy restaurant dinner and share a low-budget hotel room.
The problem here involves more than comfort.
Not all juries need to be locked up overnight.
Court administrators calculate that the state law requiring juries to be sequestered in every criminal case costs the court system some $2 million a year, money it can no longer afford.
Yet the Legislature, for no good reason, again this year refused to change the law.


People's Party: Clinking Glasses at Kitchen Tables
Vladimir Shaly said he only drinks excessively for what he understands are major occasions, like his daughter's wedding today and the death of Communism Saturday night.
"We're Russians, how else can we behave?" Mr.
Shaly said, taking a breather from the music-booming, daylong wedding celebration and admitting he already had a Kremlin-sized hangover from his mock grief for the Communist Party when the time came to raise his glass again in joy for Maria, the bride.


Buffett Picks Top Lawyer For Salomon
Moving quickly to put his stamp on Salomon Inc., Warren E. Buffett appointed a longtime associate yesterday as general counsel of the troubled firm.
Robert E. Denham, a 45-year-old securities lawyer from Los Angeles, will take over Salomon's top legal post immediately.
Mr.
Denham has been a longtime adviser to Mr.
Buffett's investment company, Berkshire Hathaway Inc.


CHRONICLE
The Los Angeles Alexis de Tocqueville Society will honor former President RONALD REAGAN, and his wife, NANCY, with Lifetime Achievement Awards in Pasadena, Calif., on Sept. 11.
The Reagans will receive the awards at a black-tie tribute, with LODWRICK COOK, chairman and chief executive of the Atlantic Richfield Company and head of the local de Tocqueville Society acting as host.
"This is the first such recognition bestowed by our local Alexis de Tocqueville Society, and the Reagans are certainly most deserving of it," Mr.
Cook said.


Health System Failed in Milwaukee Tragedy
To the Editor:
In "Slayings Point Up Lapses by Milwaukee's Agencies" (news article, July 30), you proceed to list the Milwaukee police, state parole and probation officials and the court system as culprits (scapegoats).
Insofar as there is a very spontaneous need to look for a scapegoat under such tragic circumstances, may I propose that, beyond our culture of violence, we go for the biggest fish of all: the American health-care system, and specifically its most deficient component, mental health.


Nicaragua Death Toll Is Exaggerated
To the Editor:
You err when you report, and thus dignify, unsubstantiated claims that "more than 200" former contra rebels have died at the hands of Sandinista police and armed forces ("Ex-Contras Clash With Sandinistas," news article, Aug. 2).


Sergei F. Akhromeyev: Complete Soviet Soldier, Well-Liked in West
Marshal Sergei F. Akhromeyev, chief military adviser to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and a top arms-control negotiator, was a reluctant reformer who steadfastly defended Communist ideology and the interests of the Soviet Army.
His suicide on Saturday night at the age of 68 has left Soviet policy experts who knew him shocked and saddened.
They suggested in interviews today that Marshal Akhromeyev had either supported the failed coup against Mr.
Gorbachev, or was filled with anguish once his life's work as a Communist fell apart.


INSIDE
Dinkins Pledges Fairness
In a visit to racially troubled Crown Heights, Mayor Dinkins said he would be fair to both communities.
Page B1.
Money for Mass Transit
Transit officials might have trouble obtaining $11.5 billion for rebuilding over the next 5 years.
Page B1.  25,000 Rally in Wichita
Thousands of anti-abortion protesters rallied after 70 people were arrested for blocking a clinic.
Page A14.
Sampras Takes On Skeptics
Pete Sampras hopes he's motivated enough to take the U.S.
Open title again.
SportsMonday, page C1.


The Parties, After the Party
It will take months, even years, for the world to grasp fully the implications of the Soviet Union's most incredible week since the Bolsheviks seized power in 1917.
But in all the turmoil, few events matched the drama of Mikhail Gorbachev's renunciation on Saturday of the Communist Party.
And few events hold out as much promise for a true turn toward multi-party democracy.
By resigning as the party's chief and calling for the dissolution of its Central Committee, Mr.
Gorbachev ratified the rebellious popular judgment on decades of Communist tyranny.
Only the day before, he had loyally pleaded the party's cause; hooted down by the Russian Parliament, he abandoned overnight a lifetime's allegiance.
His turnabout may enable him to stay on as symbolic head of state in a radically altered union.


Blocs Seen Replacing Free Trade
In an unusually blunt discussion, economists and central bank officials from various countries expressed concern over the weekend that the regional trading blocs emerging in Europe, North America and Asia could eventually destroy the world's free-trade system.
A few of those attending the Federal Reserve's annual summer conference, including the keynote speaker, went a step further.
They argued that the 40-year-old free-trade system, in which more than 90 nations jointly agree to lower tariffs simultaneously, had outlived its usefulness and should give way to these regional trading blocs.
The blocs can use tariffs to keep out imports from nations that are not members.
Europe, North America Cited
These economists said that the European Community and the emerging United States-Mexico-Canada trading zone were already proving more effective than the older free-trade system, known as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, on two important counts.
The blocs are generating huge increases in trade among neighboring countries, which are natural trading partners anyway.
And, the economists said, regional blocs are becoming a way to exclude Japanese competitors, whose products receive equal treatment in the free-trade system.


Handley: A Dose of Vanilla and Tranquillity
THE Giants and the 27 other National Football League franchises decide today who are the 47 players on each team most likely to advance on the circuitous, arduous road to Minneapolis and Super Bowl XXVI in January.
For Ray Handley, the Giants' first-year head coach, this task should be easy compared with the colossal decision he had to make last week.
In selecting Jeff Hostetler as his quarterback over veteran starter Phil Simms, Handley broke conventional N.F.L. wisdom that says a veteran quarterback does not lose his starting job without getting the opportunity to come back after an injury.
Handley considered that notion but also considered more.


No Medal For Yeltsin
President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic turned down the offer of a top award from President Mikhail S. Gorbachev today for leading the resistance to last Monday's failed Soviet coup.


Review/Music; Mostly Mozart Farewell With Last 3 Symphonies
This summer's Mostly Mozart Festival has carried on its back the baggage of a bicentennial: burdened, in other words, with a composer it has been chartered to celebrate all along.
With every performing arts group around it combing the archives for the big and small in the Mozart repertory it seems a shame in retrospect that this summer has been business as usual.
How fascinating it might have been to have staged an antimatter Mozart July and August -- a reverse image to hold up against everything around it.
A Haydn festival, perhaps, or a full survey of composers with whom Mozart competed in his daily life.


San Francisco Mayor in Tough Bid for Re-Election
Swept into office in a landslide in 1987 and hailed as a hero after the earthquake two years later, Mayor Art Agnos now finds himself in a bruising campaign for re-election, blamed by a cranky electorate and four challengers for urban problems that will not go away.
Panhandlers seem to be multiplying on downtown street corners.
There is litter by the curbs and graffiti on the buses.
Polls show that residents of San Francisco are running out of patience with the homeless and that suburbanites consider this a dirty, dangerous city and are staying away.


Susan Macovsky, A Banker, Is Wed
Susan Judith Macovsky, a vice president and manager of investment communications in private banking at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York, was married yesterday to Manfred Reinhold, a program director at Haus Rissen, an institute in Hamburg, Germany, that sponsors seminars on politics and economics.
Rabbi Charles D. Lippman performed the ceremony at the United Nations Plaza Hotel.


Inmates Transferred from Prison Where Cubans Held 10 Hostages
Officials today transferred 150 inmates to other prisons in an effort to reduce tensions that have spread since Cuban detainees took over a cellblock in the Federal prison here.
The detainees have been holding 10 workers as hostages since the takeover began Wednesday.
The more than 900 inmates in four other cellblocks have been restricted to their cells for all but an hour a day.


Cone Comes to the Rescue as Mets Defeat Reds, 2-1
Dwight Gooden will miss his next scheduled start because of muscular weakness in the front of his multimillion-dollar right shoulder.
Frank Viola and Wally Whitehurst have slipped into an abyss devoid of victories.
The Mets needed help last night for a suddenly vulnerable rotation.
The Mets needed David Cone, the National League's leading strikeout pitcher, to rediscover his winning ways and help his struggling team do the same.


U.P.I. Fights for Life In Yet Another Crisis
United Press International, the news agency that has stubbornly refused to die despite chronic financial distress, is facing a new fiscal crisis from old creditors demanding that U.P.I. redeem stock they hold, which could cost $2 million.
The demand could push U.P.I. to seek protection for a second time from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
That, in turn, could cost the news organization many of its remaining customers and finally force it out of business after 84 years.


Reviews/Television; Robert Motherwell's Achievements
The achievements and personalities of important artists should not be judged by documentaries made about them late in life, when they have outlived nearly all their contemporaries.
Such judgments, if made, would not favor Robert Motherwell, who until his death last month at the age of 84 was one of the last surviving Abstract Expressionists, the heroic generation of artists that in the late 1940's forged America's first international art movement.
Much is problematic about "Robert Motherwell and the New York School: Storming the Citadel," the hourlong film that has its premiere tonight at 9 on "American Masters" on Channel 13.
Directed and produced by Catherine Tatge with a narrative written by Kenneth Cavander, it is alternately distorted, superficial or, at best, strangely disjointed, two incomplete stories rolled messily into one film.


Too Quick Out of Blocks?
The possibility was raised early today that Dennis Mitchell, the third-place finisher in the men's 100-meter final, false-started.
Mitchell finished in 9.91 seconds, behind Carl Lewis, who finished in a world record of 9.86, and Leroy Burrell, who came in second in 9.88.


School Still Out on Talks Between Taylor, Yankees
As Brien Taylor, the Yankees' No. 1 draft pick, participated in freshman orientation at Louisburg College in North Carolina today, the team scrambled to sign him after his family rejected the latest contract offer of $850,000.
The Taylors rejected the newest proposal Saturday night, but said they would consider pushing back the deadline for agreeing to a contract.
If Brien attends classes at Louisburg on Tuesday, New York is forbidden from signing the 19-year-old pitcher until the collegiate baseball season ends next spring.
The only way to delay the deadline is by having Taylor refrain from going to classes at Louisburg.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; McCall's Trade Campaign Focuses on the '90's Woman'
The premise of a new trade advertising campaign for McCall's is that the way to a media department's heart is through the mind.
The campaign for McCall's, which is to make its debut next week, introduces the theme "Straight to the Heart." Six print advertisements are intended to help media decision makers at agencies think positively about the monthly women's service magazine and its readers.


Don't Extend Free-Trade Pact to Mexico
To the Editor:
"Free-Trade Accord Is Enticing Canadian Companies to U.S." (front page, Aug. 9) stops short of presenting what would occur if the United States free-trade accord with Canada were extended to Mexico.
There would be a stampede of United States companies to benefit from the truly low wage scales prevalent there, plus the low taxes and lax, if any, government regulation on the environment and social welfare.


11-Year-Old Girl Is Wounded In Shooting on Bronx Street
An 11-year-old girl was shot and wounded while standing on a street corner in the Bronx last night, and a man who randomly fired a gun in the girl's direction was arrested in the shooting, the police said.
The girl, who was not identified because of her age, was in serious but stable condition at Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center where she was treated for a bullet wound to her head, said Sgt.
Norris Hollomon, a police spokesman.


A Final Chance To View Lenin?
Thousands of Muscovites visited Lenin's mausoleum today, fearing that it might be their last chance to view his mummified corpse.
After witnessing the destruction of several monuments in the Bolshevik pantheon during the euphoria last week over a failed right-wing coup, some Muscovites said they suspected that Lenin might be reburied as early as Monday.
Lenin's corpse has been on display since his death in 1924.


As Ukrainians Uproot Party, Communists Head for Hills
The leadership of the Ukrainian Parliament voted today to dismantle the Communist Party on Ukrainian territory as it took steps to turn the independence declared on Saturday into reality.
Taking their lead from the actions a day earlier in Moscow, legislators here voted to seize the wealth of the Communist Party in the Ukraine, established a committee to investigate the role of the party in last week's coup and took control off party property until the investigation is complete.
In addition, they approved an amnesty for political prisoners.


Abroad at Home; While We Celebrate
In a week, in the twinkling of an eye, history has been unraveled and a great country transformed.
We celebrate democracy's victory over an embedded tyranny.
But what has happened is not a reason for Americans to be smug: not if we think about how faithful we have been lately to our own values.
Law was a major theme in the resistance to the coup.
The Russians who stood bravely against it called it "anti-constitutional," and that became a crucial concept.
After the coup failed, the plotters were charged with criminal offenses and all who worked with them made subject to investigation.


Nicaragua Death Toll Is Exaggerated; Whose Rebels?
To the Editor:
I note that you still use the Reagan Administration's semantics in reporting on military operations by the United States against Nicaragua, for example, "Central Intelligence Agency efforts to assist Nicaragua's contra rebels" in your July 19 frontpage article  [ in some editions ]  on Robert M. Gates, President Bush's nominee to be Director of Central Intelligence.


Lewis Wins in World's Fastest 100 Meters


Ellen A. Rothschild Weds S. A. Kolinski
Ellen Amy Rothschild, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James Rothschild of River Vale, N.J., was married yesterday to Stuart Allen Kolinski, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leo Kolinski of Bayport, L.I.
Rabbi H. Philip Berkowitz performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Or in Washington Township, N.J.
The bride, 24 years old, graduated magna cum laude from Cornell University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from New York University, where she was an editor of The Law Review.
She is to become an associate in the New York law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler in October.


Fame, Set, Match: Is It Too Much for Sampras?
He has finally discovered that life exists beyond tennis.
He's got a new car, his first; a new condo, his first; a steady girlfriend, his first; and several new millions in his new savings account.
He likes to listen to the softer songs of Led Zeppelin, shop for furniture and dine at restaurants, where he'll try almost any salad on the menu so long as it's not, like one in Palm Springs, named after him.


Coup Barely Slowed Visiting U.S. Investors
For a group of American money managers seeking investment opportunities in the Soviet Union last week, it was business as usual, despite the tanks.
"Everyone, on all sides of the conflict, was demonstrating that the business arrangements they were making would continue, regardless of the coup," Dean LeBaron, the leader of the American group, said yesterday in a telephone interview from his summer home in New London, N.H.
"The association between politics and economics is more in the eyes of Westerners than the Soviets."


As Racial Storm Rages, Hasidic Leader Is Aloof
At a makeshift souvenir stand outside the Lubavitcher movement's headquarters in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn, Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson's avuncular image adorns key chains, plaques and tiny cards.
Throngs of faithful -- some from Europe and Latin America -- descend upon the intersection of Kingston Avenue and Eastern Parkway to wait their turn for a brief audience with the Hasidic sect's grand rabbi and spiritual leader.
"Everything is the Rebbe," said Mishiel Ar, who does a brisk business selling mementoes each Sunday.
"If the Rebbe was not here, nothing would be here."


'Taught' by TV and Friend, Boy Loads Rifle, Fires and Sister Dies
From watching television, the 4-year-old Queens boy knew how to load his father's rifle.
From playing with a friend's air gun, he knew how to shoot it.
With this knowledge, he accidentally shot and killed his 2-year-old sister, the police said yesterday.
The shooting, in the boy's home at 49-04 169th Street in Flushing, was one of two accidental shootings on Saturday in which children were killed with their fathers' guns in their homes.
In the Bronx, a 4-year-old boy killed himself while playing with his father's unlicensed pistol.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the target release dates for major economic indicators scheduled to be released this week.
Monday None


Abel Kiviat, Runner, Dies at 99; Held World 1,500-Meter Record
Abel Kiviat, a former world-recordholder in the 1,500-meter run who won a silver medal in the 1912 Olympics, died Saturday afternoon at his home in Lakehurst, N.J.
He was 99 years old.
Before his death, Mr. Kiviat was the oldest living American Olympian.


Blue Jays Stay in First, Thanks to Yankees
The Yankees did not need this loss.
Not today.
Not here.
Not with the way things have been going.
They did not need to embarrass themselves in the late innings and fall to the Blue Jays, but they did.
Toronto rose from its grave and scored six runs in the eighth inning to sneak away with an 11-7 victory against the generous Yankees at the Skydome.
It was the second time in the three games that the Blue Jays conquered the weary New York bullpen.
This time they had a little help from a bumbling bunch in the field.


Donald Robinson, Writer, 77
Donald Robinson, a writer on health care for The Reader's Digest, Parade and other national publications, died on Saturday at Misericordia Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Robinson died of cancer complicated by pnuemonia, said a long-time friend, Kermit Berylson of New York.


Mind Games and Memories in Women's Draw
Memories good, bad, distant or indifferent could provide the key to who dominates the women's side of the draw over the coming two weeks at the United States Open.
Mind games, as much as tennis, will be played out in full force, especially if Steffi Graf and Monica Seles, who have traded the No. 1 ranking -- and some insults -- back and forth like a hot potato this month, manage to keep themselves on a collision course for a showdown in the final.
Graf, who played a round of Federation Cup last month despite a shoulder injury, was critical of Seles's last-minute withdrawal from the event, a move that cost Seles her Olympic eligibility.
Seles, under fire all summer for her acts of circuit disobedience, such as her decision to go AWOL at Wimbledon, said Graf ought to mind her own business.


CHRONICLE
JACK F. MATLOCK Jr., who has just stepped down as United States Ambassador to the Soviet Union, plans to write two books about his experiences in that country, including last week's failed coup.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Ad Scene; When Jokes Backfire, Campaigns Explode
IT may be the most powerful principle in marketing communications today, more pervasive than the "Unique Selling Proposition" that gave America "melts in your mouth, not in your hands," more potent than the theory of "Nameonics" that unleashed "Zest-fully clean." Like Newtonian physics, it operates invisibly.
Yet all advertising people live and work under the First Rule of Advertising Dynamics: For every commercial, there is an equal and opposite reaction.


EUROPE EMBRACING BALTIC INDEPENDENCE; 3 NORDIC LANDS ACT
Three Nordic countries became the first today to recognize the secession of the Baltic republics from the Soviet Union, paving the way for the rest of Europe to embrace Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania as sovereign equals.
Denmark, Norway and Finland informed the three Baltic governments that they had extended recognition and stood ready to establish diplomatic relations immediately, and Argentina followed with a similar announcement.
Iceland said it would do so on Monday, and Japan said it would recognize the sovereignty of the republics when Moscow does.
Bonn Wants Speedy Action
At the same time, Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of Germany invited the Baltic foreign ministers to Bonn this week and said in a radio interview, "I will propose that we decide to establish diplomatic relations."


Salvador Talks Split on Rebel Future
President Alfredo Cristiani has said the main stumbling block to a peace accord in El Salvador is the guerrillas' demand that some of their members be incorporated into the national armed forces.
He dismissed this condition as a "total impracticality."
Although guerrilla commanders have often alluded to this idea in public statements and interviews, even talking at times of the "fusion" of the two military forces, the Salvadoran Government and diplomats close to the talks had previously maintained that the insurgents were not serious about this demand.


Books of The Times; Why Unshakable Belief Isn't the Same as Truth
How We Know What Isn't So The Fallibility of Human Reason in Everyday Life  By Thomas Gilovich  Illustrated. 216 pages.
The Free Press. $19.95.
In the far reaches of the basement of the large B. Dalton bookstore on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, 14 shelves are devoted to science and technology, 22 shelves to religion, and a full 30 shelves to numerology, astrology, voodoo, the prophecies of Nostradamus, holistic health and other assorted arcana sold under the rubric "New Age." True, there are some science titles scattered among the plant and bird guides on the nature shelves and in the mammoth self-help and psychology section.
But by any measure, books about the occult have at least equal parity with those concerned with more rational pursuits.


Lendl Is Too Hot for Cold Edberg in Warmup
While Stefan Edberg broke strings, his opponent, the gaunt fellow who wards off the sun with an imitation foreign legion cap, broke him.
Edberg, who is hoping to hold his own at the United States Open this year after a humiliating first-round loss last year, couldn't even hold his serve today against Ivan Lendl in the final of the Norstar Bank Hamlet Challenge.
Edberg, the defending champion, dropped serve six times and was trounced, 6-3, 6-2, by Lendl, whose game is packing the lethal edge Edberg's lacked.


Machine Tool Orders Off 8.8% in July
Spurred by a sharp rise in demand from domestic automobile makers, orders for American-made machine tools rose 8.8 percent in July from the previous month's level, according to a report scheduled to be released today by the industry's trade association.
Still, machine tool orders this year remain well below their 1990 levels.


Losing Isuzu Finalists Get Consolation Prizes
The losing finalists in the competition for American Isuzu Motors' account, which was awarded on Friday to Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco, are already thinking ahead to the pursuit of other automotive accounts.
"We'll continue looking around," said Ed McCabe, chairman and chief executive of McCabe &amp; Company, New York, "and we'll see what happens from here."


Brian Dalby Wed To Anna D. Ponzi
Anna Dagmar Ponzi, the daughter of Dr.
Dagmar R. Ponzi of Belmont, Mass, and Tullio E. Ponzi of Cambridge, Mass., and Divonne, France, was married yesterday to Brian Kenneth Dalby, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald K. Dalby of Grosse Pointe Farms, Mich.
The Rev.
Michael Corrigan and the Rev.
George Blackman performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of Our Savior in Brookline, Mass.
The bride, 25 years old, graduated from Wellesley College and is studying for a master's degree in comparative literature at the University of Michigan.
Her father is the director of Itraco, an oil trading company in Geneva.
Her mother is an assistant professor of biochemistry at Brandeis University.


People
*
Marty Greenhouse, co-creative director of Berenter Greenhouse &amp; Webster, New York, has been promoted to president, from executive vice president, succeeding Barrie Webster, who becomes vice chairman and consultant.
Bill Berenter, who continues as chairman and co-creative director, said the changes were made because Mr.
Webster was seriously ill.
Also, Ted Pulton has been promoted to executive vice president and director of client services, from senior vice president and group account director, and Bob Marks, a senior vice president, has been promoted to director of account management, from group account director.


M. J. Ancowitz and Barry J. Kanner Are Married
Marijane Tracey Ancowitz, a daughter of Marjorie Zuckerman and Dr.
Arthur Ancowitz, both of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Barry Jacob Kanner, the son of Esther Kanner of West Hartford, Conn., and Leon Kanner of Marbella, Spain.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein officiated at the Great Neck (L.I.) Synagogue.
Mrs.
Kanner, 27 years old, is known as M. J. A graduate of the University of Michigan, she is a computer graphics consultant in New York.
Her father is an internist.
Her mother is the president and founder of Medical Reports Service, a transcription service in New York.


Heavyweight Advocacy
I thought pugilistic nicknames had reached their ne plus ultra when Carl (The Truth) Williams appeared on the scene as a contender for the heavyweight crown two years ago.
Here was a boxer with philosophical reach; a puncher with purpose who added a welcome dimension to a sport based solely on doing harm to another.
The rest of us have arms too short to box with God, but not "The Truth" -- in theory.
On July 21, 1989, he fell to the canvas after 93 seconds in the ring with "Iron Mike" Tyson.
That was no great shock.
The true have fallen to the mighty before; it's just not always so fast.


QUESTIONS BOX
Parity in Baseball
Q.
After the games of Aug. 2, 1991, all seven teams in the American League Western Division had won-lost records above the .500 mark, something that hardly was possible before divisional play began in 1969.
In the days the major leagues consisted of two 8-team or 10-team leagues, what were the most teams in a league to finish the season at or above .500?


Joy McCorriston and Kevin Johnston, Doctoral Candidates at Yale, Are Wed
Joy McCorriston, the daughter of Mrs.
Robert P. Odenweller of Bernardsville, N.J., and Robert McCorriston of Kula, Hawaii, was married yesterday at her mother's home to Kevin James Johnston, a son of Barbara F. Johnston of Centerport, L.I., and William D. Johnston of Oyster Bay, L.I.
The Rev.
Robert J. Bull, a Methodist minister, officiated.
The bride, 29 years old, graduated from the Institute of Archeology at the University of London and is a doctoral candidate in anthropology at Yale University.
As a National Science Foundation fellow, she has worked on archeological projects in the Near East.


Stress and Long Hours, but Less $$$
In the wake of six-figure contracts for college coaches and sports administrators, comes this sobering study: College coaches -- men and women -- are increasingly finding more stress in their jobs: their working hours are getting longer and the respect they receive from fellow faculty members is diminishing.
And female coaches receive considerably less pay than their male counterparts.
Those are the findings of ELLEN STAUROWSKY, the director of athletics and physical education at William Smith College in Geneva, N.Y.
She based her study on replies to a questionnaire that was returned by about a third of more than 1,800 college coaches at all levels.


Stampeding a Molecule to Market
Normally, it takes years or even decades to develop the first commercial products and apply for patents based on research breakthroughs.
But "buckyballs," an unusual form of carbon first identified in 1985 and now thought to have huge commercial potential, may have been built into a lung-scanning device developed in Australia before anyone realized they existed.
As a result, the inventor of the lung scanner and the Australian company making it are pressing broad patent claims covering the best-known method for making buckyballs and related molecules.
Their claims, which have been greeted skeptically to date, pit them against the University of Arizona and the Max Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics in Germany, whose researchers developed the machinery now used to make most of the buckyballs being sold to fellow researchers throughout the world.
New Kind of Carbon
Buckyballs are hollow spheres of 60 carbon atoms arranged in a series of hexagons and pentagons resembling the geodesic domes designed by R. Buckminster Fuller, the architect who died in 1983 -- hence their formal name, buckminsterfullerenes.
Soon after their discovery, it became apparent that buckyballs are merely the mostly easily formed of a whole group of caged carbon structures, called fullerenes.


Review/Pop; Robert Palmer Adds To His Eclecticism
Robert Palmer, who played at the Beacon Theater on Friday night, has kept his career going with a fascinating mixture of trends and movements.
An early pop eclecticist, Mr.
Palmer has spent his career experimenting with reggae, hard rock, African pop and New Orleans music: he comes off as a less literary version of Paul Simon.
And because he adds the look of an Italian suit to his image, he's brought a Julio Iglesias-like sexuality to his eclecticism; at times Mr.
Palmer looked like an out-of-town businessman whose real attentions were always focused on seduction.
He also gives the impression that he's trapped in the image of the playboy, as if he knew more than his fairly intelligent pop music allows him to show off.
At times during the concert he'd stop and tell the audience the origins of any particular song: Zimbabwe one moment, Ghana the next.
Then he'd go into innocent pop music that felt as if it were paying off bills.


Secret Tape Gorbachev Prepared
Following is a statement secretly made on a videotape by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev while in captivity last Tuesday in the Crimea, as translated by NBC News, which obtained a copy of the videotape yesterday:
I would like to make a statement right now, which I would like to be heard by the People's Deputies of the U.S.S.R., the members of the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R., by the Soviet people and the international community.
I've come to the conclusion that I need to make this statement after I have viewed the press conference of Comrade Yanayev and other members of the so-called State Emergency Committee.


Ageless Harness Driver Keeps Pace
DEL MILLER wasn't making excuses, you understand.
But, he contended, "if I had drawn a better post position I might have finished in the money."
Still, the 78-year-old Miller, a harness-racing legend, had a nostalgic day last Saturday by driving Festive Fellow in the Fox Stake at the Indiana State Fair -- 51 years after he won the event in 1940.


Chinese Aides See Cooler Soviet Ties
Chinese officials interviewed privately say that although they believe China's politics are unlikely to be immediately affected by the collapse of the Communist Party in the Soviet Union, they generally foresee a slowing down in the pace of improvement of relations with Moscow and an intensification of political education throughout China.
Vice President Wang Zhen was quoted on the television news today as emphasizing the Communist Party leadership role in the army and the importance the party played in helping the army quell the "counter-revolutionary rebellion," an allusion to the pro-democracy demonstrations of 1989.


The Day's Highlights
A Race Toward Sovereignty
REPUBLICS PLOT THEIR FUTURES One Soviet republic after another said it would seek independence or greater sovereignty, and the nation's new Defense Minister said he would replace "80 percent" of the top command with younger men who were less prone to plotting.
Page A1.
UKRAINE MOVES TO OUST COMMUNISTS Taking steps to make the independence it declared a reality, Ukrainian lawmakers voted to seize the wealth and property of the Communist Party, investigate its role in the failed coup and grant amnesty to political prisoners.
Page A5.


Connecticut Woman Now Denies Being Raped While Videotaped
A Connecticut woman who the police said was beaten and sexually assaulted earlier this month by two men who videotaped the incident now says that she was not raped and that "the whole thing has been blown out of proportion."
"What they did to me was wrong and whatever they did, they'll have to answer for it," the 19-year-old Bethel woman told The News-Times of Danbury, according to an article published yesterday.
"I just don't want to see them pay for something they didn't do."


Germans May Now Try To Extradite Honecker
The collapse of Communism in the Soviet Union has raised new hopes here that the former East German Communist leader, Erich Honecker, might now be subject to extradition and trial.
Mr.
Honecker fled to the Soviet Union in March as prosecutors were preparing to charge him in connection with shoot-to-kill orders issued to guards along the Berlin Wall.


Capriati Gets a Whipping That Doesn't Count
Jennifer Capriati was thumped with such ferocity yesterday afternoon by Gabriela Sabatini, she might have thought twice about her decision to play in the made-for-CBS exhibition one day before the start of the United States Open tennis championships.
But Capriati has more than a little Pollyanna in her, so she took her punishment, 6-3, 6-3, and insisted the 62-minute baseline fire drill at the National Tennis Center in Queens had been a great deal of fun.


Jet Victory Over Redskins Satisfying for Coslet
Did the Jets simply dodge another bullet or did they finally bite the bullet?
How do you account for their holding off a late Washington rally and escaping Columbia, S.C., with a 13-9 victory over the Redskins on Saturday night in the final exhibition game for both teams?
While poring over his roster and preparing to pare it to 47 players by the deadline today, those were the questions facing the Jets' head coach, Bruce Coslet.


Bernard Castro, an Inventor, 87; Founder of Convertible Sofa Chain
Bernard Castro, the man who "conquered space -- living space, that is" -- by inventing and then selling more than 5 million Castro Convertible sofas, died Saturday at his estate in Ocala, Fla.
He was 87 years old.
Mr.
Castro died of cardiac arrest, said his daughter, Bernadette, who became famous in New York as the little girl who opened the sofa with the "feather-lift mechanism" in commercials during the early days of television.


TRANSACTIONS
SATURDAY Baseball  American League  BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Traded Chris Myers, pitcher, to the Montreal Expos for Richie Lewis, pitcher, and sent Lewis to Rochester of the International League.


Honda Agency Has New Ploy
Korey, Kay &amp; Partners, New York, is looking to help itself by helping Danny, the salesman character in its advertising for the Honda dealers of the New York metropolitan area.
In new commercials, Danny, who is depressed because Honda is "the car that sells itself," has locked himself in a bathroom and refuses to leave.
Last week, Korey, Kay ran an advertisement in The New York Times and sent letters to potential clients, asking them to send magazines and newspapers to Danny because he was running out of reading matter.


EUROPE EMBRACING BALTIC INDEPENDENCE; PURGE OF MILITARY
Following quickly on the rout of the Communist Party, the unraveling of the Soviet Union itself gained speed today, with one republic after another joining the rush to independence or laying claim to powers of the central government.
One day after the vital Ukraine declared its independence, Byelorussia unexpectedly followed suit, Moldavia announced it would vote on a similar declaration Monday, and Western governments began recognizing the secession of the three Baltic republics.


Bridge
A choice of opening lead on the diagramed deal had a giant impact on the World Junior Team Championship final in Ann Arbor, Mich., on Thursday.
Marc Caplan and Eric Sutherland, sitting North-South for Canada, arrived in the appropriate contract of seven clubs by a somewhat hit-and-miss sequence.
North's bid of three diamonds was intended as a cue-bid, to be followed by club support, but he had not expected to have to show this support at the level of seven.
The grand slam is easy to make if the clubs break normally.
South can ruff two spades in his hand, draw trumps, and eventually discard a heart from dummy on the fourth round of diamonds.
But after a neutral lead this plan is derailed by the bad trump split: With a red-suit lead, or even an unlikely trump, South must fail.
But the American West failed to appreciate that South's bidding virtually guaranteed a void spade.
He tried to cash the spade ace, and the declarer was in control.
He ruffed, cashed the ace-queen of trumps, and drew the remaining trumps by taking the marked finesse against the jack, claiming the grand slam.


25,000 Opponents of Abortion Rally in Wichita
The intense struggle over abortion continued here today, but this time it was between thousands of abortion opponents attending a rally at a football stadium and a small airplane circling overhead.
In the sky, the plane pulled a sign: "Go Home. Wichita is Pro-Choice." On the ground, the crowd, estimated by the police at 25,000, shouted back, their voices drowning out the buzz of the plane: "We are home. We are home."


Barbara Mahany Marries Blair Kamin
Barbara Ann Mahany, the daughter of Mrs.
Eugene S. Mahany of Deerfield, Ill., and the late Mr.
Mahany, was married yesterday at her mother's home to Blair Kamin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Z. Kamin of Fair Haven, N.J.
The Rev.
Derek Simons, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Allen Secher officiated.
The bride, 34 years old, is a features writer for The Chicago Tribune.
She graduated summa cum laude from the Marquette University College of Nursing and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
She was a pediatric oncology nurse.
Her father was the corporate director of merchandising services for the Needham, Harper &amp; Steers advertising agency in Chicago.


Housebuster Holds On To Win in Photo Finish
Housebuster, the sprinting champion with the calm manner and explosive dash, opened his farewell tour today with a classic performance, winning the Forego Handicap by a nose against a horse carrying 14 pounds fewer.
It was a tour de force for the 4-year-old colt, who raised eyebrows on May 27 when he unaccountably tired and ran eighth in the Metropolitan Mile at Belmont Park.
But this time, he was once more the old pro of Robert P. Levy's barn.


Mideast Christians Have Stake in Talks
To the Editor:
In the continuing debate over the future of Middle East peace talks, the interests of the Christian minorities whose ancestors have been living within what is now Israel, the occupied territories and Lebanon for centuries have been largely ignored.


Corrections
A table in Business Day on Thursday listing the New York Stock Exchange's uncovered short sales for the month ended Aug. 15 included an erroneous figure issued by the exchange for Paramount Communications and accordingly misstated the total short interest.
The short interest in Paramount's stock was 433,045 shares, not 1,793,181.
The Big Board's total short interest rose to 725.2 million shares, not to 726.6 million.


A Mockery of Justice
To the Editor:
Jeffrey L. Dahmer's defense lawyers will be grateful for the analyses offered by renowned, experienced professionals who have identified the psychopathology of most serial killers (news article, Aug. 7).
If Mr.
Dahmer does not plead guilty, or if a guilty plea is not accepted by the court (as occurred in the case of President Reagan's would-be assassin, John W. Hinckley Jr.), it is certain a plea of not guilty by reason of insanity will be asserted.


An Emmy's Winner's Entrance


Hartford Offers Sobering Lessons As More States Face Tax Troubles
Connecticut's bitter struggle over revamping its revenue system and imposing an income tax may be just the first in a wave of such battles in state capitols from Texas to New Hampshire, politicians and economists say.
Those experts believe that with a decrease in Federal aid and increased burdens on state governments, many state tax structures -- created primarily during two earlier periods of intense budget pressures in the 1930's and 1960's -- have become antiquated and strained.


Corrections
An editorial on Saturday incorrectly reported the status of Izvestia.
Its publication was not suspended.


Yeltsin Says Elite K.G.B. Unit Refused to Storm His Office
According to Boris N. Yeltsin, it was the refusal of the elite anti-terrorist "Alpha" team of the K.G.B. to storm his headquarters, with orders to seize and if necessary kill him and his aides, that forced the plotters of the coup to postpone and finally cancel the attack.
And according to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's personal assistant, when the high-ranking conspirators first appeared at Mr.
Gorbachev's Crimean retreat, the aide's first thought was that the Chernobyl nuclear-power station might have erupted anew.


Joyner-Kersee Still Winning Despite Big Spill
Not 30 minutes after the United States celebrated a sweep in the men's 100-meter final of the world championships Sunday night, a near disastrous moment occurred in the women's long jump.
Jackie Joyner-Kersee misjudged her run-up in the fourth round and injured her right ankle, trying to adjust.
After several moments of immobility and pain, she managed to stand and walk away on her own.
Later, after passing on the fifth round, she jumped again in the sixth.


Metro Matters; A Public Servant Labels His Union Undemocratic
Pablo Lara, a New York City caseworker, says his first campaign for a significant union office was a bitter disappointment.
He lost by four votes, 66-62.
Worse, he says, none of those votes was his own.
Mr.
Lara says that he never received a ballot in the mail, and that neither did at least 80 other union members.
He contends that his campaign for union chapter chairman, a job that represents about 3,500 workers in city homeless shelters, illustrates the sad state of democracy in his union, Local 371 of the Social Service Employees Union.


Election Engineers Supply An Edge in Council Races
Una Clarke started her day on Friday by standing at the corner of Parkside and Ocean Avenues in Brooklyn, imploring the commuters who rushed by her into the subway to think of her on Election Day.
She was practicing traditional politics in the manner that candidates use to get elected in every City Council race in America.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Regional trading blocs could eventually destroy the world's free-trade system, economists and central bank officials from various countries say.
A few of those attending the Fed's annual summer conference, including the keynote speaker, went a step further, arguing that the 40-year-old free-trade system had outlived its usefulness and should give way to these regional blocs.  [ Page D1. ]


The Uphill Task Confronting Yeltsin: Achieve Change and Stave Off Chaos
For months now, Boris N. Yeltsin, president of the Russian republic, has been arguing that his plans for a radical overhaul of his republic's economy would have already gone into effect were it not for the "center" -- a word that encompasses the Kremlin, the lumbering bureaucracy of the Soviet Union's huge ministries and the long hand of the Communist Party.
In the last 48 hours, in a blizzard of decrees, Mr.
Yeltsin removed the center from his path.
He seized control of the party's Moscow-based media apparatus, took over communications networks, and kicked the struts out from under Gosplan and Gosnab, the two state agencies that once controlled planning and distribution for the entire Soviet Union, by banning their activity on the vast territory of the Russian republic.


MORE ON THE SOVIETS
The rush to independence and more big changes A10 Yeltsin's daunting task A11 More coup revelations A12 Washington prepares for Baltic independence A13


Ryan Lifts Veil Off Exercise Regimen
Sports Illustrated or Inside Sports or The Sporting News might be the usual place to look for an article on NOLAN RYAN's secrets.
But add another: Longevity magazine.
In the current issue, the Texas Rangers pitcher tells readers, presumably mature ones, that during the season he has a five-hour daily routine that includes stretching, stationary cycling and weights.
He also swims and in the winter runs for 75 minutes twice a week. . . .
Twenty-four baseball Giants of the 1950's (yes, including GAIL HARRIS, WINDY McCALL and BOB LENNON, true trivia members of that era's team) will be at a Belmont Park sports weekend from Sept. 20-22. . . .
This would have provoked gasps not so long ago: Black tennis shoes at the United States Open.
Reebok has received permission to outfit the ballboys and ballgirls in a model of its Pump sneaker known as the Midnight Edition.


SIDELINES: McNALL'S MILLIONS; Oh My, Aren't We the Acquisitive One
Remember last March when the acquisitive owner of the Los Angeles Kings, BRUCE McNALL, teamed up with WAYNE GRETZKY to pay $451,000 for that Honus Wagner baseball card?


Ending 10 Years of Rebuilding, M.T.A. Wants 5 More
A $16 billion, 10-year program to overhaul New York City's subways, bus lines and commuter railroads -- one of the most costly rebuilding efforts ever undertaken in the New York region -- will come to an end this year.
But officials of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which has directed the vast project, are scrambling to convince state legislators that more rebuilding is desperately needed.
And they are asking for more money -- $11.5 billion over the next five years.


Review/Television; A Hardware-Store Owner Crosses a Cultural Border
The television-movie flavor of the month seems to be a Hispanic-Anglo mix.
Unfortunately, "Finding the Way Home," the two-hour heart warmer and brain freezer tonight at 9 on Channel 7, is a lot less flavorsome than "Crazy From the Heart," which was shown on TNT last week.
The question tonight is whether the 60-year-old owner of a failing hardware store can find happiness among migrant farm workers.
George C. Scott plays Max Mittelmann who, in a state of terminal despondency and temporary amnesia, lands among the warmest bunch of Hispanic people this side of any border.
They are led by Ruben Lazarado (Hector Elizondo), who gives more signs than Max of being an interesting character, but the dolorous plot does not allow either actor much room for maneuver.


Time Magazine Shifts Trade Ads to Fallon
Time magazine has reassigned its trade advertising to Fallon McElligott, Minneapolis, after Lois/GGK, New York, resigned from the account.
Fallon was a finalist in the competition for the newsweekly's account in 1989, which Lois/GGK won.
Billings are estimated at more than $1 million.
Elizabeth P. Valk, the publisher of Time, attributed Lois/GGK's resignation to "a conflict involving forthcoming work for another large media company." George Lois, the agency's chairman, said he resigned from the account because "they didn't enjoy me working with Al Neuharth again."


Harlan H. Grooms, 90, Judge in a Rights Case
Harlan Hobart Grooms, a senior Federal district judge whose desegregation rulings led Gov.
George C. Wallace to stand in the door of a university building to block entry by blacks, died Friday.
Judge Grooms was 90.
Judge Grooms died at his home in Birmingham.


Pamela Levy Is Married
Pamela Sultana Levy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nessim Levy of Purchase, N.Y., was married yesterday to Eric Steven Goldstein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bertram Goldstein of East Patchogue, L.I.
Rabbi Arthur Schneier performed the ceremony at the Pierre.
The bride, 23 years old, and the bridegroom, 24, are graduates of Tulane University.
She is a traffic coordinator at the Della Femina, McNamee advertising agency in New York.
He is a commercial real-estate broker at Newmark Real Estate Services in New York.


Accounts
*
Fox Video Inc. to Cox Landey and Partners Inc., New York, for advertising and promotion for the release of "Home Alone" on videocassette.
The agency said the campaign has a budget of $10 million.
The agency has also been awarded the $5 million account for Today's Man, a Carle Place, L.I., clothing retailer. *
Commodore Cruise Line, Coral Gables, Fla., to West &amp; Co., Tampa, Fla., for its $5 million account.
The company said a review on the account also included the incumbent agency, Grulich-Koenig Advertising, Miami, and Crispin &amp; Porter Advertising, Miami.


Caren M. Deitch Is Married
Caren Meryle Deitch, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Deitch of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Kenneth J. Franklin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald M. Franklin of Lawrence, L.I.
Rabbi Joel Y. Zion, assisted by Cantor David Benedict, performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence.
The bride, 36 years old, is the controller of Nonsuch Films, a television commercial production company in New York.
She attended City College.
The bridegroom, 39, is the founder and president of Radioactive Talent Inc., a talent agency in New York.
He is a graduate of Long Island University.


A Bet Chrysler Can't Afford to Lose
Designing a car from scratch is an immense financial bet, and one an auto maker must be strong enough to lose.
The Chrysler Corporation may not have that luxury with its latest car project, which is being hurried toward completion next summer.
Chrysler's new family of midsize cars, which has been given the code name L/H, will sell for $15,000 to $22,000.
The cars will contain Chrysler's first all-new configuration of body and chassis since the plucky K-car of a decade ago, when the company was near bankruptcy.


Further Drops in Yields Not Expected for Weeks
Many credit market analysts say the move to reduce short- and long-term interest rates has been sidetracked but not derailed.
But it may be some weeks before further declines in yields are realized.
The recent rally in the bond market came to an abrupt end on Friday, when the Government reported that new orders for manufactured durable goods rose by a stunning 10.7 percent in July, the biggest monthly increase in more than two decades.


Corrections
Two picture captions in the Business section yesterday with the continuation of an article about Salomon Brothers were reversed.
John W. Meriwether, former vice chairman of Salomon Brothers, was at the left, with dark hair.
Thomas W. Strauss, former president of Salomon Brothers, was at the right.


Lewis Dorf Wed To Ms. Boltuch
Esther Boltuch, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rubin Boltuch of Brooklyn, was married in Stamford, Conn., yesterday to Lewis Dorf, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Dorf of New York.
Rabbi David Halpern performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Dorf, the bridegroom's brother and sister-in-law.
Mrs.
Boltuch-Dorf, 33 years old, graduated from the State University of New York College of Health Related Professions in Brooklyn.
She is a supervisor of occupational therapy at the Hospital for Joint Diseases in Manhattan.
Her father is the president of the BOEL Trading Company, a men's retail store in Brooklyn.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


New Charges of Torture Vex South African Rebels
A gesture of reconciliation by the African National Congress toward some dissidents detained as South African agents has backfired amid new allegations of torture.
Eight days ago, the congress arranged for 32 detainees, whom it called "among the most notorious" spies and assassins, to fly back to Johannesburg.


El Gran Combo, on the Global Road, Moves Dancers to Mixed Salsa Beat
It's a typically frenetic couple of weeks for El Gran Combo, Puerto Rico's finest salsa orchestra, and one of the greatest dance bands working.
Tonight it will play at S.O.B.'s in Manhattan.
Then it goes to Jersey City for a Wednesday night engagement, returning to Manhattan to headline a salsa show at Madison Square Garden on Saturday, followed by a late set at Club Broadway on the Upper West Side.
Then it heads off for Providence, R.I., Bridgeport, Conn., and Reading, Pa. before coming back for a Queens date and then flying down for a three-city tour in Colombia.
Such is the life for an orchestra that has recorded 62 albums -- its most recent, "Erupcion" (Combo), has been hovering around the top 10 of the Latin charts in Billboard for a few months -- and has been together for 29 years.
The 13-or-so-member group, which is swinging through the United States on one of its annual two or three North American tours, is an institution, and spends more than 10 months a year on the road proving it.


Saratoga Summing Up an Extended Run
The curtain came down today on the experimental extended racing season at Saratoga with mixed results but with assurances that Saratoga racing would most likely run five weeks again next year.
The five weeks of racing in the country, instead of the customary four, produced somewhat smaller crowds on the average at Saratoga Race Course and fewer dollars bet.


New York Taxpayers Would Be Crazy to Buy $250 Bonds; Small Investor, Beware
To the Editor:
Among the many suggestions presented to Mayor David N. Dinkins for saving New York City (front page, Aug. 6) was one for selling city bonds in denominations of $250.
This apparent booster is a bummer, a dangerous and not disinterested idea.
The scheme is designed to bring in the small investor (always fair game), and it would -- but.


Gottfried Noether, 76, Educator in Statistics
Gottfried E. Noether, the chairman of the department of statistics at the University of Connecticut, died on Thursday at Windham Community Memorial Hospital in Windham, Conn.
He was 76 years old and lived in Storrs, Conn.
Dr. Noether died of complications from prostate cancer, his wife, Emiliana, said.


Students Face Expulsion in Sex Case
A disciplinary committee at St.
John's University recommended yesterday that three students who were accused of sexually assaulting a female student be expelled, even though they were acquitted of criminal charges in the case.
The committee, made up of faculty members and students, also recommended the expulsion of another student who said he had joined in abusing the woman but who was not prosecuted in return for testifying against the other three.


BUSH HOLDING OFF ON TIES TO BALTICS
Despite mounting pressure to take the lead in the West's response to the Soviet upheaval, President Bush held to his caution today and said that he was still not ready to grant full recognition to the Baltic republics.
Brushing aside suggestions that he move faster, the President said the United States has "special responsibilities" not to make hasty decisions that could contribute to instability in the Soviet Union, although he acknowledged that it was unlikely that American actions could have that effect.  'I've Expressed Myself'
Mr.
Bush was asked at a news conference today if he agreed with Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, who said Sunday that the United States might be better off with Boris N. Yeltsin, the Russian republic's President, in charge of the Soviet Union.
He replied: "Well, we'll deal with who's there. I've expressed myself on Boris Yeltsin. I've expressed myself on Gorbachev. It's not a choosing either-or here."  [ Excerpts, page A11. ]


New Singapore Leader Facing Election Test
Unless his party wins something more than 6 of every 10 votes cast in this weekend's general election, Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong of Singapore risks being remembered only as the man who brought racy movies to this otherwise scrubbed clean island nation.
Of course, some filmgoers think that would still be quite a legacy.
Before Mr.
Goh took office as Prime Minister in November and introduced a mild Singaporean version of "glasnost," R-rated movies were banned.


Gorbachev Now: Vilified but Still a Powerful Force
The irresistible image at the heart of the raging tempest forging the fate of the Soviet land today was of President Mikhail S. Gorbachev as a leader whose will and arrogance lifted his vast nation out of thrall, now standing alone and vilified, but still large.
Throughout the debate in the Soviet Parliament today, as the survival of history's largest empire hung in the balance while a parade of deputies, many self-serving, swaggered or writhed over their role in the failed coup, it was Mr.
Gorbachev who still seemed to personify the higher tragedy and opportunity facing the land.


CHRONICLE
WALTER H. ANNENBERG, much honored for his donations to such diverse institutions as the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the United Negro College Fund, is to receive an honorary degree from the American Society for the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology.
The society, celebrating its 50th anniversary, and the institute will also honor MAX M. FISHER, a Detroit industrialist who is a former chairman of United Brands.


Hoping to End Strike, Madagascar Names Cabinet
In an effort to break the political impasse that has brought out vast rallies daily, the Prime Minister of this Indian Ocean nation named a new Government today that he hoped would persuade workers to end their general strike.
But whether the Prime Minister, Guy Rasanamazy, will succeed seems to depend in large part on the size of the crowd on Tuesday in the city square, where the opposition has called for a rally to equal that of June 26, when up a crowd of 400,000 was reported.
Opposition leaders, divided among themselves and faced with lagging enthusiasm among striking civil servants who have yet to be paid this month, called for a stepped-up strike that would shut down the country.
Under the general strike since June, banks, for instance, have been providing minimal service.


After a Gap Of 28 Years, A Tenor Sings Out
The smiling man in the shiny new cook's hat and matching white apron at the New York State Theater is Arthur Rubin, executive vice president and general manager of the Nederlander Organization, one of the three major Broadway theater owners.
The smiling man is also Giuseppe the Cook in the New York City Opera's revival of "The Most Happy Fella," which begins performances on Sept. 4.
That's because before there was Rubin the Executive there was Rubin the Tenor, and it was Rubin the Tenor who played Giuseppe in the Frank Loesser musical about a mail-order bride when it opened on Broadway on May 3, 1956.
Mr.
Rubin was 29 years old; Mr.
Loesser gave him a gold money clip as a gift, and Brooks Atkinson of The New York Times praised his exuberant singing.


A Royal No-Hitter


America West Airlines Names Chief Executive
America West Airlines Inc. said yesterday that Michael J. Conway, the company's president, would replace Edward R. Beauvais as chief executive.
Mr.
Beauvais, the airline's top executive since it was founded in 1981, will remain chairman of the financially troubled carrier.
Mr.
Beauvais said he recommended the change because the airline needed Mr.
Conway's financial expertise as it worked its way through a bankruptcy reorganization.


Not Even Death Ends Anti-Pollution Crusade
CONCERN about the environment now reaches even beyond the grave and is troubling the cremation and cemetery business.
More than two million people die each year in the United States.
Those responsible for disposing of the remains say their work is increasingly constrained by Federal, state and local laws aimed at protecting air, land and water quality.


Review/Fashion; For Men, The Profane And Sacred
Sex is returning to men's wear, after a bit of a dry spell -- hundreds of years, at least.
But there is definitely a tradition to draw on.
The Pharaohs wore high heels.
Medieval knights wore codpieces.
And tights . . . well, Robin Hood had the leggy look long before spandex.
Among the trends at the men's spring fashion showings in New York last week were "body conscious" stretch fabrics, monochrome color schemes and dazzling black and white graphics.
Tailored clothing moves in a loose, drapey direction, as the American suit becomes more casual.
Nobody wants that State Committee on the State of Emergency look.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 27


JAPAN IS CRITICIZED ON COUP RESPONSE
In an echo of the criticism over Japan's tentative role in the Persian Gulf war, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu has come under fire for what is widely perceived as his slowness in supporting the cause of democracy in the Soviet Union last week.
Partly as a result of the criticism, Mr.
Kaifu's Government moved quickly today to support the independence of the Baltic republics and to indicate that it may soon soften its long opposition to increasing aid to Moscow.


Monday Night Fans: Go Out, Be Counted
The "Monday Night Football" regular season starts next week with the Giants and the San Francisco 49ers.
Go ahead, watch it in a sports bar.
Take a trip, watch it in a motel room.
Lay down your textbook, flip it on in your dorm room.
But remember: Once you leave home, you won't count.


Onward, Upward: 2 More Hits for Bo
For Bo Jackson, the story these days isn't so much the hits, but the hip.
The would-be Chicago White Sox outfielder continued to collect base hits tonight in Game 3 of a minor league rehabilitation stint that began Sunday in Florida.
More important, Jackson continued to show little adverse effect from a hip injury suffered seven months ago, one that was at first thought to pose a serious threat to his professional baseball and football careers.
Jackson served as a designated hitter for the Class AA Birmingham Barons tonight, just as he had in a day-night doubleheader for the Class A affiliate of the White Sox in Sarasota, Fla.


Norton Desktop for Windows
THERE is a temptation, when describing Microsoft Windows 3.0, to compare it with Apple Computer Inc.'s Macintosh system software.
The comparison belittles the Macintosh, which is easier to understand and use and which has a more consistent system of point-and-click commands and operations.
However, Norton Desktop for Windows, a utility program from the Symantec Corporation, takes Windows several steps closer to being easy to use.
Experienced Windows users will see immediate benefits, but first-time Windows users will have to take it on faith that Norton will eventually make more sense than plain Windows.


Hospital Bonds In California
A $105 million negotiated tax- exempt bond issue for the California Health Facilities Authority on behalf of the Hospital of the Good Samaritan in Los Angeles was tentatively priced yesterday through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The maximum yield is about 7.08 percent for a revenue bond due in 2021, while the yield for the other long maturity, of 2007, is about 7 percent.


McPherson Goes North
Quarterback DON McPHERSON, who established a number of school passing records during an outstanding college career at Syracuse, has been added to the Hamilton Tiger-Cats' practice roster, the Canadian Football League club said yesterday.


Cartwright Gets 3-Year Pact From Bulls
Center BILL CARTWRIGHT signed a three-year deal with the Chicago Bulls yesterday, thus insuring that the starting five from this year's National Basketball Association championship team will return together for the 1991-92 season.


French Communist Chief Attacked for Stance on Soviet Coup
Seeking to reinvigorate their faltering party, reform-minded members of the French Communists have called for toppling the party's hard-line leader, saying he did not condemn the failed Soviet coup severely enough.
Nine Communist reformers have petitioned for a special meeting of the party's Central Committee to debate the party's mild reaction to the coup, its undemocratic tendencies and the future of its General Secretary, Georges Marchais.


FINANCE BRIEFS
DEBT *
Illinois Health Facilities Authority tentatively priced yesterday $20 million in hospital revenue bonds through Ziegler Securities Inc.
Yields range from 4.85 percent in 1992 to 6.65 percent in 2002.
The issue is covered by insurance from the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corp. and rated triple-A by Moody's and Standard &amp; Poor's.


1987 Cuban Riots Taught Both Sides
Federal negotiators dealing with Cuban detainees holding 10 hostages here are operating in part from a playbook developed after uprisings by Cuban inmates at the Atlanta and Oakdale, La., Federal prisons in 1987.
The Justice Department analysis of those uprisings, completed a year later, criticized some aspects of the handling of those events and applauded others.
It is apparent that the officials here have taken some recommendations to heart, including ones counseling any future hostage negotiators to exhibit limitless patience, strictly control access to the news media and what the media report and prevent third parties or news organizations from becoming involved in the negotiations except as consultants.


A Lawn Fed on Chemicals Switches to an Organic Diet
WHAT happens when the owner of a lawn that has been maintained on synthetic fertilizers and pesticides suddenly goes organic?
Last September, a modest-sized lawn in northern New Jersey -- no postage stamp, but requiring only about an hour to mow and trim -- became the subject of just such an informal experiment.


U.S. Still Confident Of Link to Moscow In a Military Crisis
Although the Bush Administration is still sorting out who is in charge of the Soviet Union, American officials say they are confident that in the event of a military crisis, longstanding lines of communication and command still exist.
President Bush would be able to reach President Mikhail S. Gorbachev quickly, most likely by telephone but if necessary over the computerized "hot line" that was created to avoid having a simple failure of communication set off a military confrontation, officials said.


GORBACHEV PLEADS, BUT BREAKAWAY AREAS DEFY HIM, PUTTING FATE OF UNION IN DOUBT
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev appealed to the nation today to keep the Soviet Union together, but was all but drowned out by spiraling calls for independence by most of the nation's republics.
The Soviet leader, trying to rebound from the foiled coup of a week ago that has left the country in turmoil, acknowledged at an emergency session of the all-union Parliament that the old tightly organized Soviet Union, with power emanating from the Kremlin, could not be sustained.
But he urged that the republics seek greater autonomy through a proposed new union treaty with the Kremlin.


Q&amp;A
Popeye's Spinach
Q.
Why does eating spinach make your teeth feel funny?
How much would Popeye have to eat to get his daily requirement of iron?


I.B.M. Lifts Some Prices
I.B.M. announced its annual price increases yesterday, but analysts noted that nearly all of the computer giant's big-selling items were absent from the list -- a sign of its worries about the health of the market.
Earnings at the International Business Machines Corporation, along with those of many competitors, have been ravaged by the recession, a factor that may have limited the price rises, analysts said.


New York Taxpayers Would Be Crazy to Buy $250 Bonds
To the Editor:
"Little Bonds for the Big City" (editorial, Aug. 10) shows the same arrogance and lack of respect New York City administrations show for money collected through taxes.


Bozo's Insults Landed Him In Cold Water
To the Editor:
There's another funny and ironic side to the dispute between Bozo the Clown and Bozo the Barbecue ("In Court, a Bitter Duel for the Right to Be a Bozo," Law page, Aug. 2).


TRANSACTIONS
FOOTBALL NATIONAL CONFERENCE
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Waived Scott Campbell and Gilbert Renfroe, quarterbacks; Rich Karlis, placekicker; Mike Pringle, running back; Randy Austin and Rich Bartlewski, tight ends; Oscar Giles, defensive lineman; George Koonce, linebacker; Karl Miller and Mike Williams, wide receivers; Brian Mitchell, cornerback; Jay Pennison, offensive lineman; and Joe Sims, defensive tackle.


Sun Microsystems Signs Resale Deal
Sun Microsystems Inc. has signed a multi-year, multimillion dollar agreement under which Computer Consoles Inc. will integrate and resell Sun computers as a platform for telecommunications applications.
The agreement is intended to advance a shift by Computer Consoles, based in Rochester, N.Y., from proprietary computer hardware to industry-standard machines like Sun's work stations and file servers.


The U.S. Wallows in Hypocrisy on Iran; Pre-election Deal?
To the Editor:
In "The Right Way to Rerun 1980" (editorial, Aug. 7), you are correct in saying our democracy "cannot survive without public accountability." However, I disagree that "exposure is the best safeguard against . . . repetition" of the alleged deal to prevent the release of the American hostages in Iran in 1980.


Open Positions on Short Sales Up 4.2% on Nasdaq
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that short interest in actively traded over-the-counter stocks rose 4.2 percent in the four weeks ended Aug. 15.
A total of 299.5 million shares in these active issues were held short and not yet covered in the period ended in mid-August, compared with 287.3 million shares in the four weeks ended in mid-July.


Court Upholds Term for Fraud
A Federal appeals court yesterday rejected a request for new sentencing from David P. Bloom, a young investment adviser who admitted bilking millions of dollars from investors to buy art and luxury goods and who is now serving an eight- year prison sentence.
Mr.
Bloom, 26 years old, had asked the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan to order a new sentencing on the ground that the judge had not considered new sentencing guidelines that might have resulted in less prison time.


Corrections
A report on Sunday about the engagement of Libby Light and David MacKenzie Grimes carried an erroneous headline.
The couple plan to marry in December; they did not marry last week.


INSIDE
Yugoslav Fighting Worsens
Yugoslav Army and Serbian rebel forces pounded towns in the secessionist republic of Croatia for hours in the heaviest fighting yet. page A3.


Pacific Enterprises
Pacific Enterprises said it wanted to sell its interest in oil and gas reserves located off the coast of the Netherlands.
A subsidiary of the company owns 21 percent of the reserves through a joint venture with the Amoco Netherlands Petroleum Company.
Pacific Enterprises, which said the sale comes as part of a strategy of selling some assets to reduce debt, gave no indication of the value of its investment.


Adding Insult to Injury


People
*
Gary Topolewski has been named acting chief creative officer on the Jeep/Eagle account at Campbell-Mithun-Esty, Southfield, Mich., after the departure of Michael Belitsos, chairman and chief creative officer.
An agency spokeswoman said Mr.
Belitsos's contract was not renewed.
Mr.
Topolewski, a senior vice president who was second in command on the account, is considered a leading candidate when Mr.
Belitsos's successor is named next month, the spokeswoman said.


The Soviet Empire: A Vast Ethnic Mix That Grew From War and Conquest
The Soviet Union originally was a re-establishment of the Russian Empire, in its somewhat-truncated post-World War I form, under the hammer and sickle flag of Communism.
During World War II, the Union expanded far beyond the boundaries of the Empire, acquiring vast territories in Europe and smaller areas in Asia.
Following is a brief account, republic by republic, of the expansion of first Russian, and then Soviet, power: Armenia
The Armenians, first recorded in the seventh century B.C., have preserved a distinct identity ever since.
Dominated by Persians, Romans, Byzantine Greeks, Arabs and Turks, the Armenians had only brief periods of indepedence.


Yankees Can Sure Use Help
The good news for the Yankees last night was that they finally reached agreement with their No. 1 draft pick, Brien Taylor.
The bad news was that Taylor was unable to fly in from North Carolina and pitch immediately.
They could have used assistance from Taylor or any other pitcher who could avoid the long ball because the Texas Rangers slammed four home runs on their way to a 10-2 rout at Yankee Stadium.
Eric Plunk started for the Yankees and yielded three of the homers and Rich Monteleone gave up the fourth in relief.


Ewing's Long Shadow
The Knicks and the National Basketball Players Association held a news conference yesterday to draw attention to the fact they have teamed with Wheelchair Charities Inc., to sponsor an exhibition game on Sept. 26 at Madison Square Garden.


Potential Therapy Is Found for Cystic Fibrosis
LONG-KNOWN simple chemicals may have potential as a therapy for cystic fibrosis, a very small study at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill suggests.
The concept having been tested, the study is being expanded to determine whether inhalation of the chemicals can prevent lung damage caused by the inherited fatal disorder, which affects about 30,000 Americans.
The research was described in the current issue of The New England Journal of Medicine.


Yanks Set To Sign Taylor for $1.5 Million
Brien Taylor abruptly abandoned the quiet, wide-eyed business of freshman orientation at Louisburg College tonight for a trip to New York, where the overpowering 19-year-old lefthanded pitcher is expected to become the richest player in the history of the major league draft.
Taylor's family and the Yankees reached agreement this evening on a one-year minor league contract worth $1.55 million, according to a person familiar with the negotiations.
Although the contract exceeds by $350,000 the precedent-setting agreement reached by Todd Van Poppel and the Oakland Athletics last summer, it is not the three-year major league contract that the family had insisted upon.


Youth Shot to Death in Struggle With Police on a Flatbush Street, Inciting New Protest
A 19-year-old man was shot and killed after a struggle with two police officers over a gun late Sunday night in Brooklyn, the police said.
The incident led to a protest in Flatbush yesterday by 150 people near where the shooting took place, as about twice as many police officers watched.
An initial police report of the shooting described an unruly crowd throwing bottles and shooting at the police officers who responded.
That report proved to be untrue.
In another discrepancy, the police had said that the victim was shot four times, but the Medical Examiner found evidence of at least five and possibly six shots.


Rounding Out Ryder
NICK FALDO and MARK JAMES of England and JOSE-MARIA OLAZABAL of Spain are the wild-card selections for Europe's 12-man Ryder Cup team that will defend the title against the United States on The Ocean Course in Kiawah Island, S.C., on Sept. 26-29. (AP)


Youth Indicted in Fatal Stabbing In Crown Heights Racial Rampage
A Brooklyn grand jury yesterday indicted a black youth in the fatal stabbing of a Hasidic Jew in Crown Heights on Aug. 19.
At the same time another grand jury wrestled with the explosive issue of whether to charge the Hasidic driver of a car that killed a black boy earlier that night, touching off four nights of racial violence.
At the funeral yesterday morning for the boy, 7-year-old Gavin Cato, demands for the arrest of the Jewish driver, Yosef Lifsh, were a refrain of the crowd.


Latvians Meeting No Resistance In Dismantling Links to Moscow
Latvia, acting as if independence from the Soviet Union were already fully acquired, is busily dismantling the structures and symbols of Soviet power in its capital and meeting no visible resistance.
This morning, in a surrender viewed by Latvians as highly symbolic, the Soviet Army turned over the very image of its privileged status, its spacious officers club in the heart of Riga.
Its loss to the occupying Soviet Army in 1940 was a major blow to national pride, because it had been built by contributions by the Latvian public to serve as a national cultural center.


By Design; See-Through Look for Men
There was plenty of men's clothing on the fashion runways last week, but the real news was the attention on the chest, where bulging pectorals are in style.
Many of the models looked as if they had their breasts augmented, although the look was probably accomplished at the gym.
Male models typically shave their chests before fashion shows, highlighting the area.


Editorial Notebook; The Red Deeds of Iron Feliks
An anti-Soviet joke long current in Warsaw: Q. Who is the greatest Pole in history?
A.
Feliks Dzer zhinsky, the Polish-born founder of the Cheka, forerunner of the K.G.B.
Q.
Why?
A.
Because no Pole killed more Russians.
This begins to suggest the scarlet aura that surrounds Iron Feliks, whose statue was hauled from its pedestal facing K.G.B. headquarters by euphoric Muscovites last week.
His Polish epitaph was well earned: his agents were responsible for an estimated 250,000 executions during Russia's civil war, from 1917 to 1922.


Arts Budget Cuts: Invisibility Isn't Painless
Here are some cultural events you're sure to miss:
*"The Black Rider," the Robert Wilson, Tom Waits and William S. Burroughs vaudeville version of Carl Maria von Weber's opera "Der Frei schutz," which was twice scheduled and twice canceled by the Brooklyn Academy of Music this year.


Books of The Times; Dreaming of Escape From a Demographic Nightmare
What's Eating Gilbert Grape By Peter Hedges 335 pages. Poseidon Press. $20.
With "What's Eating Gilbert Grape," Peter Hedges has written a completely original first novel, a novel that reads like the unlikely product of a collaboration between Nathanael West and Garrison Keillor, or David Lynch and Grandma Moses.


U.S. Cites High Costs of McDonnell Project
A Pentagon study concluding that cost overruns by the McDonnell Douglas Corporation on the Air Force's C-17 transport plane program could be far higher than previously believed raised new concerns today that the company could be exposed to potentially crippling losses.
McDonnell Douglas officials strongly disputed the Pentagon's cost estimates and continued to insist that the company should come close to breaking even on the initial phase of the program.
The company's contract calls for it to bear all costs above a certain point in the program's first phase.


Shift for Marketers: Yup to Grump
For the first time since they began arriving after World War II, the 78 million Americans of the baby boom are being courted by large numbers of marketers, not for their seemingly endless youth but for their encroaching middle age.
As the baby boomers begin to bulge, sag and squint their way into their mid-40's, companies are striking gold with products that offer a bit of youth to these aging yuppies -- a group that demographers are calling grumpies, for grown-up mature professionals.
Retailers are ringing up profits with products like wide-seated jeans, frilly girdles and bifocals without telltale lines in the lenses.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Ballistivet Inc., Minneapolis, which makes products for the cattle health-care market, announced that Fred R. Paul Jr. had resigned as president and chief executive.
No successor has been named. *
R.
R.
Donnelley &amp; Sons Co., Chicago, a printer, named Ronald G. Eidell senior vice president.


Review/Music; At Tanglewood, Beethoven's Ninth and a Sonic Blast
The Tanglewood Festival, which opened its classical season in early July with Mahler's "Resurrection" Symphony, closed it out symmetrically this afternoon with that work's prototype, Beethoven's Symphony No. 9.
But except for the Tanglewood Festival Chorus, a wholly different cast of characters held the stage.
With the festival's usual stars, Seiji Ozawa and the Boston Symphony, en route to Europe, Christoph von Dohnanyi and the Cleveland Orchestra filled in for the final weekend.
Mr.
Dohnanyi offered a fine, flowing account of Beethoven's Ninth, lucid and devoid of easy sentimentality.
In his typically purposeful manner, he found forward impulse rather than maundering mystery in the work's hushed opening, and his interpretation played itself out with compelling logic.


Long Hot Summer of Political Sleaze Leaves Rhode Islanders Boiling Mad
In the annals of sleaze, this has been a memorable summer for Rhode Island.
In the last few months scandals have been breaking out here with the regularity of bills arriving in the mail.
Theyhave ranged from garden-variety corruption, like that involving a mayor who was indicted for extortion, to more far-reaching affairs, like the state's banking crisis.


The U.S. Wallows in Hypocrisy on Iran; Reagan Didn't Know
To the Editor:
In "Untimely Retreat on Timely Notice" (editorial, Aug. 5), on Congressional legislation concerning covert actions, you make this statement: "President Reagan used the dubious retroactive finding and unnamed third parties to sell arms to Iran and then divert the proceeds to the contras." Half of this statement is at least subject to debate while the other part is absolutely untrue.


Business Scene; The Case Against Lower Inflation
FOR the first time since the late 1980's, inflation is clearly in decline.
The most popular inflation measure, the Consumer Price Index, has fallen by more than a percentage point, to an annual rate of less than 3 percent, in the first seven months of 1991.
Various other measures also show inflation to be edging down.
And that raises the question, should the Government use its powers to push the inflation rate even lower?
The consensus, for the moment, is no.
Economists offer three main reasons.
First, trying to reduce inflation from its already relatively low level would come at a high cost in more unemployment and recession.
Second, inflation is not a problem as long as prices rise each year by the same predictable percentage.
When the inflation rate jumps around, the uncertainty about what prices will do next is disruptive.
Or, as William Niskanen, chairman of the Cato Institute, put it: "A stable 4 percent inflation rate is better than an unstable zero rate that might soon rise."


Donald C. Platten, Ex-Chairman Of Chemical Bank, Is Dead at 72
Donald C. Platten, chairman and chief executive of Chemical Bank from 1973 to 1984, died on Sunday at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 72 years old and lived in Darien, Conn.
He died of lung cancer, his family said.


A Lawn Fed on Chemicals Switches to an Organic Diet; Growing Demand Creates New Interest in Alternatives
SPURRED by the public's environmental concerns and by consumer demand, the lawn-care industry and researchers are displaying a heightened interest in organic lawn care.
While maintaining that synthetic fertilizers and pesticides are effective and safe when used correctly, the major manufacturers and purveyors of the synthetics are adding organic lawn compounds to their product lines as well.
At the same time, other companies devoted exclusively to organic products are expanding their output.
A visit to any well-equipped neighborhood garden center confirms this.


Sluggish Trading in Dollar; Gold Prices Up Moderately
The dollar closed mixed in listless trading yesterday as investors evaluated events in the Soviet Union.
Gold prices rose modestly.
On the Commodity Exchange in New York, gold closed at $355.20 an ounce, up $1.80 from late Friday.
Republic National Bank quoted a late bid of $355.25 an ounce, up $1.75.


Stocks Decline Slightly in Light Trading
Stock prices held their own yesterday after the strong rise on Friday, with some indexes inching ahead and others off a bit.
Analysts said investors were beginning to focus on domestic issues, particularly on how swift the economic recovery would be and how quickly interest rates might recede.


MORE ON THE SOVIETS
An isolated Gorbachev A6 A post-Communist void A7 The debate over union A8-9 Parts of the whole A10 Reticence abroad A11


U.N. Peacekeepers Tired of Mission in Cyprus
As military operations go, the one played out on the arid plateaus of central Cyprus is less and less military.
Consider the evenings, when the soldiers at Point Bravo are having a quiet beer.
As soon as darkness sets in, the Greek and Turkish troops start up their verbal warfare.
Insults and obscenities are hurled across the sandbags and the buffer zone, right over the heads of the United Nations peacekeeping force.


Sports of The Times; Yankee Chronicles: Sour Grapes
WHOEVER says the Yankees aren't any good obviously hasn't paid attention this season.
The Yankees may not have the best record, or anything close to the best, but they lead the league in whining.
Their position in the whining standings is notable on two fronts: Their climb to the top has been a team effort, beginning in the early days of the season, and they have players among the leaders in all of the whining categories:
Hitters who hit .200 and whine that they should play every day.


Corrections
An article on Aug. 11 about the use of prescription drugs for purposes not explicitly approved by the Food and Drug Administration referred incompletely in some copies to the practices of Dr.
Larry Norton, a cancer expert at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Insurance companies do not always cover drugs used for purposes not listed on their F.D.A. approved label but such "off label" drug use is legal and widespread, especially in cancer treatment.
Dr.
Norton says he advises patients about drugs that might help them, even if the F.D.A. does not approve that use.


Romania Deceives Itself on the Holocaust
To the Editor:
In the lands of the Holocaust, the ironies of history are multiplying.
In early July, Elie Wiesel, the author, Nobel Peace Prize winner and founding chairman and member of the United States Holocaust Memorial Council, was interrupted while making a Holocaust memorial dedication speech in Iasi, Romania.


SOVIET TURMOIL: Collapse of an Empire; Soviet Politicians Agree the Union Is Dying But There Is No Accord on What's Ahead
By dissolving the crude adhesive of Communist power and knocking the props out from under the central Government, the failed coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev has set this country hurtling into dissolution, with no clear sense of what will arise in its place.
In the corridors of the Soviet Parliament, where politicians from around the country gathered today to debate the aftermath of the three-day putsch, the consensus was that the Soviet Union -- the utopian experiment that became a stagnant empire -- was living through its final days.


Former I.B.M. Official Heads Software Outfit
Larry J. Ford, the executive who has managed I.B.M.'s computer and telephone systems worldwide for three years, resigned last week to become chairman, chief executive and president of Systems Software Associates, a Chicago company that writes software for I.B.M.'s popular AS/400 mid-range computers.
He started at his new post yesterday.
Mr.
Ford replaced Roger E. Covey, the company's founder, who left to pursue an academic career.
Mr.
Covey, 36 years old, remains vice chairman and plans to retain a role in setting strategic direction for the company.
Mr.
Ford was recommended by a company vice president who had worked for him at I.B.M.


The U.S. Wallows in Hypocrisy on Iran; To Head C.I.A.
To the Editor:
President Bush's nomination of Robert M. Gates, the former No. 2 man at the Central Intelligence Agency, to head that agency raises a much broader question than those being discussed: What did Mr.
Gates know about the Iran-contra affair?
When did he know it?
And, even if he didn't, as deputy director, why not?


Yeltsin Warns Seceding Republics About Ethnic Russian Minorities
The Russian federated republic issued a statement today, warning other Soviet republics that it would not let them secede from the union taking areas with heavy Russian populations with them.
The leader of neighboring Kazakhstan then warned that border disputes could touch off a war between republics.
A statement issued in the name of Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian federated republic, said Russia reserved the right to review its borders with any adjacent republic that left the union, and a Yeltsin spokesman said this referred to areas of Kazakhstan and the Ukraine.


Market Place; 'Worthless' Stock Is Recommended
IT is not often that a Wall Street analyst recommends buying a stock that is, in the words of the analyst, "for all intents and purposes, fundamentally worthless." But that is what is happening now with an unusual bank stock.
The stock is First Interstate class A common stock, which zoomed earlier this month when the wave of bank mergers led to speculation about more mergers.
The price of the class A stock began to rise in July, after the announcement of the Chemical Banking merger with Manufacturers Hanover set off talk of other bank combinations, and it zoomed after BankAmerica agreed to take over Security Pacific.
It promptly became conventional wisdom that Wells Fargo, having been rebuffed by Security Pacific, would turn to First Interstate, another big West Coast bank.


The U.S. Wallows in Hypocrisy on Iran
To the Editor:
Steven Emerson's "Don't Appease Iran" (Op-Ed, Aug. 9) has a myopic view of world politics and a contempt for the lives of third world people.
He suggests the West should apply an anti-Iraq style "full-court press" against Iran to stop terrorism throughout the world.


Debate in Parliament: Gorbachev Takes 'an Enormous Share' of the Blame; Legislators Speak Out: 'We Have the Spirit of Reaction in this Assembly'
Following are key sections of the session of the Supreme Soviet yesterday, including a speech by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and speeches by other Supreme Soviet members.
The speech by Nursultan A. Nazarbayev was transcribed and translated by The New York Times and the BBC monitoring service; all others were translated by CNN and transcribed by Reuters.
GORBACHEV'S SPEECH
Distinguished members of the Supreme Soviet: first of all, I would like to support the decision adopted by the Supreme Soviet to convene an emergency session of the Congress of People's Deputies, because the problem itself and everything we have gone through over the last days and the decisions that are necessary are all the prerogatives of the Congress.
And this is the first thing I wanted to say.


Officials Drop Plan to Cut Medicare by $6.9 Billion
Federal health officials said today that they would revise a proposed schedule of Medicare fees to restore $6.9 billion that was to have been cut from payments to doctors.
The changes come in response to political pressure from Congress and a torrent of complaints about the cuts from doctors around the country.
The cuts were proposed three months ago by the Bush Administration as part the the fee schedule, which represents a major overhaul of Medicare's reimbursement policy.


Buffett Sets Salomon Rules; Stock Up on Tisch's Buying
Warren E. Buffett, the interim chairman of Salomon Brothers, laid out a set of guidelines yesterday for behavior at the troubled firm.
His message: Losses will be tolerated; anything that damages the reputation of the firm will not.
At the same time, Salomon's stock rallied more than $2 on reports that Laurence A. Tisch, the chairman of the Loews Corporation and CBS Inc., had bought a big block of the firm's stock last week.
Traders involved in the purchase confirmed the reports yesterday.
But it could not be determined how many shares Mr.
Tisch bought.


Giants Snip Their Way to an Unusual Lineup
The Giants got down to the 47-man player limit today by waiving 13 players, including Dave Duerson, Mike Perez and Bob Mrosko.
When the Giants were done, they were left with a strange team.
They kept seven rookies, high for a Super Bowl champion.
They kept more players on defense (24) than offense (21), reversing normal numbers.
They kept 10 linebackers, two above normal, and 9 defensive backs, one or two above normal.


Bena F. Mayer, 93, An Artist Lauded For Her Portraits
Bena Frank Mayer, a painter best known for her portraits, died on Thursday at the St.
Luke's division of St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
She was 93 years old and lived in Manhattan.
She died of a heart attack, her lawyer, Martin Bressler, said.


Fads Also Take Court At Flushing Meadows
While fans purchased packs of tennis cards in the book shop, a courtroom stenographer was trying to keep up with the high-speed ramblings of Monica Seles in the interview room.
Michael Stich showed up in black Reebok tennis shoes, hot in every sense of the word.
And out on Court 5, Todd Witsken was putting a different kind of spin on the ball with a special kind of racquet.


Apparatchiks Awaken To Life on the Sidelines
In the upside-down world of Moscow today, where the Communist Party has all but vanished and its once infallible newspaper, Pravda, has been shut down pending an investigation, the executive editor still has a direct phone connecting him to the Kremlin.
"Who do you want to speak with?" the executive editor, Aleksandr V. Chernyak, asked with a touch of wry nostalgia as he waved the receiver from one of the six phones stacked on his side table.
"Gorbachev? Here I'll put you through."


Ayer Executive Denies Europe Buyout Report
Thomas F. Maxey, vice chairman and chief operating officer of Ayer Inc., New York, yesterday denied a report in a trade publication that the managers of the agency's European network are planning a management buyout.
"This idea is just absurd," Mr.
Maxey, who oversees Ayer's international operations, said in a telephone interview.
The report, on the front page of this week's issue of Advertising Age, said the managers wanted to buy back their agencies and form an independent network in a move that would strip Ayer of its European presence.


Grain and Soybeans Rise After Export-Credit Move
Grain and soybeans futures prices surged yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade after President Bush released previously allocated export credits to help the Soviet Union buy grain to get through the winter.
Wheat futures for delivery in September settled 6 1/2 cents higher, at $3.06 a bushel; September corn settled 5 cents higher, at $2.54 1/2 a bushel; September oats were 1/4 cent higher, at $1.26 1/4 a bushel; September soybeans were 15 cents higher, at $5.82 3/4 a bushel.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article on Sunday about the history of the Soviet Communist Party included scrambled paragraphs in some copies.
The affected passage should read:
"The party was a place of intrigue, doctrinal squabbles and, for more than two bloody decades under the leadership of Stalin, of imprisonment and murder that cost the lives of millions of Soviet citizens. Among them were most of the party's founding fathers.
"Over the years, Communism was a faith that rose high and died hard. In 1956, Nikita S. Khrushchev, then the leader of the Soviet Communist Party -- a job synonymous with national leadership until two years ago, when the office of Soviet President was created -- declared that in the struggle between capitalism and Communism, 'we will bury you.' "


Fast Start: Questions Linger
The question of Dennis Mitchell's start in the men's 100-meter final Sunday night lingered today, as an official of the International Amateur Athletic Federation acknowledged that the official starter for the race had not been wearing an earpiece.
An electronic apparatus beeps through the earpiece if any runner leaves the starting blocks faster than .100 of a second after the gun.
That time, selected after scientific study, indicates that the runner probably left too soon, a false start.
The starter has the option of consulting a computer readout of the reaction times.


Sidney Cohn, 83, Aide To Union Organizers
Sidney E. Cohn, a lawyer whose half-century-long career included a key role in helping workers in New York City organize and join unions, died on Sunday at his Manhattan home.
He was 83 years old.
He died of heart disease, his stepson, David Garfield of Los Angeles said.


NEWS SUMMARY
Soviet Turmoil A6-11
President Gorbachev called for unity in an attempt to keep the Soviet Union together, but he was all but drowned out by accelerated demands for independence from most of the nation's 15 republics.
Page A1


Ever Unabashed, Stein Emerges Again
To his best friend, Shirley MacLaine, he is an accomplished and caring composite of Don Quixote, Peter Pan, the Lone Ranger, Charlie Brown, Bart Simpson, E. T. and all of the seven dwarfs except for one: Bashful.
To a political foe, Dennis Rivera, the labor leader, he is simply a "farce."
Andrew Stein chooses one word to describe himself: politician.
"That's what I do professionally," Mr.
Stein said.
"I never did anything else." Courting the Parties
Nearly a quarter-century after he brashly plunged into politics as a candidate for the State Assembly, the 46-year-old New York City Council President is emerging as the leading Democratic challenger to Mayor David N. Dinkins.
Mr.
Stein is so much the politician that he is also the prime contender for the Liberal Party's endorsement.
He is courting the Republican and Conservative parties, too.
Last month, a poll showed him beating Mr.
Dinkins.


Coast Experts Debate Tide Gauges' Findings
IN most of the world, the ocean is relentlessly moving in on the land.
The question is, Is the rise evidence of global warming or is it just the result of local conditions?
Until more sophisticated satellite measurements and other data are available, scientists trying to answer the question rely on tide gauges, modern versions of ancient instruments that measure water levels.
In some harbors, tide gauge records go back almost 400 years, and many scientists say they believe they show a trend of rising sea levels.


On My Mind; Fear of Victory
As we watch the Soviet empire predictably disintegrate and Mikhail Gorbachev predictably fade into history, two pesky questions just will not go away:
How does Bush-Baker foreign policy manage to be so wrong so often?
How do they get away with it?


Verbal Scores Hit New Low In Scholastic Aptitude Tests
The verbal scores of 1991 college-bound high school seniors on the Scholastic Aptitude Test declined to an all-time low and mathematics scores fell for the first time since 1980.
The College Board, which released the S.A.T. results today, cited what it called a "disturbing pattern of educational disparity" between top-performing students who were accepted by selective colleges and the general student population.
Some educators said they worried that the decline in the general S.A.T results might indicate that a fall was continuing in the quality of primary and secondary education that first caused alarm more than a decade ago.
Although some educators disagreed, the officials said they viewed the scores as a sign that 10 years after warnings were sounded in the benchmark study, "A Nation at Risk," the country's schools are experiencing continued problems resulting from a general decline in academic quality and study habits at the secondary level.
Call for 'Drastic Measures'
"The declines in the averages for all students this year are a further sign that we must take drastic measures if we are to meet the educational goals set by President Bush and the nation's governors," said Donald T. Stewart, president of the College Board.
Even though college attendance is at a high, Mr.
Stewart said, the decline in scores for the college-bound, particularly those for the verbal portion of the test, is "disturbing."
Despite the heightened concern expressed by College Board officials about what the decline might mean, some educators said they saw in the decline, of four points in the combined average scores and two points in the score for each component, an indication that the universe of S.A.T. takers had become more democratic, with a wider variety of students taking the test.
"If one year you have the top 10 percent of performers taking the S.A.T. and you have one score, and the next year you have the top 20 percent and the scores fall only a few points, then you're looking at a great victory because you have a whole lot more kids taking the test and hardly a change in score," said Marc Tucker, president of the National Center on Education and the Economy, a non-profit policy and analysis organization based in Rochester.
Other educators added that the change in this year's scores are not statistically worrisome.
"That two-point drop is not a drop in my eyes," said Marvin Sontag, associate professor of psychology and education at Columbia Teacher's College.
"It's such an infinitessimal amount as to not be worth commenting on."
The S.A.T, a two-and-a-half-hour, multiple-choice test, is taken by high school students, most of whom plan to attend college, and measures verbal and mathematical reasoning ability.
The highest possible combined score on the S.A.T.'s verbal and mathematics components is 1,600 and the combined minimum is 400.
The national average score this year was 896, compared with 900 in 1990.
On average, students scored 422 on the test's verbal section, down two points from 1990, and they scored 474 on the math section, down from 476 last year.
Breakdown in Scores
Average scores among women dropped one point in the verbal portion and two points in the math section.
For men, the average verbal score fell three points and the average math score dropped two points.
This year, 100,209 black students took the SAT -- more than ever.
The average score for black students in 1991 was 351 on the verbal section and 385 on the mathematics section.
Test scores for blacks were in the same neighborhood as last year's.
The performance of ethnic minority students, whose scores have shown substantial gains since they were first reported in 1976, showed mixed results in 1991.
Only Puerto Rican and Asian American students' scores showed increases in both verbal and math sections in 1991.
Among the possible explanations offered by some educators for the decline is a change in the demographic makeup of the group taking the test.
The group now includes more minorities, women and non-English speakers.
Others point out that in recessions, young people stay in school longer, meaning a larger pool of students are taking the tests, including those who would not ordinarily be attending college.
Still others, including several College Board officials, attributed the decline to less rigorous academic standards, less time spent reading at home and in school, too much television and too many videos.
Mr.
Stewart agreed, saying demographic changes alone could not explain the drop in test scores, because there is an effect also of what people are being taught, he said.
Generally, the students competing for the colleges with the toughest entrance standards take the S.A.T. and special subject-specific Achievement Tests, as compared with many students who take only the S.A.T.
Specter of a Division
He noted that students who took the board's subject-specific achievement tests, required by the nation's most selective colleges, scored an average of nearly 100 points higher on each part of the S.A.T. test than did the others taking the same portions.
These students, who represent about 20 percent of all those who take the S.A.T. nationally, have average S.A.T. scores of 515 on the verbal portion and 584 on the mathematics portion.
This group has continued to score substantially higher, on average, than the national mean since the agency began calculating the mean in 1976.
"If this kind of dichotomy continues, we could evolve into a nation divided between a small class of educational elite and an underclass of students academically ill-prepared for the demands of college or the workplace," said Mr.
Stewart.
He noted that among S.A.T takers, 65 percent had four or more years of math, 55 percent had enrolled in a trigonometry course and 44 percent had taken physics -- with lower percentages for nearly all ethnic minority students.
Mr.
Tucker conceded that if the best students take the achievement tests, it is not surprising that they also outscore students who only take the S.A.T.
Top-scoring students, particularly those who take the subject-specific Achievement Tests, tend to be the most advantaged, he said.
"Disproportionately, they tend to go to the best high schools and the best high schools are disproportionately where the real estate prices are highest," he said.
"That essentially means that the people who are able to go to those school districts have the highest incomes."
Instead, the drop may reflect the greater proportion of high school students taking the test, said Mr.
Tucker.
This year 1,032,685 students took the test, an increase of 7,162 over 1990.
With more students taking the test, he said, the decline "is not necessarily a downward trend."
He also emphasized that the S.A.T. test does not measure intelligence or the ability to learn.
"If the S.A.T. is measuring intelligence, then we should be extremely alarmed by falling scores because that would mean that American kids are being born less intelligent," he said.
"The real issue is whether our kids know what they need to know and are they able to do what they need to do to do college level work. The S.A.T. doesn't tell you that."
Ramsey Selden, director of the state education assessment center for the Chief State School Officers, said another problem with extrapolating overall educational trends from the S.A.T. tests was that they do not test representative samples of students.
For example, while Iowa reported the highest average scores, with a verbal score of 515 and a score of 578 in mathematics, only 5 percent of its graduates took the test.
South Carolina reported the lowest averages, with verbal scores of 395 and scores of 437 in mathematics, but 58 percent of its high school seniors took the test.


Mothers Dying of AIDS Get Child Custody Help
When she learned a year ago that she had the AIDS virus, 24-year-old Maria M. said her greatest fear was not the prospect of death, but what would happen to her four children.
"When I die, I want my mother and father to raise my children," she said.
"They have agreed, but how do I know my wishes will be followed?"


The Day's Highlights
Deeper Into Disintegration
Political Dissolution Proceeds: President Gorbachev appealed to his country to keep the Soviet Union together but was drowned out by accelerating calls for independence from most of the republics.
Page A1.
What Happens Next?: By dissolving the crude adhesive of Communist power, the failed coup set the Soviet Union hurtling into dissolution, with no clear sense of what will arise in its place.
News analysis, page A1.
Latvia Acts Independently: Latvia, acting as if independence were already fully acquired, is busily dismantling the structures and symbols of Soviet power in its capital and meeting no visible resistance.
Page A1.
Gorbachev as Tragic Hero: The irresistible image at the heart of the tempest is that of President Gorbachev, a leader whose will and arrogance lifted his vast nation out of thrall but who now stands alone and vilified.
News analysis, page A6.
Vestiges of the Old Order Crumble
Pravda Loses Infallibility: At Pravda and thousands of other old-line institutions across the Soviet Union, it is clear that life will never be the same again.
Page A7.
Border Disputes Loom: The Russian republic issued a statement warning other Soviet republics that it would not let them secede from the union taking areas with heavy Russian populations with them.
The leader of neighboring Kazakhstan then warned that border disputes could touch off a war between republics.
Page A7.
The World Adjusts Its Sights
Bush Hesitates on Baltics: Despite mounting pressure to take the lead in the West's response to the Soviet upheaval, President Bush held to his caution and said he was still not ready to grant full recognition to the Baltic republics.
Page A1.
U.S.
Ad Agencies Expect Vast Market: With the Soviet Union taking a sudden leap toward free markets, American advertising agencies already operating there are planning to expand, while others are now considering opening offices.
Business Day, page D19.
Japanese Premier Under Fire: In an echo of the criticism over Japan's tentative role in the Persian Gulf war, Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu has come under fire for what is widely perceived as his slowness in supporting democracy in the Soviet Union.
Page A11.
Grain Futures Prices Rise: Grain and soybeans futures prices surged on the Chicago Board of Trade after President Bush released previously allocated export credits to help the Soviet Union buy grain to get through the winter.
Business Day, page D17.


Cannibal Stars Find a Fountain of Youth
CERTAIN aging stars of the cosmic kind have made a discovery that would be the envy of Hollywood.
They have hit upon a veritable fountain of youth and manage to shine with a radiance belying their years.
For almost four decades, these stars have enchanted their most devoted fans, astronomers, by appearing hotter and brighter than they should be, considering some are not a day under 15 billion years old.
In the usual cycle of stars, they should have cooled off long ago and, like their neighboring contemporaries, settled into a quiescent old age as red giants.
Yet they masquerade as hot young blue stars much less than half their actual age.


Pain and Learning May Be Close Cousins In Chain of Evolution
AS the school year draws nigh, students who loathe the thought of confronting organic chemistry and the unabridged work of Thucydides may not be surprised to hear that learning and pain could have a common evolutionary origin.
Scientists studying the nervous system of a slimy marine mollusk have found that the snail's nerve cells display the same physical changes when they are injured as they do after the creature has learned a new behavior.


U.N. Optimistic on Hostage Release
The United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, said today that "we are moving at a good pace," after discussing the hostage issue with his chief trouble-shooter who returned from a visit to Israel.
"I continue my hope that something very important will happen in seeing all the detainees set free," Mr.
Perez de Cuellar said after his consulatations with Giandomenico Picco, his personal representative on the hostage crisis.
"When, I cannot say, but things are moving and moving at a good pace."


BUSINESS DIGEST
INTERNATIONAL
A group led by Mexico's top securities executive paid the Government $2.3 billion for a controlling share of Banco Nacional de Mexico, the nation's biggest bank.
The move was a strong show of confidence in the Mexican economy and surprised even optimistic Government officials.  [ Page D1. ]
Argentines and international bankers are hoping that an economic turnaround has arrived after more than two years of recession, repeated bouts of hyperinflation and isolation from the world financial community.  [ D1. ] COMPANIES
A Pentagon study concluding that McDonnell Douglas's cost overruns on the Air Force's C-17 transport plane program could be far higher than previously believed raised new concerns that the company could be exposed to potentially crippling losses.
McDonnell officials strongly disputed the Pentagon's estimates.  [ D1. ]


Niven Busch, 88, the Novelist of 'Duel in the Sun'
Niven Busch, a screenwriter and novelist best known for his novel "Duel in the Sun," which David O. Selznick made into a classic western film in 1947, died at his home on Sunday.
He was 88 years old and lived in San Francisco.
He died of heart failure, said his son Jerry.


Farthest Quasar Found
USING the 200-inch telescope at Mount Palomar, Calif., astronomers have discovered an object more distant from Earth than any seen before.
It is some 12 billion light-years away.
The faint object found by the group is a quasar, designated PC 1247+3406 -- a relatively small object that blazes with a brightness comparable to that of hundreds of galaxies.
Because of the immense distance its light had to cover before reaching Earth, astronomers are seeing the quasar as it was some 12 billion years ago, when the universe was very young. (The age of the universe is generally estimated as between 10 billion and 20 billion years.)


Beijing Journal; A Rotund Shape No Longer Means Good Fortune
In this country of skin and bones, Li Yadong is still something of a phenomenon, but the 290-pound, 16-year-old boy is just one of a growing number of children in China who are struggling to shed unwanted extra pounds.
"The biggest problem is that I can't find clothes anywhere," Yadong said, adding that his sister makes his clothes.


Fox Studio Said to Get $80 Million From Swiss
A Swiss insurance company has agreed to invest $80 million in eight future films to be produced by the 20th Century Fox Film Corporation, the movie company, according to several executives close to the negotiations.
A Fox executive declined to comment yesterday, but several movie industry executives said the agreement was signed last week.
They added that the Swiss company, which was not identified, would have a one-third interest in each film.


Bridge
An unusual number of foreign experts attended the American Contract Bridge League's Summer Nationals in Las Vegas earlier this month.
They came from England, Scotland, Sweden, Germany, India, Australia, New Zealand and the small island of Mauritius in the Indian Ocean.
This last was represented by Robert D'Unienville, who came the farthest and was the last to depart these shores, leaving yesterday from New York City.
On the diagramed deal from the Life Master Pair Championship in Las Vegas he held the South cards and arrived in the right contract of six clubs.
He knew from North's bidding, marking him with a singleton heart, that the hands would fit perfectly.


Bargains for Business
A SMALL business doesn't have to spend a small fortune on software.
Here are two helpful programs that cost less than $100, one of them far less.
MyBusinessCheckbook is a versatile expense-tracking, check-writing and printing program aimed at the small business or home office with an MS-DOS system, although anyone who writes a lot of checks can benefit from it.
It can handle multiple accounts and businesses and give up to 15 different reports on things like cash flow trends and expenses in various categories.
It works from the keyboard or with a mouse and can use Lotus 1-2-3 worksheets.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.56
5.32
8.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.40
5.38
7.49
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.47
5.46
7.48
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.73
7.68
8.75
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.14
8.12
8.99
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.15
9.10
10.00
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.99
6.98
7.70
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Image Isn't Everything: Krickstein Upsets Agassi
Andre Agassi went down in a streak of cerise, buried his face in a towel, and then watched in stunned silence as his challenger, Aaron Krickstein, paraded across the court in the posture immortalized by Rocky Balboa.
As traumatized after the match as he'd been flustered during it, Agassi, last year's finalist and one of this year's favorites, had no answers to his unseeded opponent's defiant behavior.
"He had a lot more to do with what happened than I did," said the eighth-seeded Agassi, for whom Krickstein turned from a stepping-stone to a stumbling block in the span of 1 hour 52 minutes during the most startling of the first-round matches at the United States Open.


Baltics' Allies Find Backing In Congress
The Baltic lobby and its allies in Congress kept pressing the Bush Administration today for full diplomatic relations with Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, sensing that this emblem of the independence they had long sought was almost at hand.
Recognition, they said, would help them realize other key goals, foreign aid and favorable trade status.
Each of those issues has been complicated until now by the Baltic supporters' unwillingness to see those benefits pass through Moscow.
If Moscow and Washington acknowledge independence, that irritant would disappear.


Minor Lee Rogers, 61, Professor of Theology
Minor Lee Rogers, a specialist in Japanese Buddhism and a professor of religion at Washington &amp; Lee University, died Sunday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 61 years old and lived in Lexington, Va.
His son, Dr.
John D. Rogers, said he died of complications from metastatic cancer diagnosed six weeks ago.
The British-born Dr.
Rogers graduated from Virginia Military Institute and was ordained an Episcopal priest after serving as a lieutenant in an American Army armored unit in the Korean War.
He spent several years as a missionary in Kyushu, Japan, in the early 1960's.


Eva Bertrand Adams, 80, Chief Of U.S. Mint for Most of 1960's
Eva Bertrand Adams, a gold miner's daughter who presided over the United States Mint for eight years, died Friday at a hospital in Reno.
Miss Adams was 80 years old and lived in Reno.
The funeral home said she died of natural causes.


Barney Pressman, Retailing Legend, Is Dead at 96
Barney Pressman, the legendary haberdasher whose savvy promotions and eye for fashion trends transformed a cut-rate men's clothing store into an emporium of expensive exotica, died on Saturday at St.
Francis Hospital in Miami.
He was 96 years old.
One of seven siblings growing up on Elizabeth Street on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, Mr.
Pressman started pressing pants for 3 cents a pair in his father's clothing store and parlayed his skills into a business that is expected to sell almost $200 million of apparel this year.


Cleaner Air, by Consensus
The biggest question left by the Clean Air Act of 1990 -- President Bush's grandest legislative achievement so far -- was whether its promise would be thwarted by bureaucratic infighting, regulatory paralysis and endless litigation.
That's been the sad fate of other ambitious laws, including the original Clean Air Act of 1970.
Although the jury is still out on the new act, legislators already complain that the President's Council on Competitiveness, headed by Vice President Quayle, is becoming a haven for businesses seeking to avoid costly investment in anti-pollution equipment.
In one case, the council pressured the Environmental Protection Agency to ease regulations on old coal-fired power plants.


Compaq Begins Review; Incumbent Is Included
he Compaq Computer Corporation has started a review on its estimated $35 million North American advertising account, which has been handled by Ogilvy &amp; Mather, Houston, since the company started manufacturing computers in 1982.
A spokeswoman for the Houston-based company said yesterday that Ogilvy, which is included in the review, would continue handling most of Compaq's advertising abroad.
But Compaq "would prefer a single agency" to handle all of its advertising, she added; the total budget exceeds $60 million.


A Silent Budget Victim: New York's Dying Trees; How to Make A Greener City
New York City can only afford to plant about 4,300 trees this year, but those wanting one on their streets should contact the local community board and ask to be put on their tree planting list.
Community boards submit these lists twice a year, in spring and fall.
The fall planting season runs from Oct. 15 to Dec. 1.
The following community board coordinators can identify a local board: Bronx (212) 566- 7938; Brooklyn (718) 566-1644; Manhattan (212) 566-8951; Queens (718) 566-3600; Staten Island (718) 566-7352.


Patterns
116 Pages of Calvin Klein
In a sign that the recession may be lifting on Seventh Avenue, Calvin Klein has taken 116 pages of advertising space in a single issue of Vanity Fair magazine.
The whopping advertising package, to appear in a separately bound supplement in October, is the largest industry executives could remember.
In the 1970's Revlon bought 100 pages of advertising in Harper's Bazaar, to celebrate that magazine's 100th anniversary.


Chess
Max Euwe, in his critical commentary on his victorious 1935 match for the world championship against Alexander Alekhine in his native Netherlands, said, "In one quality I believe I was deficient: the ability to distinguish with certainty that infinitesimal dividing line between the inspired and the unsound."
We can all sympathize because the solution to that problem is never easy when facing gifted, aggressive opponents.
And the opponents must not be presumed to be charlatans; they may not be at all sure whether their ambitious strategy will prove ultimately correct or a will-o'-the-wisp.
They are striving on the outer edge of intuition and analysis, and to defeat them requires that you follow them out to the same edge and best them there.


Big Bank Stake Sold By Mexico
In a remarkable show of confidence in the Mexican economy, a group led by the country's pre-eminent securities executive today paid the Government $2.3 billion for a controlling 50.7 percent share of its biggest bank.
Roberto Hernandez, president of Mexico's leading brokerage, surprised the Government by bidding not only for the 31 percent of the Banco Nacional de Mexico that it had put up for auction but also for 19.7 percent that was not supposed to become available until later.


Review/Music; Celebrating Mendelssohn in Large and Small Ways
There were times, during Claire Bloom's highly charged reading of an adaptation of Sophocles' "Antigone" at Bard College here on Saturday night, when the orchestra arrayed behind her seemed superfluous.
The Greek tragedy tells of the ruler Creon forbidding the burial of a traitor, and of Antigone's defiance of his order as she proclaims a higher law.
Even though the playwright's words were pruned and supplemented by Bernard Jacobson's narration, the drama was still so coherent in its conflicts, so musical in its passionate unfolding and so balanced about its own allegiances that music might have been a distraction.


How the Soviet Union Was Formed


Saberhagen Pitches No-Hitter As Royals Defeat White Sox
Bret Saberhagen threw his first career no-hitter tonight in the Kansas City Royals' 7-0 victory over the Chicago White Sox.
"This is terrific, but there will never be anything better than the World Series," said Saberhagen (10-6), who struck out five and walked two.
"The World Series thing was an individual award, but this is a team game."


Our Towns
Thelma Williams stood at a microphone, staring down homeowners who had come to the Housing Authority to oppose a plan to scatter public housing across New Haven.
The agency hopes to do this by buying individual houses and condominiums and renting them.
Mrs.
Williams, who lives in the authority's Brookside Avenue apartments, was sure of one thing: "A certain stigma has been laid upon public-housing tenants as a whole."


Faster Recharge Time For Nissan Electric Car
The Nissan Motor Corporation said today that it had developed an electric car that can be fully recharged in 15 minutes, a significant improvement over electric car batteries announced to date.
But industry experts say the Japanese auto maker's latest entry in the race to develop electric cars faces numerous technical hurdles before the battery in the vehicle can be sold widely.


Apparatchiks Awaken To Life on the Sidelines
In the upside-down world of Moscow today, where the Communist Party has all but vanished and its once infallible newspaper, Pravda, has been shut down pending an investigation, the executive editor still has a direct phone connecting him to the Kremlin.
"Who do you want to speak with?" the executive editor, Aleksandr V. Chernyak, asked with a touch of wry nostalgia as he waved the receiver from one of the six phones stacked on his side table.
"Gorbachev? Here I'll put you through."


Household Finance Prices $789 Million in Securities
A $789 million offering of asset-backed securities by the Household Finance Corporation was priced yesterday through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The four-part sale consists of asset-backed certificates secured by home-equity loans.
Three parts of the financing are floating-rate issues and the other is a fixed-rate issue.
Each issue has two average lives for each portion, based on certain conditions.


New Troubles Seen At Newmark &amp; Lewis
Newmark &amp; Lewis Inc. closed all its stores on Sunday to take inventory, an unusual midyear move that led to questions about the future of the troubled consumer electronics retailer.
The company is in the midst of renegotiating its bank loans, and analysts and competitors said the Sunday inventory was most likely conducted at the request of Newmark's banks.


A Silent Budget Victim: New York's Dying Trees
There's a pit on 42d Street, right by the north entrance to the New York Public Library, that looks like the giant footprint of a prehistoric animal.
In it is the cracked cork-like remains of a tree that once cooled the passers-by and helped purify the air they breathed.
Now it looks like a fossil from another time.
Indeed, only one tree still lives on this stretch of sidewalk between Fifth and Sixth Avenues.
It's a bedraggled London plane, with a huge scar running up its trunk, the mark of repeated batterings by trucks and cars.
08-27-91


Amstar Planning To Change Name
The company that sells Domino sugar has decided to rename itself after the well-known brand.
The Amstar Sugar Corporation said it is changing its name to the Domino Sugar Corporation because it wanted to better reflect its core business.
The change takes effect on Sept. 20.


Vital Signs Quickening In Argentina
To some it is "euphoria"; to others it is "the little rush of late." And it may not last.
But Argentines and international bankers here are hoping that an economic turnaround has arrived after more than two years of recession, repeated bouts of hyperinflation and isolation from the world financial community.
At the beginning of this month, the average daily trading volume on the Buenos Aires Stock Exchange was a paltry $5 million.
On Friday it soared to $115 million, and the value of stocks has doubled in the same period.


Many Exit Emergency Room Before Getting Needed Care
Overcrowding of emergency rooms has become so severe that substantial numbers of seriously ill people are simply giving up and leaving before they are seen by a doctor, new studies have found.
The studies found that the most seriously ill patients, those with heart attacks, for example, were almost always seen immediately.
For the rest, many with serious conditions, the wait ranged from 15 minutes to 17 hours.
Of the patients in this category, those who left the hospital before being treated were, as a group, just as sick as those who remained.


Lively Computer Creation Blurs Definition of Life; Quest to Mimic Life Began in 1940's
ARTIFICIAL computer "life" originated in cellular automata, inventions dating from the dawn of the computer age in the 1940's.
A cellular automaton is a mathematical entity, typically any one of the squares or hexagons that can be arranged in a regular grid on a computer screen.
All the cellular automata on a screen (or in an abstract mathematical framework) must follow the same simple rules as they interact in a continuous series of steps.
The complex interactions of these mathematical units often mimic real-life situations.


FINANCE/NEW ISSUES;
Illinois yesterday priced a $185 million short-term tax-exempt note issue through competitive bidding won by the First Boston Corporation.
The underwriters said the notes, scheduled to mature on June 15, 1992, were a general obligation of the state and had an interest rate of 5.25 percent.
They are being offered to the public at a price to yield 4.6 percent.


Seles's Bigger Off-Court Opponents
Monica Seles did five minutes' worth of scouting on her first-round opponent at the United States Open, then dispatched Nicole Arendt in less than an hour.
Her return to Grand Slam tennis had been a quick, painless success, 6-2, 6-0, on the Stadium Court yesterday.
This left plenty of time, once again, to take on the world.


Ailing Joyner-Kersee Pulls Out After Riding High in Heptathlon
On a day that the Soviet Union extended its lead in the medal count at the world track and field championships, the United States was staggered by the loss of its top female athlete, Jackie Joyner-Kersee, who was injured and forced to withdraw from the heptathlon, an event she was virtually certain to win.
And that wasn't all.
After months of expectation that Michael Johnson and Leroy Burrell would share the gold and silver medals in the men's 200-meter dash, Burrell ran one of his poorest races in years and failed to advance to the final on Tuesday.
Just the night before he had placed second in the 100-meter final in 9.88 seconds as Carl Lewis set a world record in 9.86.


Observer; Slam Plot Dumbos
I was once involved in a Broadway musical that never got to Broadway on account of folding in Toronto.
It was a humbling experience.
A lot of talented, hard-working dancers and singers who had been anticipating their big break were suddenly thrown out of work through some fault of my own.
A large sum of money may or may not have been lost.
Since theater bookkeeping is one of the most creative arts, it was hard to tell.
Most humbling of all, though, was the discovery that I was the only person in the United States and Canada who didn't know how to write a successful Broadway musical.
The newspaper reviewers were amazed at my ignorance, and had a delightful time telling the world about it.


Treasuries Fall in Light Trading
Prices of Treasury securities fell in light trading yesterday, as the fallout from Friday's strong report on July durable goods orders continued to reverberate through the market.
With new two-year and five-year notes to be auctioned today and tomorrow, much of the selling was in shorter-term maturities.
Given the steep rise in yields on those issues over the last few days, traders said that demand for the new issues should be good.


Quotation of the Day
"The center is dead. The center has committed suicide." -- Levon Ter Petrosyan, President of Armenia, in the Supreme Soviet.  [ A1:6. ]


Two Detectives' Daughter, 3, Is Shot at Home
The 3-year-old daughter of two New York City detectives was shot in the head on Sunday when one detective tried to shoot the other during an argument at their home in Queens and hit the child, the police said yesterday.
A bullet entered the back of the girl's head and exited near her chin, the police said.
She was in serious condition at New York Hospital yesterday.


Raytheon Is Seeking Account Consolidation
The Raytheon Company, Lexington, Mass., which this month put its $10 million advertising account into review, is expected to name the finalist agencies by early next month, industry executives say.
As part of the review, the executives said, Raytheon, which makes the Patriot missiles used in the Persian Gulf war, contacted 20 agencies, including Della Femina, McNamee, New York, which handles the bulk of the company's account.
Raytheon, whose advertising is now handled by more than a dozen agencies, is seeking to consolidate with one agency.


BRIEFS
*
ABB Kraftwerke A.G., a German unit of Asea Brown Boveri A.G., the Swiss-Swedish engineering concern, will cut 450 jobs from its work force of 3,600 by the end of 1992. *
Chippewa Resources Corp., Denver, an oil and gas company, has completed the acquisition of 71.9 percent of the outstanding equity of Amber Resources Co., Denver, an oil and gas company, plus certain offshore-California oil and gas interests, for about $2.2 million in convertible notes plus 1,100 shares of Chippewa's series B preferred stock.


Corrections
Articles on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday about a traffic accident in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, in which a 7-year-old child was killed included an incorrect spelling of the driver's name supplied by the police.
He is Yosef Lifsh.


52 Companies Banned From School Construction Bids
In an unorthodox effort to deter corruption and build schools more efficiently, the agency in charge of New York City's $3.6 billion school construction program has banned 52 companies from bidding for its contracts.
The agency, the School Construction Authority, said it had eliminated the companies for a variety of reasons, from associations with organized-crime figures to questions about their financial stability.


Yes, It Helps Us, Too
Whatever the merits or demerits of "aid" to the Soviet Union or its various splintering republics, the argument that we cannot afford it is nonsense.
Can our Iowa farmers not afford to sell grain?
Can Detroit not afford to supply trucks to ease transportation bottlenecks?
Can the Baby Bells or A.T.&amp; T. not afford to get telecommunications functioning in what was the Soviet empire so that businesses there and here, as well as ordinary citizens, can communicate with one another?
Is our computer industry so overwhelmed with orders at home that it cannot help usher Russia and the other republics into the computer age?
Is our pharmaceutical industry so lacking in capacity that it cannot provide vital medicines?
Would our food conglomerates or families suffer if some baby foods fill empty shelves in Leningrad, Minsk or Kiev?


Mets Down Astros, But Casualties Mount
Any drama of where the Mets would finish the 1991 season died long ago.
It has become an increasingly interesting question, however, as to whether the Mets will finish the season.
The Mets, losing players almost at the rate at which they have lost games of late, tonight lost left-fielder Kevin McReynolds for at least a week when he badly sprained his left ankle in what wound up as a 6-4, 10-inning victory over the Astros.


New Atlantic Group Vice Chairman
Melvyn R. Lewinter, chief financial officer of the Atlantic Group, one of the record labels in Time Warner's record division, has been named to the additional post of vice chairman.
Atlantic is the second largest of Time Warner's record groups, after Warner Records.
Within Atlantic are several separate record operations -- Atlantic Records, ATCO Records, EastWest Records America -- as well as the video operation A-Vision Entertainment and various subsidiary labels.


Accounts
*
New Retail Concepts, New York, maker of No Excuses apparel, to Follis DeVito Verdi, New York, for its advertising account.
Billings on the account, most recently at Lois/GGK, New York, were not disclosed.
A new print and television campaign begins running early next month in which the tennis player Monica Seles succeeds Marla Maples as the featured spokeswoman. *
Southwestern Bell Messaging Services Inc., a subsidiary of Southwestern Bell Corp., to D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, St.
Louis, for its new home voice-mail system, Call Notes Voice Message Service.
Billings were not disclosed.


Pretoria Drafts Charter Based on Universal Vote
Previewing its negotiating stance on South Africa's future, the governing National Party has drafted the outlines of a new constitution that would replace the existing presidency held by F. W. de Klerk with an executive council of three to five members and would mandate elections held on the basis of one person, one vote.
The plan offers the most detailed look yet at what the Government is likely to put on the table at a conference of political parties expected later this year.
Some points have been mentioned previously; others, like the proposed elimination of the Presidency, are a surprise.


From Chance Matchmaker, True Fit
The three telephone lines ring constantly in Pat Bergman's kosher kitchen, where she has unexpectedly set up shop as the shadchen of Silicon Valley.
This is an unlikely place for an Orthodox Jewish matchmaker.
It's a bland suburban landscape where gefilte fish is hard to find and Mrs.
Bergman's tiny synagogue, Congregation Am Echad, is the only one for miles around.


Attacks on Croatia Called Worst of War
Yugoslav Army and rebel Serb forces pounded Croatian towns with artillery, mortar and air bombardments for hours today in the Yugoslav civil war's heaviest fighting to date, according to local news reports.
Clashes centered on Vukovar and Kijevo and also reportedly broke out near Vrlik, Sinj, Krusevo, Ilok and Osijek and at least a dozen other towns.
Reports speak of dozens killed in today's fighting, but exact casualty figures are unavailable and may not be known for days.


Legislative Leader Quits, Denying Charges
The Soviet Parliament Speaker, Anatoly I. Lukyanov, resigned today amid charges that he was the chief ideologist behind the coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.
Mr.
Lukyanov told reporters before a special session of the Parliament called to discuss the failed coup that he had quit, but that he rejected charges he was involved in the revolt.


CHRONICLE
GERTRUDE BELLE ELION, a winner of the 1988 Nobel Prize for medicine, was named yesterday to the Women's Hall of Fame in Seneca Falls, N.Y., where the first women's rights conference in the United States was held in July 1848.
EMILIE SISSONS, director of the Hall of Fame, said the announcement was made yesterday to commemorate the 71st anniversary of women winning the right to vote.


Un-Soviet Unions?
Americans, devoted to political self-determination, can only cheer the disintegration of the Soviet Union, a whole maintained by force and terror over the parts.
Yet they must also feel alarmed by the destructive forces unleashed by disintegration.
Disunion: which is it, good or bad?
It's merely an abstract question; there's no point bemoaning a trend that is unstoppable anyway.
But disunion need not mean chaos.
Once the proud, impatient republics assert themselves, the parts still have compelling reasons for recombining in one or more new wholes.
These new,
un
-Soviet unions could serve the republics' interests rather than that of a totalitarian empire.


Yanks' Kleinman to See Mattingly
Leonard Kleinman, the Yankees' executive vice president, has scheduled a meeting with Don Mattingly this week to discuss the state of the club and the comments the team's captain made soon after he was told to get a haircut 12 days ago.
Since Mattingly revealed then that he had asked the Yankees to consider trading him, Kleinman might talk to him about remaining in New York.
Mattingly was unsure if he would reiterate his plea for a trade or if Kleinman would broach the topic.


Two Arrested in Killing Of Transit Clerk in July
Two suspects were arrested yesterday and charged with the July 8 slaying of a token-booth clerk in a subway station in Harlem, the police said.
The victim, Richard A. Daily, 35 years old, was shot to death during a robbery in the station at 145th Street and Lenox Avenue.
He was killed at 5 A.M. as he was reporting to work.


Bitterness Pervades Funeral For Crown Heights Boy, 7
Grief and politics clasped hands yesterday in the small Baptist church in Crown Heights where hundreds of people said farewell to Gavin Ossie Cato.
The 7-year-old black boy from Guyana, whose death after being hit by a car driven by a Hasidic Jew inspired the worst racial turmoil in New York City in years, was remembered at a funeral and somber march through Brooklyn.
The gathering across lines of generation and class recalled the passion of the 1960's, when blacks congregated en masse to express their grievances.


Agencies Speed Up Plans To Expand in Soviet Market
THE collapse of Communism in the Soviet Union will bring a significant increase in the presence of United States advertising agencies there, industry executives said yesterday.
Agencies already operating in the Soviet Union are looking to expand, while others are now considering opening offices.
Many of the largest United States shops have had Soviet operations since the late 1980's, when President Mikhail S. Gorbachev touched off experimentation with capitalism.
But last week's stunning, rapid-fire sequence of events, which culminated with the rout of the Communist Party, could inspire companies to accelerate their plans.
And where companies go, their agencies follow.


Lively Computer Creation Blurs Definition of Life
A "CREATURE" consisting only of ones and zeros has emerged from its computer womb and caused a scientific sensation: without human guidance it reproduces, undergoes spontaneous genetic changes, passes them on to offspring and evolves new species whose interactions mimic those of real biological evolution and ecology.
The creature, actually a coded set of 80 instructions written in a special "machine language" understood by the operating cores of computers, is the work of Dr.
Thomas S. Ray, a plant biologist at the University of Delaware, who became a computer expert to study the underlying dynamics of life.
The descendants of what Dr.
Ray calls his "ancestor creature" can now evolve on their own, and some have devised clever ways (completely unforeseen by Dr. Ray) to multiply, gain advantage over competitors and stave off extinction.


War Against Parasite
United States officials are planning to use satellite imagery to track and eventually eliminate a parasitic enemy in Central America.
The screwworm, a parasite of warm-blooded animals that at one time caused more than $50 million in damage a year to the Texas cattle industry, is the focus of a joint effort by the Federal Department of Agriculture and space researchers at the University of Texas at Austin.


From Alaska With Love


Bond Panel Gets Chairman
The Public Securities Association, a bond industry trade group, yesterday named William Shaw of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company as chairman of its governments trading practices committee.
Mr.
Shaw replaces Thomas Murphy, who was dismissed last week from his job as a managing director at Salomon Brothers after disclosures that the firm had violated rules at Treasury auctions.


Jet Roster Is Down to Size But Not Necessarily Final
After more than 11 hours of deliberation over the course of the last two days, the Jets trimmed 12 players, and placed left outside linebacker Joe Mott on injured reserve today to get down to the 47-man limit that all National Football League teams much reach by Tuesday.
Mott, who tore a ligament in his left knee during the game against the Washington Redskins on Saturday night, is scheduled for surgery next Tuesday and is out for the season.


Careers; Demand Up In Medical Technology
HOSPITAL industry executives say there are thousands of job openings across the country for technologists in medical imaging and radiation therapy.
"We are desperately in need of people," said Howard W. Schwartz, senior administrative director of radiology at the University of Minnesota Hospital and Clinic in Minneapolis.
The supply of trained people has not kept up with the explosion in the use of medical technology, notably images generated by computerized X-ray scanners, magnetic resonance imaging and ultrasound devices, as well as radiation treatment for cancer patients.


Restaurants With a Message: Hangouts of the 60's Grow Up
THE hanging ferns are dead.
The tables are set with china instead of crockery.
The odds and ends of chipped glassware have been replaced by matching crystal.
Just like Jerry Rubin, the radical-turned-capitalist, the hippie restaurants of the 60's have grown up and gone mainstream.
Woody Allen, who satirized the Los Angeles health-food scene in "Annie Hall," would not be able to order a plate of mashed yeast in the 90's version of the politically correct restaurant.


Woodstock Journal; Making a Public Pleasure Of a Private Playground
Laurance S. and Mary Rockefeller's 531-acre summer retreat is a very private piece of property just north of this village, hidden from the road by a stone wall and a natural screen of trees and hedges.
But if Congress gives the couple their way, that privacy will one day give way to an inquiring public.
Continuing a Rockefeller family tradition of expanding the nation's system of national parks, Mr. and Mrs.
Rockefeller announced earlier this month that they plan to donate their Woodstock estate to the Federal Government as a National Historical Park.
If approved by Congress, it would be the only national park in Vermont.


A Bit of Good News Amid Injury to a Jet
It seems as if it was only a few days ago that the Jets were worried about having too many offensive linemen in camp.
Now they are worried about not having enough because of another changing of the guards.
Even though training camp was closed today and players were off, a collective sigh of some relief could be felt after it was announced that Mike Haight needed only arthroscopic surgery on his right knee, which means the starting left guard will be on injured reserve the minimum four weeks instead of out for the season.
It also means plugging up another hole temporarily.


Topics of The Times; Keeping a Deal With the Doctors
Score one for the doctors' lobby, which appears to have overturned an attempt by the Federal Government to cut $7 billion from payments to physicians for treating Medicare patients.
Even people who believe doctors are overpaid can agree that in this case the doctors are right.
The Federal Government was treating them shabbily.
The fracas started in 1989 after Congress required a fairer fee schedule.
The goal was to increase payments for doctors like family physicians and general practitioners who spend a lot of time examining patients, while decreasing payments for "overvalued" procedures like surgery and diagnostic imaging.
To gain support for the radical change, Congress insisted that the reallocation not be used as a cloak to cut Medicare spending.


For Chinese Artists, Shattered Dreams Despite Freedom
A shocked and solemn crowd consisting mostly of young artists from China had gathered in the narrow, dingy apartment on West 145th Street.
Upstairs, in a friend's home, a young woman was weeping inconsolably.
Between sobs, Duan Haimeng, the widow of a Chinese artist slain near Times Square, managed to say, "I never dreamed that something like this could happen."
On Aug. 18, Ms.
Duan's 34-year-old husband, Lin Lin, was shot dead while drawing a portrait in the wee hours of Sunday morning.
The police said a young man provoked an argument with Mr.
Lin and then shot him through the chest when the artist answered back.
They later arrested James Skinner, 21, of Brooklyn, and charged him with second-degree murder in the killing.
Survival or Freedom?
The incident stunned the subculture of Chinese artists to which Lin Lin belonged.
Many of his artist and painter friends came to the city in recent years to escape the political atmosphere in China, which they believed threatened their artistic development.
And yet several artists said what happened to Lin Lin would be inconceivable in China, where violent street crime is almost nonexistent.


U.P.I. Planning to File for Bankruptcy Protection Today
The chief executive of United Press International said yesterday that the troubled news agency would file in New York today for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.
Pieter VanBennekom, U.P.I.'s chief executive, said that the news service would continue to operate as usual and that the filing was a way to resolve debts of approximately $50 million that had hindered efforts to sell the company.


National Semiconductor To Take $149 Million Charge
The National Semiconductor Corporation, saddled with excess manufacturing capacity, said today that it would take a $149.3 million charge against first-quarter earnings to cover plant closings and employee reductions.
The announcement represents the first big move to improve the company's performance by Gilbert F. Amelio, the president and chief executive.
He took command of the Santa Clara, Calif.-based company in May from Charles E. Sporck, the industry titan who ran National for more than two decades before retiring.


Food Notes
Holiday Treats
Rosh ha-Shanah, the Jewish New Year, begins at sundown on Sept. 8.
Though Mama or Grandma prepared the whole meal in years past, these days professional bakers and caterers often help out the family cook.
Some professionals even use recipes that belonged to their mothers and grandmothers.


Southern Hospitality and B.C.C.I.
Down the street from the Kiddie Kottage child-care center and the Magnolia Manor retirement home, on an 1,800-acre estate built by Henry Ford, lies the Pharaon Zone.
That is the name some locals here adopted to describe the unlikely preserve of Ghaith R. Pharaon (pronounced fuh-ROAN), who captivated this small town south of Savannah when he parked his private jet and took up part-time residence as the town's eccentric Arab millionaire who played host at lavish parties for the rich and famous.


NEWS SUMMARY
SOVIET TURMOIL A6-11
President Gorbachev won agreement from two major republics to keep some kind of Soviet Union, he said, while also threatening to resign if efforts at unity failed.
Page A1
Mikhail Gorbachev gave a lesson in resilience to his country, lunging like a spirited boxer at the specter of disintegration stalking the nation.
A6
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania were recognized as independent nations by the European Community in a move that bolsters the independence efforts of the Baltic republics.
A1
News analysis: Western responses to the prospect of Baltic independence reflect a mosaic of self-interest, geopolitical currents and domestic political pressures.
A11
Group of seven is seen backing some Soviet aid A11
Riga's dazzling changes are emerging in large and small ways, including the abandonment of its K.G.B. headquarters and the celebration of a five-day festival of Jewish culture.
A7
Lithuania's limbo leaves border posts on the merit system A7
Moldavian republic ends its link with Moscow A7
A full-scale pruning of the K.G.B. has taken place, according to President Gorbachev, who said that its governing board had been disbanded and its independent military units reassigned to the army.
A1
Conspiracy theories are multiplying in Moscow.
In the press, the streets and the corridors of power, people are speculating about an ultimate culprit behind the failed coup.
A10
Reporter's notebook: Et tu Anatoly?  A10 INTERNATIONAL A3-5
Croatian men may be mobilized within 24 hours to join the forces that have been under heavy attack from rebel Serbs and the Yugoslav Army, Croatian leaders said.
A3
Cambodian factions reached a pact under which they will disband 70 percent of their military forces and put the rest under the supervision of the United Nations.
A3
U.S. opposes exceptions to ban on drift nets A12
U.N. chief and Iran official meet on hostages A5
Perquin journal: With peace on everyones lips, killing goes on A4 NATIONAL A12-19
Clarence Thomas got a mixed review from the American Bar Association in its evaluation of his fitness to be a Supreme Court Justice, association officials said.
A1
Governor Wilder of Virginia, testing the waters for a campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination, came to New Hampshire with an appeal to "put America first." A14
An epidemic of telephone fraud is leaving companies with enormous bills for calls they did not make, and is forcing the users of sophisticated phone equipment to scramble for better ways to lock out high-technology phone thieves.
D1
Big chip maker is taking a $149 million charge for cuts D1
Polite robber surrenders in 100 heists A17
The only Indian in Congress is Ben Nighthorse Campbell, who represents a vast area of rugged western Colorado.
A rancher, jewelry maker and Democrat, Mr.
Campbell's candid style has won him immense support.
A14
A Methodist panel on homosexuality, after three years of deliberations, could not agree on whether such activity is compatible with Christian belief.
A14
Inmates climb to roof and hold up signs asking for food A15
Woodstock journal: Making a private playground public A14 REGIONAL B1-4
The Brooklyn District Attorney worked to hold down expectations for an indictment in the car crash that killed a black child and set off racial violence in Crown Heights.
At the same time, the child's family said through spokesmen that they would not cooperate in the inquiry and demanded a special prosecutor.
A1
Protesters march in Flatbush over police shooting B3
Homeless families are being placed into commercial hotels that cater largely to tourists and businessmen as their numbers grow and welfare officials struggle to find places for them.
B1
The murder of a Chinese artist has shocked his fellow artists.
Many are questioning whether it is worth braving the dangers of New York City to gain the artistic freedom they were deprived of in China.
B1
Flushing politics are in transition.
Even though Chinese and Korean immigrants have left a prominent stamp on the area's economy, they still are struggling in the political arena.
B1
Scriba residents are angry and afraid since the accident at the nuclear power plant that shocked their community in upstate New York.
The Nuclear Regulatory Agency says the incident is one of the most serious ever at an American plant.
B1
New York's McIntoshes get jump on autumn B2 BUSINESS DIGEST D1 Education Page
The college orientation process has become much more elaborate than a barbecue and a campus tour.
It can be an intense social and intellectual initiation that can last the entire year.
D19
Low test scores renew debate on television D19
Helping single parents find success in college D19 The Living Section
Food
Eating Well C1
Leaner diets for football players C1
60-Minute Gourmet C2
De Gustibus C3
Food Notes C4
Paterson farmers' market C4
Homey, high-tech farm C8
Wine Talk C9
Living
Metropolitan Diary C2
Surfing dictionary C8 Health Page
The mind of the confirmed bachelor C1
Caution urged on using trial labor after a caesarean birth C10
Personal Health C10 Arts/Entertainment
Richard Wright redux C11
Theater: "The Matchmaker" C12
Film: "Tournee of Animation" C11
"One Hand Don't Clap" C13
Music: The Pop Life C14
Word and Image: A biography of Oliver Wendell Holmes C15
The British remake American TV C11
Book Notes C15 Sports B5-10
Baseball's newest millionaire is Brien Taylor.
A deal with the New York Yankees has transformed Taylor from a 19-year-old would-be junior college pitcher to the highest paid player in the history of baseball's amateur draft.
A1
Baseball: Yanks had to sign Taylor B7
Vincent says Steinbrenner interfered B7
Whitehurst routed again B7
Yankees lose to Rangers B7
Columns: Vecsey on the Open B5
Smith on baseball B8
Football: Giants won't have to worry about Montana B5
49ers must stop man on the run B9
Amid a Jet injury, some good news B9
Horse Racing: Settling old ties at Belmont B9
Tennis: Lendl avoids early exit B5
Track and Field: American influence in Tokyo B8 Obituaries D21
Irving Bieber, a psychoanalyst who studied homosexuality Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed
Editorials A20
Yeltsin: democrat? autocrat?
Sighted in Cambodia: peace
Trees
Topics: Leninland


Will You Support Your Local Dairy?
To the Editor:
"A Few Pennies Can Save Our Family Farmers" by Senator Patrick Leahy (letter, Aug. 7) suggests that Americans would not object to paying a little more for milk to help American farms.
I have an alternative proposal.


Hard Road for Software Merger
Almost every month brings news of a new computer industry match-up: A.T.&amp; T. and NCR, Computer Associates and On-Line Software, Borland International and Ashton-Tate.
As profit margins shrivel and the costs of developing new products multiply, merger momentum is bound to continue.
But the record of other high-technology deals, like the one that formed Dun &amp; Bradstreet Software Holdings Inc. in 1989, might give these proud new partners pause.


Lawyer Pleads Guilty in Fraud
A Long Island lawyer pleaded guilty yesterday to fraud charges in the bilking of $20 million from people who invested in his mortgage businesses.
The 67-year-old defendant, Hyman J. Gaines, of Manhasset and East Hampton, entered the plea before Judge Thomas C. Platt in Federal District Court, according to the United States Attorney's office for the Eastern District of New York.
Prosecutors said 400 people were defrauded between 1984 and July 1990.


Once Together at Lowe, To Be Reunited at FCB
Three advertising executives who had worked together for several years on RJR Nabisco accounts at the Lowe Group will be reunited next month at FCB/Leber Katz Partners.
And again, they will work on RJR Nabisco business.
Nanette Koryn, a vice president and creative supervisor at Lowe in New York, said yesterday that she and her partner, Mark Wolf, a vice president and copywriter, have been named senior vice presidents and creative directors at FCB/Leber Katz in New York.
The client had been consulted on the change, she added, and approved.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Aug. 23
Aug. 16
Aug. 24
1991
1991
1990
Gasoline production, daily
7.2
7.4
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.0
2.9
3.1
Gasoline stocks
207.6
205.8
210.9
Distillate stocks
124.7
123.7
124.0
Crude imports, daily
6.8
7.0
6.6
Product imports, daily
2.3
2.2
2.2
Crude stocks
348.6
343.6
376.6
Crude production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.3
Refinery utilization (%)
89.2
88.8
92.4
(Source: American Petroleum Institute)


Washington State Utility Financing
The Public Utility District No. 1 of Lewis County, Wash., is tentatively offering, through negotiated sale, $169.2 million in tax-exempt revenue bonds for a Cowlitz Falls Hydroelectric project, through underwriters led by Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Company.
Underwriters said the maximum yield is about 7.125 percent for 7 percent bonds due in 2022, priced at 98.437.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities are offered at a price of par, to yield from 5.6 percent in 1995 to 6.35 percent in 2001, 6.8 percent in 2006 and 6.9 percent in 2008.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the evolution of the Soviet Union referred incorrectly to the Latvian and Lithuanian peoples.
They are Baltic, not Slavic.


Confirmed Bachelorhood: It May Be a State of Mind
A PSYCHOLOGIST who studies the hearts and minds of confirmed bachelors over the age of 40 has advice for women who want to marry one: Forget it.
"If you get involved with a never-married middle-aged man, don't expect him to change," said Dr.
Charles A. Waehler, a psychologist at the University of Akron in Ohio who studied a group of white, heterosexual bachelors 40 to 50 years old.
"If you both value independence, it might be okay," he said.
"But if you want marriage, stay away."


Yanks Faced Facts on Taylor Deal
Signing Brien Taylor came down to saving face or saving a few dollars.
And when you are the New York Yankees, with $500 million in revenue from cable television alone, you cannot be worried about saving bucks when your reputation and the fate of perhaps the next Dwight Gooden are at stake.
The Yankees made the right move by finally coming to terms with the 19-year-old Taylor on a $1.55 million contract, the most lucrative deal ever made with a draft choice.
Other league owners and general managers had pleaded with the Yankees to remain firm and not give in to the Taylor family and Scott Boras, their adviser.
The Yankees tried.


Paradox Underlies French Bias in Quebec
To the Editor:
Quebec's New Minority Issue: Blacks Charge Bias" (Montreal Journal, Aug. 16) was good, but as a native Montrealer I must say you left out the background information to help put the racial problem in context.
You do mention the minority problem of the French-speaking people within Canada.
But within the province of Quebec the French are in a clear majority, about 80 percent of the population.
In Canada provinces have considerable jurisdictional power, and this has allowed the French to combine the fierce resentments of a minority with the coercive power of a majority.
The result is the most xenophobic jurisdiction in North America.


Fire Destroys Philadelphia Warehouse


Baltic States May Be In Olympics
The president of the International Olympic Committee said today that as many as three Soviet republics might participate in the Barcelona Olympics next summer as independent teams and that the Soviet Union's participation in the world track and field championships here this week could be its last as a single nation.
"I think we have seen the red flag for the last time," Juan Antonio Samaranch, the I.O.C. president, said, referring to the Soviet banner with its yellow hammer and sickle over a background of red.


Did Steinbrenner Meddle In Decision on Taylor?
Commissioner Fay Vincent said yesterday that he believed that George Steinbrenner directly influenced the Yankees' signing of Brien Taylor, the No. 1 selection in the June amateur draft.
But Vincent said he would take no action against the owner because Steinbrenner's involvement developed through questioning by reporters.
Under a year-old agreement with the commissioner, Steinbrenner is banned from operating the Yankees or being involved in baseball decisions.
Last weekend, however, Steinbrenner told newspaper and radio reporters that the club would be crazy not to sign Taylor, a 19-year-old pitcher from North Carolina.


Dollar Ends Mostly Higher; Gold Closes Lower in U.S.
The dollar closed mostly higher in foreign exchange trading yesterday in an uneventful session.
Gold prices rose overseas but slipped in domestic trading.
At the New York Commodity Exchange, gold closed at $354.40 an ounce, down 80 cents from late Monday.
Republic National Bank quoted a late bid of $354.35 an ounce, off 90 cents.


The Pop Life
'Metallica'
Metallica's first album in three years has squashed all opposition on the charts.
In its first week, "Metallica" sold 2.2 million copies, easily moving into the top slot on Billboard's charts and bumping another Elektra act, Natalie Cole, into the No. 2 position.
"Metallica" outsold Ms.
Cole's "Unforgettable" 3 to 1.
The Wiz had its biggest single-day sale in 10 years with the album, and other major chains also reported record-breaking sales.


Whitehurst's Collapse Gives Mets One More To Forget About
For Wally Whitehurst, the chance he waited a lifetime for has become the fiasco he can't end.
Whitehurst, after a long and dutiful apprenticeship, was anointed a regular starter for the Mets last month.
The right-hander, though, has been a regular flop ever since.


Miami Quarterback Loss Is Rutgers Gain
BRYAN FORTAY, the quarterback who decided to leave the University of Miami this week, has chosen to play for Rutgers University in his hometown.
The third-year sophomore from East Brunswick, N.J., quit the Hurricane team Sunday after losing the battle for Miami's starting job.
He will sit out this season, but he has two years of eligibility remaining.
"He's another Jersey guy coming home," said DOUG GRABER, the coach at Rutgers. (AP)


New York City's Parks Are Worse for Layoffs
To the Editor:
Your Aug. 12 news article on New York City's layoffs may leave the reader with an overoptimistic impression of what has happened in the Parks Department as a result of the city's fiscal crisis.


Sharp Declines Are Posted For Grains and Soybeans
Grain and soybean futures prices tumbled yesterday on the Chicago Board of Trade as investors worried that the Soviet Union could not obtain bank financing to buy crops through the United States export-credits program.
Wheat futures for delivery in September settled 3 1/4 cents lower, at $3.02 3/4 a bushel; September corn settled 2 3/4 cents lower, at $2.51 3/4 a bushel; September oats were 3 1/2 cent lower, at $1.22 3/4 a bushel, and September soybeans were 8 cents lower, at $5.74 3/4 a bushel.


'I Want Some Control Over My Life's End'; Aid in Dying
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen's "Death: the Best Seller" (column, Aug. 14), about "Final Exit," Derek Humphry's book, shows excellent sensitivity to some of the issues, but omits others that are important.


New York's McIntoshes Get the Jump on Autumn
Apples in August? Yes.
Ten days to two weeks ahead of schedule, before cold evenings have had a chance to bring a full red blush to the cheeks of McIntosh apples, the harvest has started in upstate New York.


HOSTAGES HUNGRY, INMATES' SIGNS SAY
About two dozen of the Cuban detainees holding 10 hostages at a Federal prison here rushed to the roof of the cellblock they have seized and erected signs saying prison officials were denying them and the hostages food.
The incident was among several dramatic occurences today in the takeover that began last Wednesday.


Hurt by Program Selling, Dow Loses 13.20
Stock prices fell yesterday, with some analysts attributing the decline to concerns over the domestic economy and others saying the market was reacting nervously to instability in the Soviet Union.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 13.20 points, to 3,026.16.
Stocks were generally mixed during the morning, but moved decisively lower in the afternoon, as computer-program selling began to take hold.
Program selling accounted for a cumulative decline of 15.66 points in the Dow throughout the day, according to Birinyi Associates, which monitors program trading.


Sole Indian's Uneasy Role in Congress
In isolated little mountain towns, the faraway workings of the Federal Government can seem especially remote.
So when the Congressman from this district, Ben Nighthorse Campbell, organized a town meeting in this old mining center recently, he came mostly to listen.
But when a constituent began grousing about a water pact with the Ute Indians, Representative Campbell took a turn to speak.


Giants Won't Have to Worry About Montana
Six days from their opener against the Giants, the San Francisco 49ers made a reluctant but expected move today, placing quarterback Joe Montana on the injured-reserve list and making him ineligible for at least the first four weeks of the season.
Montana, who has tendinitis in his right elbow, cannot return until the 49ers' game on Sept. 29 against the Raiders at the Los Angeles Coliseum.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Markets
The first Treasury note auction since the Salomon admission on illegal bids went off without a hitch.
The new notes, worth $12.5 billion, were sold at an average yield of 6.46 percent.  [ D1. ]
Stock prices fell, with some analysts citing concerns over the economy.
The Dow dropped 13.20, to 3,026.16.  [ D6. ]
Grain and soybean futures prices tumbled as investors worried that the Soviet Union could not obtain bank financing to purchase crops.  [ D14. ]  The dollar closed mostly higher.  [ D14. ] The Economy
A growing epidemic of telephone fraud is leaving companies and other organizations with huge bills for calls they did not make, forcing a scramble for better ways to lock out thieves.  [ D1. ]
Consumer confidence edged down in August, the Conference Board reported.
The decline, to 76.3 from 77.7 in July, was the fourth in five months.  [ D2. ]
The nation's merchandise trade deficit shrank to $15.6 billion in the April-June quarter, the smallest gap in eight years.  [ D2. ] Companies
National Semiconductor said it would take a $149.3 million charge against earnings to cover plant closings and job cuts.  [ D1. ]
Bolar Pharmaceutical said it would pay $40 million to SmithKline Beecham to settle claims involving Bolar's fraudulent behavior in marketing a generic version of Dyazide.  [ D1. ]
The merger that formed Dun &amp; Bradstreet Software Holdings in 1989 was hardly made in heaven.
Management Science America and McCormack &amp; Dodge had been bitter rivals.  [ D1. ]
Salomon Brothers was notified that it might lose its coveted role in the sale of assets seized from failed savings and loans.  [ D6. ]
NBC issued an official denial of reports that its parent, G.E., was negotiating a sale to Marvin Davis.  [ D5. ]
United Press International will file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection today, its chief executive said.
He said that the news service would continue to operate as usual.  [ D5. ]
Intel temporarily halted production of its 50 megahertz 486 chip because of problems in manufacturing and testing.  [ D4. ] International
Germany's failure to grasp the economic consequences of unification and unwillingness to make the sacrifices required for rebuilding eastern Germany have led to the nation's highest inflation rate in nine years, Karl Otto Pohl said.  [ D2. ]
Ghaith R. Pharaon captivated Richmond Hill, Ga., when he parked his private jet and took up part-time residence as the town's eccentric Arab millionaire who gave lavish parties.
Since the B.C.C.I. scandal broke, he has not been seen there.  [ D1. ] Business Technology
As complex plastics replace metals in cars and appliances, recycling becomes a larger problem.
Attention is turning to a high-temperature process called pyrolysis that breaks down plastics into burnable oil and gas.  [ D9. ]
A long-life battery born of a German research venture is starting to penetrate the aerospace market.  [ D9. ] Today's Columns
Why have young black men lost ground to whites in the last 15 years?
The answer, some economists say, is not as simple as it might seem.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene.  [ D2. ]
A 116-page ad supplement for Calvin Klein Jeans with the October issue of Vanity Fair might be a harbinger of better times for the magazine field.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising.  [ D5. ]
Sears's chairman says he can restore the lumbering $32 billion merchandise group to a respectable degree of profitability, and some investors apparently believe him.
Market Place.  [ D6. ]


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Activated Frank Castillo, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Scott May, pitcher, to Iowa of the American Association.


As Life Changes, So Does Freshman Orientation
A college education used to begin with a quick and casual freshman orientation: There usually was a barbecue, followed by a big dance and finally a rambling campus tour led by a bored sophomore.
Now orientation has evolved into an intense social and intellectual initiation that combines aspects of academic boot camp and cultural finishing school.


After 25 Years, Paterno And Ga. Tech Meet Again
Joe Paterno still remembers the hot dogs at The Varsity in Atlanta.
He was a 28-year-old Penn State assistant coach spending five days at Georgia Tech's spring practice in 1955, trying to learn from the legendary Coach Bobby Dodd.
"I always had a tremendous amount of respect for Coach Dodd," Paterno said the other day, "and I came away very impressed with Georgia Tech. I even liked the hot dogs they had across the street at one of those spots where they sell a couple million hot dogs."


Civility Loses Again In Roar of Motorcycles
To the Editor:
Peter Knobler's account of the degradation on Upper Broadway ("Hell on Upper Broadway," Op-Ed, Aug. 9) is evidence of the collapse of civility in Manhattan neighborhoods.
This breakdown can not only be seen in the men and women laid out on the street beside their ragged bags of belongings, but it can also be heard.


INSIDE
Putting Homeless in Hotels
New York City is placing homeless families in commercial hotels that cater largely to tourists and business executives.
Page B1.
New Type of Phone Fraud
In a growing epidemic, thieves break into private computerized systems, leaving companies with huge bills for calls they did not make.
Page D1.
Block That Steak!
Football players are doing end runs around the traditional training meal of steak and eggs in favor of leaner diets.
The Living Section, page C1.


49ers Wary of Giants' Man on the Move
They saw enough of Jeff Hostetler last January to know that Monday evening's opener with the Giants could become a long, exhausting chase into the night.
But the San Francisco 49ers have a plan.
They have gone to the videotape, analyzed their previous mistakes and vowed to do a better job keeping Hostetler inside the pocket this time.
If they don't, the Giants' new starting quarterback will be difficult to stop two ways: when he's running and when he's throwing on the run.


Battery Intended for the Road Takes to the Air
A long-life battery born of a German research venture is starting to penetrate the aerospace market, thanks to an American company.
The fiber-nickel-cadmium design owes its existence to worries in the 1970's at Daimler-Benz and Volkswagen, Germany's largest car makers, that the days of gasoline-powered cars may be numbered.
Their joint venture to conduct electric-vehicle research later linked up with Hoppecke, a leading German battery maker.
Together, they figured out how to make nickel-cadmium batteries last longer by replacing stainless-steel conducting plates with more flexible pancakes of compressed polyolefin fibers.
The same hollow fibers are used in disposable diapers.


A Mosaic of Motives: The West's Response to Baltic Quest for Independence
The variety of Western responses to the prospect of Baltic independence reflects a mosaic of self-interest, geopolitical currents and domestic political pressures.
For the second day in a row, President Bush's cautious moves on the issue stood in sharp contrast to other nations' responses, like Scandinavia's rush last week to establish diplomatic relations with the Baltic republics to the European Community's concerted action today to formally recognize Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia as independent countries.


Personal Health
PERHAPS you were persuaded by friends to take a long bike ride or hike over hill and dale, and though you're in good shape, your leg muscles were so sore the next day that you could hardly walk the stairs.
Or maybe you took a long swim and a painful cramp in one foot suddenly stopped you in midstroke.


Chemical Bank Appointments
Chemical Bank and Manufacturers Hanover yesterday announced top-level appointments to take effect when the two banks officially merge at the end of the year.
The new company will be called the Chemical Banking Corporation.
William B. Harrison Jr., a vice chairman at Chemical, who in July was named to head the new bank's worldwide corporate and institutional activities, said yesterday that the latest round of appointments create the leadership for the three groups that will make up his division.


Group of Seven Is Seen Backing Some Soviet Aid
When senior officials from industrialized nations meet this week to discuss aid to the Soviet Union, they are likely to disagree on whether to provide large-scale financial assistance but strongly endorse technical assistance and humanitarian aid.
Advice and training for Soviet officials seeking to rescue their country's foundering economy is vital to help officials there understand the country's troubles, said a senior Administration official who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Technical assistance also provides a way to identify the problems and possible solutions while waiting for either the central Government or the republics to emerge as responsible recipients for aid, he added.


Quotation of the Day
"It is a restoration in which the law catches up with the facts. It is a tremendous satisfaction to see law triumph and to see the will of the people triumph over the will of dictators." -- Roland Dumas, the French Foreign Minister, on recognition of the Baltic states.  [ A1:3. ]


Irving Bieber, 80, a Psychoanalyst Who Studied Homosexuality, Dies
Dr.
Irving Bieber, a psychoanalyst and professor who headed a major study in 1962 on the origins of homosexuality, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 80 years old and lived in Manhattan.
He died of pulmonary complications, a friend of the family said.


Protest Against Police in Flatbush Shooting Death
Marchers paraded through the streets of Flatbush last night in the second day of protests that followed the death of an armed Brooklyn man who was fatally shot by the police.
On Monday night, the first day of the protests, two officers on patrol in the neighborhood were fired on from the roof of an apartment building, the police said yesterday.
Three bullets hit the officers' patrol car.
Neither officer was injured and neither returned fire, the police said.
There have been no arrests in the incident.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 28


Times Mirror Sets Buyouts
The Times Mirror Company said today that it planned to offer some employees of its largest newspaper, The Los Angeles Times, early retirement to cut costs.
The Times said the program would be offered to employees 55 years old or older who have at least 10 consecutive years of service.
The Times, which has 6,000 full-time employees, said a maximum of 300 people would be allowed to retire under the program.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
Nowadays, it seems that Stone Age New Yorkers like myself (no VCR, no microwave, etc., etc., etc.) often make phone calls that are answered by recorded messages that instruct callers to push buttons for various types of information.
After the lengthy message, one must hold the line for human assistance, whether one is calling for the answer to the meaning of life or simply from a non-touch-tone phone.


About New York
For a long time, the only thing that 12-year-old Sheneda Simmons knew about Jews was that they dressed funny and seemed to dislike black people.
Although she lives in a city imprinted by Jewish culture to a remarkable degree, her perceptions were shaped by life in Crown Heights.
In her Brooklyn neighborhoood, ripped by racial disturbances, the only Jews Sheneda encounters are Hasidim.
And they do not attend her school or play with her friends.


Polite Robber, Kind Till End, Goes to Police
An unemployed oil company worker surrendered to the police today in a widely publicized conclusion to a case that involved a string of nearly 100 robberies of hotel guests in Texas and Louisiana, all said to have been commited by a criminal dubbed the "gentleman bandit" by law-enforcement officers.
The authorities said the robberies were carried out by a man distinguished by his dapper attire and courteous manner, who was said to have apologized profusely to his victims, sometimes calling them at home to be sure they had recovered from the ordeal and once calling an ambulance for a man who had a heart attack during a robbery.


Topics of The Times; Leninland
The toppling of all those monumental statues in the Soviet Union serves as a monument to the fall of Communism.
Hundreds, perhaps thousands of statues of Lenin, Stalin, Dzerzhinsky and others were erected, huge ones, sometimes 100 feet high.
But as the Eastern Europeans discovered, toppling is easy; it leaves the question of what to do with all those fallen forms.
Smash them?
Melt them?
Cover them over with ivy?
A subtler proposal, made last year in Lithuania before the Vilnius City Council, merits the attention of Soviet iconoclasts: Collect the toppled statues and re-erect them, together, in one park.


Chief Now Chairman At Chemical Waste
Jerry E. Dempsey has been promoted to chairman of Chemical Waste Management Inc., the nation's largest hazardous-waste management company.
Mr.
Dempsey, 58 years old, had been president and chief executive of the company, which is based in Oak Brook, Ill.
He succeeds Dean L. Buntrock, who will remain the chairman and chief executive of Chemical Waste's parent, Waste Management Inc.


Wine Talk
Were you by any chance aboard the container ship Ever Going in March 1990, two days out of Port Kelang, and pounding through the South China Sea?
No?
Just as well.
You might have heard ominous sloshing noises and assumed the ship was taking on water and would soon be headed for the bottom.
You would have been wrong.
Capt.
Chen Mali, skipper of the Ever Going, would have been quick to disabuse you.
"What you heard is the Cognac, you lubber," he might have said.
"Get below before I clap you in irons."


Testing Waters, Wilder Says America's Needs Come First
Testing the waters for a campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia came to New Hampshire today with an appeal to "put America first," asserting that the nation could not neglect its own fiscal and economic problems while facing the crises in the Soviet Union and elsewhere in the world.
In a speech to a state treasurers' convention, the text of which was later made available by the Wilder campaign, Mr.
Wilder declared, "We cannot focus all our energies on the international arena at the expense of America's finances and economic health." He added, "This neglect can no longer be tolerated."


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Analysis &amp; Technology Inc., North Stonington, Conn., an engineering services company, named Gerald Snyder and V. Lehman Woods senior vice presidents. *
Conning &amp; Co., Hartford, which provides investment banking services to the insurance industry, named Jeffrey J. Park senior vice president and director of corporate finance.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about a decline in Scholastic Aptitude Test scores misstated the date of the education study "A Nation at Risk." It was April 1983, not 1981.


BRIEFS
Debt  *
AAR Corp., Elk Grove Village, Ill., a supplier of aerospace and aviation products and services, has filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission for up to $100 million in debt securities.


Down by 2 Sets, Lendl Refuses to Take an Early Exit
Theatrics aren't his style.
Even when three-time United States Open champion Ivan Lendl was pushed to the brink of a first-round disaster by a Dutch teen-ager who used his serve like a megaphone to announce the veteran's imminent demise, he never flinched.
Instead, just as 19-year-old Richard Krajicek had feared, Lendl metamorphosed into something the Dutchman described as "a lean, mean, fighting machine" and turned a near-upset into a workmanlike five-set victory yesterday in a match that began on a mediocre note and ended with a manifesto.


Construction Spending Up
An index of construction spending rose in July after a decline the month before, indicating that this important sector of the economy resumed a recovery begun earlier this year.
The F. W. Dodge division of McGraw-Hill Inc. said yesterday that its index of construction contract value rose 7 percent in July compared with June.


Consumer Confidence Registered a Decline in August
Consumer confidence edged down in August with expectations for the economy over the next six months becoming less optimistic, the Conference Board reported today.
The decline in the New York business group's confidence index, to 76.3 from 77.7 in July, was the fourth in five months, following a postwar surge in March of more than 20 points.


Phone-Service Theft Surges at Companies
A growing epidemic of telephone fraud is leaving companies and other organizations with bills for hundreds of thousands of dollars of calls they did not make, and is forcing the users of sophisticated phone equipment to scramble for better ways to lock out high-technology phone thieves.
The industry has long been plagued by sophisticated users who found ways to tap into phone company lines or people who used stolen credit card numbers to make calls without paying for them.


U.S. and Philippines Sign Treaty on Bases
The Philippines and the United States signed a treaty today providing for the presence of American troops at Subic Bay Naval Station for 10 more years.
But the treaty, which was sent to the Senate here today, is not certain to be ratified.
Under the Philippine Constitution, American military forces must leave the country by Sept. 16 unless a new treaty is ratified by a two-thirds vote of the 23-member Senate.


Lithuania's Limbo Leaves Border Posts On the Merit System
The border between the Soviet Union and Lithuania, which the Lithuanians expect will soon become a full-fledged international boundary, is already starting to go up.
At the Vilnius airport today, no Soviet border guards, customs agents or immigration officers were on duty.
But no Lithuanian officers have arrived to replace them.


'I Want Some Control Over My Life's End'; Consider a Hospice
To the Editor:
Placing your article on the book "Final Exit" on the same page as "In Age of Cancer and AIDS, Therapists for the Dying" serves to underscore my observation that with few exceptions, terminally ill patients who are part of a hospice program served by a team of medical, psychosocial, volunteer and pastoral care-givers rarely attempt suicide.


CHRONICLE
PATRICK SWAYZE is expanding his interest in the restaurant business.
The ballet dancer-turned-actor is a partner with the restaurateur BOBBY OCHS in the Mulholland Drive Cafe, a restaurant on Manhattan's East Side.
Now the partners plan to establish a branch of the restaurant in Santa Monica, Calif.


Review/Theater; Dorothy Loudon Plays Dolly Levi
Though the source of "The Matchmaker" is a 19th-century Viennese comedy, Thornton Wilder made his version archetypally American by creating the character of Dolly Gallagher Levi.
That flamboyant woman has entered our mythology through the musical adaptation, "Hello, Dolly!," as well as the Wilder play.
She is the busiest of busybodies, poking into everyone else's affairs while arranging a marriage for herself with that miserly old merchant of Yonkers, Horace Vandergelder.
To present a full-bodied "Matchmaker," a theater needs a Dolly with charm as well as determination and a supporting cast that draws inspiration from her effervescence.
Despite that dominant force at the center, "The Matchmaker" is far from a one-woman vehicle.
Unfortunately, Lonny Price's revival, which opened last night at the Roundabout Theater Company, is lackluster in almost every department.
Apart from the lead, the play is undercast, and it is sloppily staged, even making experienced actors seen ineffectual.


Not Too Late for Connors
As the twilight melted into the witching hour and beyond, the crowd dwindled to 4,000 of the faithful, but those who stayed last night got to watch a resurgent legend outdistance another legend's younger brother in the first round of the United States Open.
On the buggy and humid stadium court, the legend played with the persistance of a gnat, a bionic gnat.
Jimmy Connors, making his case for the eternal reprise and perpetual histrionics, swatted, stung, and swore his way past a quavery Patrick McEnroe, 4-6, 6-7, 6-4, 6-2, 6-4, to move into the second round of his 21st Open.
The marathon took 4 hours 20 minutes and marked the seventh career comeback from a two-set deficitfor Connors, who erased a 0-40 deficit and ended things at 1:35 this morning with a service winner on his third match point.


Traffic Death Rate: New Low in 1990


Review/Film; Dancing Toothbrushes To 'Red Riding Hood' In Animation Festival
Here is a scene you're not likely to find in a Disney movie: a chorus line of toothbrushes, wearing cheerful little skulls as heads, singing and dancing to calypso music.
"I like to keep my teeth clean," takes on a loony and macabre tone when sung by animated-clay skulls lined up on a bathroom shelf, as they are in this three-minute musical, "Oral Hygiene." It is one of the cleverest, goofiest shorts in "The 23d International Tournee of Animation," an annual compilation that opens today at the Angelika Film Center.
The inspirational godfathers of this year's anthology seem to be Marcel Duchamp and David Lynch rather than Disney, for the best of the films have a dark, surreal edge.
"Slow Bob in the Lower Dimensions" combines puppets, live-action film and animated objects to tell an eerie little nonsense story.
Bob, played by an actor, lives in the basement, where puppet-lizards send out electrical zaps to him.
He is tormented by puppet Siamese twins -- dolls with blond braids and only three legs between them -- who sneak up and paint him bright yellow with blue X's.
"Slow Bob" was made as a pilot for MTV, which helps explain its irreverent sensibility and the fast-moving mini-form that owes so much to music videos.


60-Minute Gourmet
IT is remarkable how popular goat cheese has become in American cooking.
Not long ago it was considered an exotic French specialty, tasted, often warily, with crackers and bread.
Today, much of it is American-made and it is a staple in restaurants.
It shows up in salads, in sauces, on pizzas, under the skin of roast chickens, atop grilled eggplant, even in desserts.
Not all of these are successful.


Spinal Condition Sidelines Bills' Mueller
JAMIE MUELLER, the starting fullback for the Buffalo Bills, will miss at least four weeks of the National Football League season because of a rare spinal condition that may threaten his career, according to team officials.
The Bills placed Mueller on the injured reserve list yesterday with cervical stenosis, a narrowing of the spinal canal.


Perquin Journal; With Peace on Everyone's Lips, Killing Goes On
"And this is supposed to be liberated territory of the guerrillas?" a laughing army officer asked as he ambled into town in a company of 300 soldiers under the beating midday sun.
"Tell me, how many guerrilla press conferences have you attended here?" he said in a chiding tone to a group of foreign journalists who happened to drive into Perquin from the south just as the army was silently dropping down from the mountains to the northwest.


Corrections
An article in Weekend on Aug. 16 about walking around Manhattan misidentified the river beneath the Washington Bridge, which connects the Bronx and Manhattan.
It is the Harlem River, not the Bronx River.


Wisconsin Bonds
A $97 million general-obligation bond issue by the State of Wisconsin was priced yesterday through competitive bidding won by Prudential Securities.
The tax-exempt issue is priced to yield from 5 percent in 1993 to 5.55 percent in 1996, 6.1 percent in 2001, 6.6 percent in 2006 and 6.75 percent in 2011 and 2012.
Underwriters said the state's general-obligation debt is rated Aa by Moody's Investors Service and AA by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Corrections
An article on Monday about a rape case in Danbury, Conn., misidentified an organization that studies rape.
It is the National Clearinghouse on Marital and Date Rape.


Treasury's Note Sale Is Smooth
The first Treasury note auction since Salomon Brothers admitted that it had made illegal bids at four note auctions went off without a hitch yesterday.
Increased scrutiny of trading in the wake of the Salomon situation had led market participants to wonder -- and worry about -- how the auctions might go.


Methodist Panel Is Split on Homosexuality Issue
After three years of hearings and debate, a special committee of the United Methodist Church has completed a report on homosexuality that expresses unanimous agreement on everything but the central question that the panel was asked to resolve: whether homosexual activity is compatible with Christian belief.
On Sunday, at the end of a four-day meeting in North Carolina, 18 of the committee's 24 members endorsed a version of the report that included a sentence asking the 8.9-million-member denomination to remove the condemnation of homosexual practice from the church's official statement of social principles.


Intel Is Putting New Chip on Hold
The Intel Corporation said today that it had temporarily halted production of its 50 megahertz 486 chip, the new high-speed version of its most powerful microprocessor, because of problems in manufacturing and testing.
Intel said it believed that the problem could be solved quickly, possibly in a few days.
In the meantime, the company has asked computer makers to suspend shipments of personal computers that use the chip.


Review/Film; Calypso, Past and Present, As Two Veterans See It
Kavery Dutta's "One Hand Don't Clap," opening today at the Village East Cinema, is a sweet, lilting documentary on the history and present state of calypso and its more recent spinoff, soca, defined as calypso with soul.
Ms.
Dutta concentrates on two key figures: Lord Kitchener, born 70-some years ago in Trinidad as Aldwyn Roberts, who introduced calypso to London in 1948, becoming an internationally known performing artist and composer, and Calypso Rose, born in Tobago in 1940 as McCartha Sandy, who is said to be the first woman to become calypso star.


When a Teen-Ager Plays Just Like One
They cannot all be Jennifer Capriati, body perfectly proportioned and fine-tuned for the task at hand.
Some teen-age players are still growing, still tripping over their own feet like newborn foals with tennis racquets.
One of them, Lindsay Davenport, a long-limbed girl from Palos Verdes, Calif., was on Court 20 yesterday evening at the National Tennis Center, trying to get her 15-year-old act together.
The shots would not stay down, and Davenport would not charge the net.
She lost in a first-round match at the United States Open, 6-3, 6-2, to Debbie Graham, a brand new professional already on her way up the ladder.


'I Want Some Control Over My Life's End'; Suicide Isn't Solution
To the Editor:
Re your Aug. 9 article on Derek Humphry's "Final Exit":
I am a survivor, not a medical clinician or scholar, and I speak with the poignant authority of one who suffers from the personal loss of suicide.
It is four years since I lost my sister, and I still seek answers to the many questions unleashed by her death.
I have not learned what all the answers are, but I have learned enough to know what they are not.
And I know from this experience that suicide is not an answer.


Calvin Klein Redefines The Big Buy
IF Calvin Klein sets trends in advertising the way he does in fashion, magazine executives said yesterday, the appearance of a 116-page ad supplement for Calvin Klein Jeans with the October issue of Vanity Fair might be a harbinger of better times for their recession-racked field.
The issue of the monthly, which is published by Conde Nast Publications, will be accompanied by what is being called the largest ad supplement for a consumer magazine in the United States.


Croatia Says Call-Up Is Next Move
Leaders of Croatia's government said today that they expected to announce a general mobilization within 24 hours that would oblige all healthy, adult men to join forces that have been under heavy attacks from rebel Serbs and the Yugoslav Army.
Croatia's Deputy Prime Minister, Mate Granic, said in a news conference this morning that he expected the Zagreb Government to decide on Wednesday to invoke emergency powers and set in motion a call up of the republic's eligible, able-bodied adult men, perhaps as early as this week end.


The Works of Richard Wright, as Written
The hard-hitting works of Richard Wright, which influenced generations of writers, were meant to be even stronger stuff.
His 1940 novel "Native Son," about a young black man growing up in Chicago's South Side slums, his 1945 memoir "Black Boy," about his own early years in the South, and other books were changed or cut, mostly because of their sexual, political or racial candor.
But the unexpurgated Richard Wright is on the horizon, in two volumes to be published in October by the Library of America.


Tampa Bay Picks Up Manley
One day after being released by the Phoenix Cardinals, defensive end DEXTER MANLEY was acquired by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
The acquisition of Manley, an 11th-year pro who spent most of his career with Washington, is aimed at helping one of the league's weakest pass rushes.
KEITH McCANTS is making the transition from linebacker to right end, but the club was desperate for help on the other side. . . .
Five days before the start of the National Football League's regular season, JOHN STEPHENS is back in a Patriots uniform.
Stephens, a fourth-year running back who has led the team in rushing the last three years, agreed late Monday to a four-year contract with New England, ending a 40-day holdout.
Financial terms were not announced, but the Patriots reportedly offered Stephens an average of $800,000 a season over the life of the contract, while Stephens was said to be seeking $1.2 million a year. . . .
Defensive lineman MICHAEL DEAN PERRY agreed to terms with the Cleveland Browns, ending a salary dispute that caused him to miss the entire preseason.
Perry, who had 11 1/2 sacks last year, his third in the league, stayed away from camp while demanding to become the highest paid lineman in football.
Details of the contract weren't disclosed. . . .
DAVID LITTLE, the linebacker who led the Steelers in tackles the last three seasons, has agreed to a three-year contract with Pittsburgh believed to be worth about $2 million. . . .
The Raiders recalled quarterback VINCE EVANS, linebacker JERRY ROBINSON and safety DERRICK CRUDUP, who were placed on waivers Monday.
They made room for the three by placing three others on the injured reserve list. (AP)


For Those With a Stake in Garlic, It's a Time for Festivities
SAUGERTIES, Batavia, Ithaca and Calverton, N.Y., aren't in the same league as Gilroy, Calif., where more than 100,000 people gather every summer for the elephant of all garlic festivals.
More intimate garlic festivals will be held in those towns through October.
Not that garlic needs much promoting these days.
The Fresh Garlic Association, a trade group in California, estimates that on average, Americans now eat more than a pound of garlic each in a year, sometimes a whole roasted head at a time.
That's more garlic than lamb chops or veal scaloppine.
And it's a lot more than they ate in 1965, when garlic production in this country was a fifth of what it is today.
Garlic was not even grown here commercially before 1922, when it was first planted in Gilroy.


British Make Their Own Version of American TV
Conjure up the muscle-bound, Italian-American character played by Tony Danza in "Who's the Boss?" and then imagine that he has a British counterpart.
It would not be merely a fanciful exercise.
Mr.
Danza's character really does have a British counterpart and, in fact, "Who's the Boss?" itself has a British cousin.
Called "The Upper Hand," it is one of those rare shows that was conceived and produced in the United States and then adapted and Anglicized into a new production before being shown on British television.


Market Place; Looking at Sears As a Good Buy
WHEN a new Sears store opened recently in Nashville, Edward A. Brennan, the company's chairman, rolled up his sleeves and sold a refrigerator.
Mr.
Brennan's sales efforts have met with success in a larger arena as well.
A small but growing group of investors are finally buying Mr.
Brennan's claim that he can restore Sears's lumbering $32 billion merchandise group to a respectable degree of profitability.


Perez Teases; Yanks Pay
Pascual Perez has teased the Yankees in so many ways since joining the team two years ago.
Usually, he is not ready to pitch because of injuries.
When Perez is ready, he performs well enough to give the club hope.
Perez teased them again last night at Yankee Stadium by carrying a shutout against the Rangers into the sixth inning.
The Yankees wanted to believe he was finally for real.
They prayed he would continue pitching with passion and not get hurt.


Public &amp; Private; The Cement Floor
Women prospered cute in the 1980's.
Every time you turned around, there was some cute story about a woman high school quarterback, a woman sanitation worker or a woman hard hat.
Eventually, after the sideshows were over, real life went on.
Women were admitted where their talents could take them, and their talents took them far.
There were more women in all walks of life, many of them places from which you could draw a decent paycheck.


Fox Studio in Swiss Deal
A Swiss insurance company has agreed to invest $80 million in eight future films to be produced by the 20th Century Fox Film Corporation, the movie company, several executives close to the negotiations said.
A Fox executive declined to comment on Monday, but several movie industry executives said the agreement was signed last week.
They added that the Swiss company, which was not identified, would have a one-third interest in each film.


In Flushing Council Contest, a Slice of Asian Politics
Vito Dottone, a retired mailman, has spent more than 50 of his 71 years in Flushing.
When he thinks about downtown these days, it pains him.
"It looks like hell," he says.
"It's really a disaster." There is too much traffic, filth and chaos.
More and more, he says, his neighborhood is turning into an unwieldly Hong Kong.


Mutual Benefit Bailout Plan
Executives of the Prudential Insurance Company of America and the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company confirmed a published report yesterday that the chances of their participating in a bailout of the Mutual Benefit Life Insurance Company had decreased.
Mutual Benefit, based in Newark, was taken over by regulators in early July.
But contrary to the report yesterday in The Wall Street Journal, the executives said the chances of a Metropolitan and Prudential bailout had decreased not because of a change in their attitudes but rather because the new management team hired to run Mutual Benefit had not requested support from Metropolitan and Prudential.
Executives at Prudential and Metropolitan said, however, that the offer to study Mutual Benefit's individual businesses with the possibility of buying some of them was still open.


GORBACHEV THREATENS TO QUIT UNLESS REPUBLICS FIND A WAY TO PRESERVE A MODIFIED UNION; NEW PACT IS SOUGHT
Fighting to stem the flight of republics from a disintegrating nation, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev said he had won agreement today from two major republics to keep some kind of Soviet Union and threatened to resign if efforts at unity failed.
Mr.
Gorbachev said the leaders of the Russian federated republic and Kazakhstan, the largest of the republics in area, had agreed with him and the President of Kirghizia on the need for an early signing of a revised treaty between the Kremlin and those republics willing to stay in the union.
Such a revised agreement would determine what kind of political and economic structure would emerge from the current crisis -- a federation, or a commonwealth, for instance.
Break by Another Republic
But even as he announced this agreement, another republic said it wanted its independence.
Moldavia, situated on the border with Romania, with which it was long associated in the past, announced its independence from the union, the third republic to do so since the failed coup in Moscow last week.


What We Lose By Not Running
The next Presidential election is 14 months away, but only one Democrat, Paul Tsongas, has officially hit the campaign trail.
By contrast, at this stage in the 1984 Presidential race I was already well acquainted with the Holiday Inns of Iowa and New Hampshire, as were my six competitors.
At first it appeared the 1992 campaign would merely start later than usual -- a good thing, perhaps, given the familiar complaints about the interminable nature of modern Presidential races.
Now, however, it seems that many of the Democratic Party's most able leaders are choosing not to enter the race at all.


Best of Bunch at Belmont Aim to Settle Old Scores
After five weeks of racing in the countryside at Saratoga, stars of the horse world will begin converging on New York today when Belmont Park opens its fall meeting with 31 stakes races in 48 days and championships on the line in every division of the sport.
The meeting will run until Oct. 21 and will offer more than $6 million in stakes.
But mostly it will offer dramatic new confrontations for horses trying to settle old scores before the best of the bunch compete in the ultimate test, the Breeders' Cup series of championships at Churchill Downs in Kentucky on Nov. 2.


Bar Association Splits on Fitness Of Thomas for the Supreme Court
The American Bar Association has given Judge Clarence Thomas a mixed rating in evaluating his fitness to be a Supreme Court Justice, officials of the group said today.
The bar association committee that conducts the evaluations split on President Bush's choice to succeed Thurgood Marshall on the Court, with a majority rating Judge Thomas "qualified" for the job and a minority of two members finding him "unqualified." No one on the committee found him to be "well qualified," the third available rating and the association's highest.


Joan D. Abrams, 62, Former Superintendent
Joan D. Abrams, a former superintendent of schools in Red Bank, N.J., and a leader in the movement to open doors for women in school administration, died on Sunday at Morristown Memorial Hospital in New Jersey.
She was 62 years old and lived in Short Hills, N.J.
Dr. Abrams died of breast cancer, her son, Linus, said.


GORBACHEV THREATENS TO QUIT UNLESS REPUBLICS FIND A WAY TO PRESERVE A MODIFIED UNION; A GAIN FOR BALTICS
Bolstering the independence efforts of the Baltic republics, the European Community recognized Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania today as independent nations after five decades as part of the Soviet Union.
At a meeting of the foreign ministers of the 12 member nations, the community granted unconditional recognition to the Baltic republics although community officials admitted that the Governments of the Baltics and the Soviet Union still had to negotiate many issues, including who owns what within the three breakaway states.


Youth Held in Breslin Assault
A 14-year-old Brooklyn youth was arrested yesterday and charged with assaulting and robbing the New York Newsday columnist Jimmy Breslin last Wednesday night while he was covering the racial unrest in Crown Heights.
Mr.
Breslin was pummeled and kicked and then stripped to his underwear and press card.
The police identified the suspect as Odel Bettencourt of 1268 Park Place in Crown Heights, and said he was being charged as an adult with assault, robbery and riot.


Hofstra University $34.6 Million Issue
To finance a Hofstra University project, the Nassau County Industrial Development Agency yesterday tentatively priced a $34.6 million bond issue through the senior manager, Fleet/ Norstar Securities.
The civic-facility revenue bonds are priced to yield a maximum 6.75 percent for an issue due in 2011.
This issue also features annual sinking-fund payments beginning Aug. 1, 2007, giving the issue an average life of 18.13 years.


New to Yanks, New to City, Old Hand in Cutting a Deal
After a hastily planned flight from North Carolina, baseball's newest millionaire, Brien Taylor, was finally able to rest with his family at a Manhattan hotel yesterday afternoon.
They needed it.
In the previous 24 hours, a long-awaited deal with the New York Yankees had transformed Taylor from a 19-year-old would-be junior college pitcher to the highest paid player in the history of baseball's amateur draft.
Studied the Rules
His plans had been altered, literally, overnight.
The direction of his career had changed.
Everything had changed, that is, except his family's sensibilities.
Bettie Taylor, the mother of the left-handed pitcher who will soon be $1.55 million richer, stared at the movable table of empty room-service plates.


Traces of the Old Guard Linger in a New Latvia
"We have stopped doing absolutely everything we did before," said Maj.
Gen.
Janis Trubins, deputy commander of the K.G.B. in this breakaway Soviet republic.
General Trubins, an amiable and voluble man of 46 -- one of the youngest generals in the K.G.B., he noted proudly -- appeared to be resigned to unemployment and expressed no resentment about the turn of events.


After Blackout at A-Plant, a New Wariness
The control room went dark on a Tuesday morning while the dawn sprang gray on Lake Ontario.
The nuclear plant sent off a whooping siren that seemed to fall from the sky.
It was said to have spooked the cows, but it settled on the house trailers and the front porches and the ballfields like a soft net.
The town barely stirred.
By late morning, however, men and women in Scriba, were sharing the news: This had been no routine warning to ignore in your sleep.
There had been real chaos up the road at Nine Mile Point in the depths of the Unit 2 reactor, where a group of operators, sitting in a windowless chamber, had been at the mercy of a master panel that suddenly turned blank.


Et Tu, Anatoly? In Moscow It Has a Certain Ring
The aftermath of the coup was rich in the theme of betrayal.
Leaders had turned on the nation, Communists had turned on their leader, Russians had turned on their own.
But most damning was that the plotters included some of the people closest to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, and none closer than Anatoly I. Lukyanov, the Speaker of the Parliament and a comrade from the 1950's when they both attended the law faculty at Moscow State University.


Sighted in Cambodia: Peace
Here's some good news that deserves to be heard above the Soviet din: The killing in Cambodia's killing fields is nearing a negotiated end.
Yesterday, leaders of Cambodia's four political factions agreed to reduce their armies by 70 percent and put the rest under U.N. supervision.
That reinforces a cease-fire in place since June.
Major hurdles still stand in the way of a comprehensive settlement.
But two decades of intermittent carnage seem truly over.


U.N. Chief and Iran Official Meet on Hostages
Iran's representative at the United Nations conferred here today with Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar for 90 minutes.
The envoy, Kamal Kharrazi, later told reporters that he had nothing new to say about the hostage situation in Lebanon, but said he remained optimistic that it would be resolved.
Mr.
Perez de Cuellar was reported by Reuters to have accepted an invitation to go to Teheran on Sept. 10 to discuss other issues and said he would talk about the hostages if needed.
On Monday he said that he hoped the hostage issue would be resolved before he went to Iran.
Reuters said that when asked about that today, the Secretary General replied, "Well, I wouldn't say settled, but I hope that something positive will happen in between."


More on the Soviets
Articles and texts, pages A6-11. The day's highlights in brief, page A6.


Miss Knight, Editor, Weds Rider McDowell, Novelist
Victoria Cross Knight and Thomas John Rider McDowell were married in Carmel, Calif., yesterday at the home of the bridegroom's father, Samuel H. McDowell.
The Rev.
Colleen Cunningham, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony.
The bride, 32 years old, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William R. Knight of Ramona, Calif.
She is an editor of travel articles.
She attended San Diego State University.
Her father is a retired Air Force colonel.


J. B. Lanterman, 76, Ex-Steel Executive
Joseph B. Lanterman, the former chairman and chief executive officer of Amsted Industries, died Sunday at Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago.
He was 76 years old and lived in Chicago and Palm Springs, Calif.
He died of kidney failure, said his sister-in-law, Georgia Swicegood, of Kansas City.


CHRONICLE
The impromptu offer EUGENE M. LANG made in 1981 to provide college scholarships for a sixth-grade class in the Bronx grew into a nationwide network of volunteer groups, the "I Have a Dream" Foundation, that has raised millions of dollars for scholarships.
But Mr.
Lang, a New York City industrialist, still marvels at the reality his own dream has become.


Trees
To Joyce Kilmer, whose ode to them was once
de rigueur
for grade-school memorizing, trees were lovelier than anything a poet could produce.
Actually, they outclass the works of artists on several counts: cutting air pollution, for one, and cooling the air, for another.
Trees shade the sunstruck, shelter the rained-upon and make a natural gathering place for the gregarious.
And in New York City, eight of them are dying or being taken down for every one that's planted, as an article in yesterday's Times by Anne Raver lamented.
City life -- car rammings, oil spills, salt runoffs and people who don't pick up after their dogs -- is hard on trees.
It's gotten even harder now that the city's forestry budget has been cut from $5.2 million to $660,000; and the number of climbers and pruners dropped from more than 100 to 20.
Even so, there's a lot New Yorkers can do to improve the quality of life for the Bradford pears and gingkos, cherry trees and locusts that soften our streetscape.


Books of The Times; Chipping Away at a Jurist's Facade
The Justice From Beacon Hill The Life and Times of Oliver Wendell Holmes By Liva Baker Illustrated. 783 pages.
HarperCollins. $29.95.
Oliver Wendell Holmes was named to the Supreme Court by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1902 and he retired a few months short of his 92d birthday in 1932, when Franklin D. Roosevelt was elected President.
His public career (if one begins counting from his service in the Massachusetts 20th Volunteers during the Civil War) covers major chapters of the American story.
As a legendary, long-lived Associate Justice, his opinions and dissents played a significant part in our laws and language.


Shanahan Case Goes to an Arbitrator
Yesterday's deadline for the Devils and the St.
Louis Blues to reach an agreement on compensation due the Devils for losing BRENDAN SHANAHAN to the Blues through free agency came and went without being resolved.
The two teams now have two days to submit sealed individual proposals to the Ottawa-based National Hockey League arbitrator, Judge EDWARD HOUSTON, who will have two business days to hear arguments from both sides and make a decision.


In Alabama, Jackson Is First and Foremost
When the University of Georgia's Herschel Walker broke his thumb a few years back, an Atlanta newspaper ran charts, diagrams and nine articles, including the lead story on Page 1, as well as a detailed history of thumb injuries in sports.
Well, it was Herschel Walker, it was Georgia and it was football.


Volvo Seeks Payment Over Faked TV Spot
Volvo Cars of North America wants its former advertising agency, Scali, McCabe, Sloves in New York, to return as much as $250,000 in production costs for the infamous "Bear Foot" television commercial.
The spot, which appeared last fall, showed a Volvo withstanding the assault of a monster truck that flattened a line of cars.
Disclosures that the spot had been faked caused a scandal that led to Scali's losing the account, as well as to the agency's and Volvo's being fined $150,000 each by the Federal Trade Commission.


Bleecker Street Cinema Closing
The Bleecker Street Cinema, one of New York City's best-known theaters devoted to innovative film programs, will close its doors on Monday night, said Nick Russo Nicolaou, the theater operator.
"With all the multi-screen theaters now in Greenwich Village, the Bleecker Street Cinema just doesn't make economic sense anymore," said Mr.
Nicolaou, who also operates Cinema Village on East 12th Street and Cinema Village on Third Avenue between 12th and 13th Streets.


Status Quo on Television, Tagliabue Says
Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE, speaking to reporters in a conference call, said yesterday that the N.F.L. would not experiment with pay-per-view games "during our current television contracts, which run through 1993." He promised no new wrinkles in the league's television arrangements, saying such matters were "really down the road."


These Days, It Takes Less Beef To Keep Football Players Beefy
ROBERT REESE, the head trainer of the New York Jets, was thinking back to the old days of football training camps, 5 or 10 years ago, when steak and eggs were served for breakfast, steak and potatoes for lunch, and steak or prime rib for dinner.
"The mentality in football was that to replace muscle you needed protein, so you ate steak and eggs," said Mr.
Reese, who came to the Jets in 1977 after serving as an assistant trainer for five years with the Buffalo Bills.
"That's what everybody ate.


C.D. Yields Decline Again
Yields on certificates of deposit and money market accounts were down for the week ended yesterday, but the steepness of the previous week's decline had eased.
According to the Bank Rate Monitor, a North Palm Beach-based interest rate publication, the rapid drop in C.D. yields has just about caught up with the last reduction in interest rates by the Federal Reserve Board.


In Flushing Council Contest, a Slice of Asian Politics
Vito Dottone, a retired mailman, has spent more than 50 of his 71 years in Flushing.
When he thinks about downtown these days, it pains him.
"It looks like hell," he says.
"It's really a disaster." There is too much traffic, filth and chaos.
More and more, he says, his neighborhood is turning into an unwieldly Hong Kong.


Oakley Charged With Assault in Atlanta
CHARLES OAKLEY of the Knicks was charged with simple assault and disorderly conduct and for being intoxicated early Monday morning after his arrest in Atlanta for pushing and threatening a busboy in a downtown restaurant.
ADOLPH SHIVERS of Charlotte, N.C., who was with Oakley, was also arrested and charged with disorderly conduct.
An Atlanta Municipal Court spokeswoman, who declined to give her name, said Oakley faced a court hearing next month.


Cambodia Factions to Cut Forces 70%
The Cambodian Government and rebel groups reached agreement here today to disband 70 percent of their military forces and put the rest under the supervision of the United Nations.
All sides and foreign diplomats agreed that the disarmament pact appeared to be a landmark in efforts to conclude the 12-year civil war, although hopes have been dashed before.


Ruth G. Schapiro, 64, Leading Tax Lawyer
Ruth G. Schapiro, a nationally known tax lawyer and a partner in the New York firm of Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 64 years old.
Donald Schapiro, her husband of 39 years, said she died of cancer.


Bolar to Pay SmithKline $40 Million
The Bolar Pharmaceutical Company said yesterday that it would pay $40 million to the SmithKline Beecham Corporation to settle claims involving Bolar's fraudulent behavior in marketing an inexpensive generic version of Dyazide, SmithKline's popular diuretic drug.
The Federal fraud charges, to which Bolar pleaded guilty earlier this year, sent the generic drug industry into a tailspin and touched off criminal indictments and dismissals of Federal Food and Drug Administration officials.
Bolar paid fines of $10 million plus $250,000 to cover the Government's costs in the case.


A Fervent Gorbachev Fights for Soviet Unity
Mikhail S. Gorbachev offered the Soviet Union a desperately needed lesson in resilience today, lunging like a spirited boxer at the specter of disintegration that now stalks the nation.
Addressing the Parliament, the Soviet President seemed to feed off the long odds of the nation's deepening crisis as he found fresh political resolve and staked whatever remains of his career on the continuation of the union.


CREDIT MARKETS;
The New York State Thruway Authority yesterday initially priced $218 million in tax-exempt local highway and bridge service contract revenue bonds through Dillon, Read &amp; Company as senior manager.
Underwriters said the maximum yield was 7.36 percent for a 7 1/4 percent bond due in 2010, while a 6 percent term bond due 2011 is priced to yield 7.3 percent.


Corrections
A headline in Business Day on Monday about orders for American-made machine tools misstated the change from the previous month.
Orders rose 8.8 percent in July.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.50
5.63
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.40
7.49
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.43
5.47
7.47
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.60
7.73
8.81
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.12
8.14
9.03
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.10
9.15
10.04
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.99
6.99
7.67
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the effects of reductions in New York City aid to the arts misstated the location of a canceled performance of the Royal Shakespeare Company production of Euripedes' "Electra." It was the Brooklyn Academy of Music, not the Brooklyn Museum.


Low Test Scores Renew Debate on TV
Television has long been blamed for the decline in students' reading ability.
Once again, those accusations were made in the aftermath of the release on Monday of the verbal scores of 1991 college-bound seniors on the Scholastic Aptitude Test, which hit an all-time low.


Economic Scene; Why Black Men Have Lost Ground
IT is no great puzzle why young male workers have had to run so hard over the last 15 years simply to stay in place.
They are the first generation to compete with women workers on a nearly equal basis.
More important, they are the first postwar generation to enter the labor market when labor productivity was barely growing.
The mystery is why, in spite of the triumphs of the civil rights movement, young black men have lost ground to their white counterparts during the period.


A Homey Farm With a High-Tech Edge
Thimble Farm resembles a Martha Stewart production -- not a flower out of place, neatly lettered signs, manicured lawns, live animal decor.
More or less what you'd expect from two Boston lawyers-turned-farmers.
But this facade masks an enterprising goal: Bud and Pat Moscow, Thimble's owners, have installed sophisticated European greenhouse technology at the farm on Martha's Vineyard, and they hope soon to grow profitable crops, like strawberries, tomatoes, herbs and flowers, year-round regardless of weather or daylight.
By using stacking systems developed in Israel, they can produce 10 times more strawberries inside a computerized greenhouse where feeding, moisture and lighting are monitored by sensors.


Turning Waste Plastics Into Fuels
As complex plastics increasingly replace metals in cars and appliances, recycling these products becomes a larger problem.
Attention is now turning to a high-temperature process called pyrolysis that breaks down plastics into burnable oil and gas.
Auto makers and plastic suppliers hope to demonstrate within a few years that this technique has great commercial potential.
Environmental advocates question whether pyrolysis is truly recycling, but backers of the technique say it is far better than throwing the plastic away.


The Day's Highlights
Gorbachev Battles the Tide
A Threat to Resign: Trying to stave off total disintegration, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev was said to have reached agreement with the leaders of three republics -- including Russia and Kazakhstan, the two largest in area -- on retaining some form of union.
But Moldavia became the latest republic to announce its independence.
Mr.
Gorbachev threatened to quit if a new union treaty were not renegotiated.
Page A1.


Yeltsin: Democrat or Autocrat?
"Law and law," Boris Yeltsin urges on those who would remake the Soviet Union, emphatically rejecting vindictiveness.
Having faced down the people who would re-impose tyranny, he associates himself with Mikhail Gorbachev's passionate efforts to restore legitimate central authority.
Yet he has also acted with peremptory harshness that ignites concern.
Yes, the president of the Russian republic is a hero of the current turmoil, but is he a democrat at heart?


Subplots Within the Plot Intrigue Coup Theorists
In this city where pirate editions of Agatha Christie sell in the millions and where the official version of anything is automatically assumed to be a lie, a feverish hunt is on for the great secret behind the spectacularly unsuccessful attempt to seize the Soviet Government last week.
In the press, the streets and the corridors of Parliament, conspiracy buffs belabor gaps in the official accounts of the coup and audition candidates for the role of kingpin, feeding on a glut of leaked memorandums, self-justifying reminiscences, hypotheses and gossip.


Bridge
The last six world championships have been in Sao Paulo, Brazil; Venice; Nottingham, England; Perth, Australia; Geneva, and . . .
Ann Arbor, Mich.
How did a small university town get into this list of big metropolitan areas?
The first five were chosen by championship organizers looking for a location.
But Ann Arbor was a location looking for a championship.
A local resident, Gary Hann, suggested that the University of Michigan campus would be the ideal setting for the World Junior Team Championships, and when play ended there Thursday those present were convinced that he had been right.


Book Notes
Memoirs by Thatcher
Initial indications suggest that bidding for the memoirs of former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher could go as high as those for Gen.
H.
Norman Schwarzkopf's book, sold to Bantam last month for over $5 million.


NBC Denies Reports That It Is Being Sold
NBC issued an official denial yesterday of reports that its parent company, the General Electric Company, was negotiating the sale of the network to the Los Angeles developer Marvin Davis, and it repeated assurances that the network was not for sale.
But a Wall Street analyst said NBC was at least "unofficially" for sale and had been for about a year.


At LEast 5 Dead and 150 Hurt as Subway Derails
At least five people were killed and more than 150 were injured when a subway train headed for Brooklyn derailed in Lower Manhattan early this morning, transit and police officials said.
The police reported at about 2:30 A.M. that as many as seven people may have died, with some victims still trapped in the wreckage.


Prosecutor On Radio: Excerpts
With racial tension smoldering in Crown Heights, District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn discussed the situation on Monday morning in a call-in program on WLIB-AM, a radio station aimed primarily at black listeners.
Following are excerpts from Mr.
Hynes's appearance, as transcribed by The New York Times.


A Gift of an Ambulance
Amid turmoil between blacks and Hasidic Jews in Crown Heights, leaders of two Brooklyn volunteer ambulance services -- one run by blacks and Hispanics, the other by the Hasidim -- announced yesterday that they will help a volunteer ambulance service run by blacks get started.
The Bedford-Stuyvesant Volunteer Ambulance Service will provide a van which the Hatzolah Volunteer Ambulance Service will refurbish.
Together, the services will donate the van to a new service tentatively called Tri-Community, which an official of the Bedford-Stuyvesant service said has been trying to get started for a year.


Prosecutor in a Mine Field Known as Crown Heights
The Brooklyn District Attorney yesterday tried to hold down expectations that a Hasidic Jew would be indicted in the car crash that killed a black child and set off racial violence in Crown Heights last week.
At the same time, the child's family said through spokesmen that they would not cooperate in the inquiry.
They called on Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to appoint a special prosecutor.


K.G.B., Once a Pervasive Power, Is Quickly Being Brought to Heel
Mikhail S. Gorbachev disclosed today that a full-scale pruning of the K.G.B. had taken place, telling the Soviet Parliament that the governing board of the once pervasively powerful security and intelligence agency had been virtually disbanded and its military units reassigned to the army.
The newspaper Moskovsky Komsomolets also reported that the entire leadership of the Ninth Directorate of the K.G.B., the division that had been charged with security for top officials and included the men who confronted President Gorbachev at the outset of the coup, had been arrested.


BRIEFS
*
Bidermann Industries Corp., New York, a maker of apparel products, has sold its J. Schoeneman Inc. unit to Plaid Acquisition Corp., a unit of Plaid N.V., a Dutch concern.
Terms were not disclosed. *
H.
J.
Heinz Co., Pittsburgh, the food company, said it had integrated the newly acquired JL Foods, Eugene, Ore., into its North American affiliates.


Homeless Put Into Hotels For Tourists
New York City welfare officials, scrambling to find shelter for a growing number of homeless families, are secretly booking them into commercial hotels that cater largely to tourists and businesspeople.
The practice of placing homeless families in commercial hotels without telling the hotel management -- at a cost of as much as $100 a night in cash -- began on July 30, city officials said.


'I Want Some Control Over My Life's End'
To the Editor:
I am going to buy "Final Exit," Derek Humphry's how-to book on suicide, whose rise to the top of the best-seller list you describe in an Aug. 9 article, and I will place it on my bookshelf next to Betty Rollins's "Last Wish."
But I want to reassure Dr.
Lonnie R. Bristow, quoted in the article, and others who are afraid this book will influence people to commit suicide.
I still have a few good years left in me, and I emphasize the "good" because when they are no longer good, I would like to feel I have some control over how my life will end.


It Was Definitely a Day For American Influence
The 800-meter gold medalist lives in New Mexico.
The new 400-meter hurdles champion attends school in Alabama.
The winner of the 200-meter final lives in Texas.
Six of the eight finalists in the women's 100-meter dash were former N.C.A.A. sprint champions.
Yes, it was quite a day at the world championships today for the United States and for foreign athletes with American ties, even if American athletes claimed just three of the 21 medals awarded.


2 Reports Urge Caution on Using Trial Labor After a Caesarean Birth
ALLOWING women who have had caesarean deliveries to attempt a vaginal birth in subsequent pregnancies can occasionally result in rupture of the uterus and such disastrous consequences as death of the baby, according to two reports in a leading obstetrical journal.
The authors, writing in the June issue of Obstetrics and Gynecology, warned against a casual attitude toward this increasingly popular practice, which they said is not suitable under every delivery circumstance or for every woman who wants to try it.
They estimated that one such birth in a 100 resulted in uterine rupture and serious complications for mother or baby and urged that risks be fully considered by the physician and the woman before deciding to try it.


History Repeats, Europe Forgets
Where was Europe?
A few hours into the Moscow putsch, as Europe's chanceries were preparing to cave in to the amateur plotters, George Bush took the lead by hoisting the "coups fail" banner.
Last August it was the United States that drew a line in the sand, dragging a bunch of reluctant allies all the way to victory against Saddam Hussein.


Sports of The Times; Engineer Studied The Angle
THERE are not too many industrial engineering degrees running around at the United States Open.
There are probably a few up in the stands who have made enough money to afford the designer clothing and the designer food at the Open, but industrial engineering degrees on the court are a bit more rare.
Bryan Shelton does have just such a degree from Georgia Tech.
While others from the class of 1990 are out making their mark in their chosen professions, he is trying to make a mark in his, which is tennis.


A Mosaic of Motives: The West's Response to Baltic Quest for Independence
The variety of Western responses to the prospect of Baltic independence reflects a mosaic of self-interest, geopolitical currents and domestic political pressures.
For the second day in a row, President Bush's cautious moves on the issue stood in sharp contrast to other nations' responses, like Scandinavia's rush last week to establish diplomatic relations with the Baltic republics to the European Community's concerted action today to formally recognize Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia as independent countries.


Gorbachev and Yeltsin To Appear on ABC
ABC News announced yesterday that both Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet President, and Boris N. Yelstin, the Russian President, would appear on a special "town meeting" broadcast on the network.
The broadcast is to be early Tuesday morning after the Monday Night Football game and the late local news.
ABC expects the program to begin about 12:30 A.M.


Prize-Winning Silver, Serious or Not
A streamlined pitcher that balances partly on its handle, a silent butler engraved in hieroglyphics and a fish knife whose handle looks like fish scales are 3 of the 11 award winners in the 1991 National Student Sterling Design Competition.
The designs, along with 10 other selected entries, are on view through Sept. 5 in the lobby of Lever House, 390 Park Avenue at 54th Street.
The winning designs were chosen in May from 114 entries representing 35 colleges and universities.
The 11 winners shared $3,500 in prize money from the sponsors, Coeur d'Alene Mines Corporation in Coeur d'Alene, Idaho, and Silver Trust International, a trade group in Manhattan.


Kuwait Says It Thwarted Iraqi Infiltration of Island
Kuwait said today that it had thwarted an attempt by a group of heavily armed Iraqis to infiltrate the island of Bubiyan, capturing at least 47 of them and sinking several boats carrying others.
"It's not just a simple border violation," said the spokesman for the Kuwaiti mission to the United Nations, Masoud al-Fehaid.
"The forces were quite large, and they had heavy arms with them. I would assume there were casualties on the Iraqi side since several boats were sunk."


Nuns at Auschwitz Are Set to Move
To the Editor:
The continuing squabbling among Henry Siegman ("Incident at Auschwitz," letter, Aug. 3), Rabbi Avi Weiss and Prof.
Alan M. Dershowitz (letters, Aug. 15) over the Carmelite convent that is outside the triple wire fence of Auschwitz I-Stammlager is irrelevant.


Review/Theater; A Revival Begs for High Jinks and Gets Them
As far as the outdoor audience is concerned, the stars of "Los Jibaros Progresistas" are the musicians, Anibal Lleras and Rafael Picorelli.
The play by Ramon Mendez Quinones arouses great laughter, but it is the hands of Mr.
Lleras on the guitar and Mr.
Picorelli on the sweet little super-guitar called a cuatro that make the audience's feet and hands thump on the ground and finally bring people to their feet, bouncing.
The play, first performed by the Puerto Rican Traveling Theater 10 years ago, is being presented in Spanish by the company in outdoor locations throughout the city's boroughs and in New Jersey through Sept. 8.
Then it moves into the company's theater on West 47th Street for a two-week run starting Sept. 11.


Video Vacations
The bather put aside his novel and got to his feet, prompted by the sight of four young children scrambling outward on the jetty, dangerously close to the sea.
No parents called after them.
The lifeguard had quit for the day.
The smallest child slipped out of sight for a heart-stopping second before his head reappeared above the rocks.
The bather cursed the missing parents and readied himself to dash into the sea.
"That's great, kids! Great!" The shout came from somewhere out of view.
A man and two women bounded across the sand, each carrying a video camera, each bent on capturing the latest scenes of Vacation 1991.
The children retreated from the edge, and the filmers crouched around them.
"Now do something. Play!" one said, and the two girls sat down and obliged with a rhyme and a game of pat-a-cake.
The filmers leaned in, catching the patting palms in triplicate.


Delve Deeper Into C.I.A.-Bank Connection
To the Editor:
"Blurred Response to B.C.C.I." (editorial, Aug. 8) calls for a focused probe of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandal at the highest level.
A primary focus of such a coordinated inquiry should be the bank's relationship with the Central Intelligence Agency in its entirety.


Yields Up on Tax-Exempt Money Funds
Yields of money market funds monitored by IBC/Donoghue's Money Fund Report were mixed for the week ended yesterday, with yields of tax-exempt funds rising as many usual buyers moved to longer maturities with higher yields.
The seven-day compounded average yield for tax-exempt funds rose 2 basis points, to 4.12 percent, with the simple yield up 1 basis point, to 4.03 percent.
During the same period the 30-day compounded yield rose 3 basis points, to 4.10 percent, as the simple yield was up similarly, to 4.02 percent.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Bolar Stock Rises on Settlement of Dispute
Bolar Pharmaceutical Company's shares jumped $2.75, gaining 50 percent yesterday and closing at $8.25 on the American Stock Exchange, after the announcement on Tuesday that Bolar would pay $40 million to the SmithKline Beecham Corporation to settle a dispute.
Analysts said the payment was considerably less than had been expected.
The dispute centered on Bolar's fraudulent marketing of an inexpensive generic version of Dyazide, SmithKline's popular diuretic drug.


View From a City of Skeptics: A Coup? It Hardly Matters
Lenin stood untoppled and undefiled today on his pedestal in First of May Square, as serene as this provincial city after Russia's 10 days of panic, deliverance and recrimination.
Just 50 miles from the Moscow epicenter of the quake that shook down the Communist temple, this city of 95,000 weathered the tremors with an outward calm bordering on indifference, and a conviction that nothing as important as the price of sausage will change as a result.


N.H.L. Will Celebrate 2 Big Anniversaries
The National Hockey League announced yesterday a two-year celebration of its past.
Of course, President JOHN ZIEGLER was unavailable for the announcement at New York's Plaza Hotel: He was negotiating a new contract with the union in Chicago.
But on the dais, there was MAURICE (ROCKET) RICHARD, eyebrows still arched, eyes still burning with intensity at 70, and GUY LAFLEUR and another hall-of-famer, TED LINDSAY.


Walter Fisher, 99, an Attorney In Famed Double-Jeopardy Case
Walter Taylor Fisher, a Chicago lawyer and civic leader who gained national attention for the tenacity with which he pursued a celebrated double-jeopardy case that he argued before the United States Supreme Court, died Tuesday at his home in Highland Park, Ill.
He was 99 years old.
Prof.
Roger Fisher of Harvard Law School, one of his five sons, said the elder Mr.
Fisher had died in his sleep.


Robert M. Pyle, Broker, 86
Robert M. Pyle, a retired stock and bond broker, died on Saturday at Overlook Hospital in Summit, N.J., after a long illness.
He was 86 years old and lived in Short Hills and Mantoloking, N.J.
Mr.
Pyle, a past president of the New Jersey Bond Club and a member of the New Jersey Securities Commission, was associated for 53 years with the securities firm of Hornblower &amp; Weeks, which is defunct.


Communique Against Coup Is Rewarded
Before he became a diplomat in 1982, serving first as Ambassador to Sweden and then to Czechoslovakia, Boris D. Pankin, the new Soviet Foreign Minister, had been head of the Soviet copyright agency, a Communist Party propagandist and a star in the ranks of the Young Communist League, or Komsomol.
But his sudden promotion today is not because of his biography, but his decision at 1 A.M. on Aug. 21 to come out with a statement against the unlawful takeover of the Soviet Government by a right-wing group.


Illustrious Illustrators
To The Home Section:
A little historical perspective would have enriched Elaine Louie's article about the fairy-tale illustrations of contemporary architects  [ "Once Upon a T-Square," Aug. 15 ] .
Books as well as buildings have been embellished by some of the most gifted architects in this country and abroad, and I do not mean just the architectural publications of a Palladio or an Asher Benjamin.


A Sculptor's Work Is Written on Wind
"IN the last half of this century, we're leaving behind very few heirlooms," Travis Tuck remarked as he bent over a sheet of copper, cutting blanks from a paper pattern for a Buff-Orphington rooster.
Mr.
Tuck, whose weather vanes turn in the wind above rooftops in 40 states and 10 countries, came to Martha's Vineyard from New York 20 years ago and stayed as part of the small year-round community.
His studio in Vineyard Haven, down a lane off Main Street, evokes the sights and sounds of a craftsman at work.


Confused but Resigned, Commuters Grind to Halt on East Side
Like water swirling around a drain that has been unexpectedly plugged, subway riders pouring into midtown Manhattan yesterday morning struggled to find ways around the lines that were closed after a Lexington Avenue train derailed beneath Union Square.
By the time the evening commute started, things still moved slowly, but more smoothly, as people avoided the East Side as much as possible.


O'Brien on Record Pace After 3 of 10 Events
With the leading performance in the first two events today, Dan O'Brien was ahead of the world-record pace after three events of the decathlon at the world track and field championships.
O'Brien, the 25-year-old United States champion from Moscow, Idaho, ran the 100 meters in 10.41 seconds and stretched 25 feet 11 inches on the last of his three efforts in the long jump and then hoisted the shot put 53 feet 3 1/2 inches, a personal best by more than 7 inches, for an overall total of 2,897 points.
That put him 11 points ahead of Daley Thompson's pace at the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics, where the British champion set the world record.
O'Brien's score also left him 182 points in front of the second-place athlete, Mike Smith of Canada.
Christian Schenk of Germany, the 1988 Olympic champion, was in third with two events remaining today -- high jump and 400 meters -- and five on Thursday.
It was a far different story for Dave Johnson, the American champion in 1989 and 1990.
With a sluggish time in the sprint, 11.16 seconds, and a poor effort on his third long jump after two fouls, he stood in 19th place, 574 points off the pace.
Rob Muzzio, the other American among 27 who began the competition, was in 14th place.
O'Brien began the competition as the clear favorite, after he scored 8,844 points at the national championships two months ago in New York.
That exceeded Bruce Jenner's 15-year-old American record of 8,634 and missed equalling Daley Thompson's seven-year-old world mark of 8,847.
O'Brien was not recognized as the American record-holder because meet officials had no wind gauge in place at the time of his 100 meters.
A View Apart on Drug Testing
Differences of opinion between Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the International Olympic Committee, and Primo Nebiolo, the president of the International Amateur Athletic Federation, are often never far from view.
That explains to some degree why Nebiolo has not achieved what aides say he wants most, membership in the I.O.C.
One glaring difference emerged this week, when Samaranch said that he felt the I.A.A.F.'s new penalty for a drug violation, four years, was excessive.
Last week, the I.A.A.F. increased the suspension for all infractions that previously carried a two-year penalty.
"For myself, I thought two years was enough in the life of one athlete," Samaranch said at a breakfast, with Nebiolo sitting on his right.
"We have seen what happened with Ben Johnson."
Johnson, the Canadian sprinter, was the world-fastest human for two years through the 1988 Seoul Olympics, only to test positive there and admit later he had been using performance-enhancing drugs for seven years.
Since his return to competition last January, his times have ben ordinary.
Beneath Samaranch's opinion, however, looms a bit of pique.
The I.O.C. has campaigned to have the international federations of all sports standardize their penalties, and most have adopted two-year suspensions for the more serious infractions.
The move by the I.A.A.F., which came despite opposition by its own medical commission, upset the I.O.C. efforts.
"Maybe we will study this," Samaranch said of the I.A.A.F's change, before reiterating that the two-year ban would be in effect for Barcelona.


Collagen Upheld on Appeal
The Collagen Corporation said today that the State Court of Appeals for the 14th Circuit in Houston had upheld a 1989 jury decision in its favor.
In that case, Linda Ramey contended that the company's injectable bovine collagen product, a purified protein used to smooth facial wrinkles, had caused her to develop dermatomyositis, a rare autoimmune disease.
The jury rejected her claim and awarded no damages.


7th-Seeded Forget Upset; McEnroe Presses Onward
John McEnroe was saved by the clouds, but Guy Forget, seeded seventh, didn't survive the summer simmer yesterday at the United States Open.
Forget, the mildly eccentric Frenchman who shaved his head last year just before winning the world doubles championship, met his match in 42d-ranked Jan Siemerink of the Netherlands, who began his career on the Grand Prix Circuit last year by winning a bet that required his coach to shave his head if Siemerink could reach the quarterfinal round at Singapore.


In Madagascar, Even Protest Isn't 'African'
Almost daily for the last three months, Radotonolranaivo Solofoririana, a 25-year-old railroad electrician, has sat in the city square with tens of thousands of other Government workers in an enduring show of civil disobedience.
He has yet to weary of the protest and vowed to keep coming until the President of this island nation was removed.


C&amp;S/Sovran Chooses Bozell
One of the advertising account puzzles created by the nation's three large proposed bank mergers was solved yesterday when it became clear which of two agencies would win the Nationsbank account.
The C&amp;S/Sovran Corporation announced that it would move its $20 million account to Bozell Southwest, Dallas, bypassing GSD&amp;M Advertising, Austin, Tex.
GSD&amp;M last month was named the conditional winner of a review on C&amp;S/Sovran's account, pending the resolution of questions raised by the decision of C&amp;S/Sovran to merge with the NCNB Corporation to form Nationsbank.


CHRONICLE
The soprano KATHLEEN BATTLE and the publisher MORTIMER ZUCKERMAN are among the seven celebrities who will choose Miss America 1992 at the pageant on Sept. 14 in Atlantic City.
The others are the actress DELTA BURKE; PIERRE COSSETTE, a television and film producer; the actors PAUL SORVINO and PATRICK WAYNE, who is a son of John Wayne, and MARILYN VAN DERBUR, Miss America 1958.
The hosts of the spectacle, which began in 1921 and is the best known of all beauty pageants, will be the television personalities REGIS PHILBIN and KATHIE LEE GIFFORD.


Fujitsu Buys Big Stake in U.S. Concern
Fujitsu Ltd., the largest computer company in Japan, has invested $40.2 million in Hal Computer Systems Inc., a Silicon Valley start-up company headed by a former star computer-designer for I.B.M.
The agreement, announced today by Hal, represents one of the largest initial financings ever for a computer company.
It is also yet another example of American electronics companies turning to Japanese companies for money in exchange for technology.


Navy Chooses G.E. Engine
The Navy chose the Growth II+ version of the General Electric Aircraft Engine Group's F404 jet engine for its proposed F-18E and F-18F carrier-based twin-engine fighters, the company said Tuesday.
The G.E. division said the initial $5 million contract for engine development, along with a contract it expected later this year for engineering and manufacturing work, would not alter the size of the work force at its plant in Evendale, Ohio, a Cincinnati suburb.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
REGULAR maintenance of picket and chain link fences will preserve their looks and prolong their lives.
If minor problems are allowed to worsen, fences can deteriorate rapidly.
Here are some common fence ailments and ways to fix them.
Sagging gates on picket fences are a familiar nuisance, but the remedy is easy.
You will need some eighth-inch-diameter galvanized metal cable, a four- or six-inch-long metal turnbuckle, four U-bolt cable clamps and two eye screws.


G.N.P. Fell 0.1 Percent In Quarter
The economy contracted during the second quarter instead of expanding, revised Government figures showed today, suggesting that the recession lasted longer than had previously been thought.
Total output of goods and services edged down at an annual rate of a tenth of 1 percent, a tiny decline that nevertheless contrasted with the Commerce Department's estimate a month ago that output rose at a pace of four-tenths of 1 percent in the April-June period.


A Bicycle Far Ahead Of the Pack (On Paper)
In the future, most bicycles may not have hubs or spokes.
The Zero Bike does not have them now.
Last week, the bike won a design excellence award from the Industrial Design Society of America.
Designed in 1988 by Makota Makita and Hiroshi Tsuzaki, then students at Art Center College of Design in Los Angeles, this theoretical bicycle has wheel rims cradled by magnets.
The bicycle would be powered by magnetic pedals.


Quotation of the Day
"There was something wrong from the beginning." -- Jerry Yambl, who survived the subway crash.  [ B6:1. ]


Sports of The Times; For Connors, The Grimier The Better
THE man in the shoulder-length hair and the purple suit and the accent was one of the first to greet Jimmy Connors yesterday afternoon in the locker room at the National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows.
This was the day after the night of one of Connors's most remarkable triumphs, in a long, long career of remarkable matches and triumphs.
"Jeemmy, Jeemmy, the keeng," the man said, and began to bow.


Rent Control in New York Has a Short and Beneficial History; Require a Surtax
To the Editor:
"A Relic Called Rent Control" (editorial, Aug. 13) points out rent control's archaic nature.
A solution: Require tenants in rent-regulated apartments (whether stabilized or controlled) to pay a surcharge on their New York City income tax.


U.S. Swords Into Plowshares for Soviets?
Congress began grappling with the murky consequences of Soviet upheaval today as Representative Les Aspin, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, urged taking $1 billion from the military budget to send food and medicine to the Soviet Union this winter.
He contended that providing stability in the Soviet Union was "defense by different means, but defense nevertheless." But he was quickly challenged both on the wisdom of large-scale aid and the best source of it.


Bridge
The Bridge Today All-Star Individual tournament played in Albany a week ago included 12 invited players with substantial records in international competition.
Highest-ranked among the four women competitors was Kathie Wei, of Manhattan, who finished fourth, thereby winning a prize she had herself presented.
Players were required to use standard bidding, so she was barred from employing her favorite Precision system.
On the diagramed deal she sat South, and was eventually doubled by East in three no-trump.
That player assumed that bad breaks would defeat a contract in which North-South had borderline game values, but this optimistic decision proved to be wrong.


Aid Planned for Executive Life Customers
The insurance industry has agreed to pay as much as $1 billion in coming years to make up losses suffered by customers of the failed Executive Life Insurance Company of California, regulators said today.
The plan, by far the largest of its kind to date, would restore full value to the life insurance policies and annuities held by 95 percent of Executive Life's 372,000 customers nationwide, said John Garamendi, the California Insurance Commissioner.
The only customers still exposed to losses would be those whose policies have cash values of more than $100,000; they would be fully covered up to $100,000 and would get 81 percent of amounts above that.


Face Lifts for Aging Art
New York Conservation Associates Ltd.
(212) 594-8862
For most art conservators, the big occupational thrill comes from working on art objects of museum quality.
But less significant objects can be almost as exciting, particularly when they pose interesting problems, says Harriet Irgang, a partner in New York Conservation Associates Ltd., which restores and repairs paintings.
Ms.
Irgang recently worked on a landscape painted on oilcloth by a client's grandmother.
It had been nailed to a wall, and the client wanted it cleaned, repaired and framed.
"This was a challenge because it was so unusual," said Ms.
Irgang, a painting conservator since 1984.
A more common job is repairing enormous contemporary paintings torn and damaged in transit.
"People who collect contemporary paintings rarely think about conservation problems, but big paintings need special care when they're moved," Ms.
Irgang said, standing over a huge, ripped canvas.
The six conservators at the 12-year-old Manhattan conservation studio clean paintings from Old Masters to the present.
Discolored varnish can be removed.
And structural work, which includes creating linings, stretchers and supports, can be accomplished on a variety of canvases.
Work can be done in phases, starting with efforts to prevent the painting from further disintegration.
Cosmetic touches, like removing discolored varnish, can come later, Ms.
Irgang said.
New York Conservation Associates charges $75 an hour.
Daedalus Inc.
(212) 406-7020.
Clifford Craine, owner of Daedalus, recently restored a pitcher and basin that belonged to John Hancock.
The old restoration materials were removed; the objects were taken apart and cleaned and reassembled with a modern adhesive.
"About 50 percent of our work is redoing old restorations," said Mr.
Craine, a conservator for 19 years.
Early adhesives often lose stability, and paints can yellow and darken, he said.
Daedalus has three conservators who work on sculpture dating from ancient to modern times, as well as archeological and decorative objects.
The charge is $75 an hour.
Daria Keynan
(212) 206-6992
Very often artwork on paper becomes damaged simply because it was framed improperly, says Daria Keynan, a Manhattan-based paper conservator.
Mats not made from 100 percent ragboard may contain acid, which destroys paper.
And tape can leave stains and tears.
"Half of the damage I see in works on paper from private collection is avoidable," Ms.
Keynan said.
Many paper problems can be solved.
Darkening and discoloration can often be removed with good-quality water or bleaches.
Brown spots are also removable.
But fading is usually permanent.
Daria Keynan charges $50 an hour.


Gorbachev and Yeltsin Move To Secure Nuclear Weapons
As Western officials expressed some concerns over the long-term stability of the Soviet nuclear arsenal, Boris N. Yeltsin, President of the Russian federated republic, said today that he and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev would convene a meeting of national security officials and the leaders of the Soviet republics to discuss future national controls over nuclear weapons.
Mr.
Yeltsin said the declaration last weekend by the Ukraine to secede from the Soviet Union and proclaim its territory a nuclear-free zone would prompt the transfer of nuclear weapons stored there to the Russian republic, where they would remain under strict central authority.


Cambodian Talks Stall on Election Question
Peace talks aimed at ending the 12-year-old civil war in Cambodia bogged down here today as the Cambodian Government and rebel groups became deadlocked on issues ranging from how to hold free elections to deciding which soldiers must be disarmed.
The negotiations stalled a day after the Government and rebel leaders reached what they described as a landmark agreement to reduce their military forces by 70 percent.


Man Says He Saw Police Shoot 19-Year-Old in Back as He Fled
A Brooklyn man, asserting that he saw the shooting death of 19-year-old Andel Anthony Amos on Sunday, said yesterday that Mr.
Amos was trying to flee when he was shot several times by the police.
The man, Guillermo Simmons, 26, also said that although Mr.
Amos had a handgun and struggled with an officer over the weapon, he dropped it just before he ran.
Mr.
Amos had his hands in the air as he fled and was shot in the back, Mr.
Simmons said.


LITHUANIANS FREE OF SOVIET DRAFT
The Soviet Government has agreed to stop conscripting Lithuanian youths and to release those now serving in the Soviet Army, further indicating Soviet moves toward acceptance of Lithuania's independence, President Vytautas Landsbergis of Lithuania announced today.
Mr.
Landsbergis spoke after meeting with the new Soviet military commander for the Baltic region, Lieut.
Gen.
Vladislav Mironov, who was appointed on Sunday.


Chet Lemon Is Hospitalized
CHET LEMON, who played for the Detroit Tigers and Chicago White Sox, was in serious condition in a Florida hospital with a rare blood-clotting disorder in his abdomen, Tiger officials said yesterday.


HUNGARIANS EASE STAND OVER DAM
Officials from Czechoslavakia and Hungary are trying to resolve their differences over the future of an almost completed hydroelectric dam that threatens to alter the flow of the Danube and roil relations between the two formerly Communist countries.
Hungarian officials have withdrawn earlier threats to block all river and truck traffic bound for Czecholsovakia if Prague went ahead and put the Gabcikovo dam into operation on schedule next year.


Accountants Push to Bar Cheap Audits
A New York State accounting group, fighting a growing trend toward tough price competition for clients, is seeking to ban accountants in the state from doing audits at prices that do not cover costs.
The debate began last summer when the New York State Society of Certified Public Accountants named an 11-person task force headed by Harvey D. Moskowitz, director for professional services at BDO Seidman, to study the issue.
In June, the task force persuaded the society's board to take the view, as its confidential report states, that an auditor who performs "services for a fee that is less than the direct labor and related costs" is presumed to lack independence from the client.


Michael Owens Charged With Rape
Former Syracuse football star MICHAEL OWENS was arrested yesterday and charged with raping an 18-year-old woman, Syracuse police officials said.
Owens, 23, pleaded not guilty in city court to a first-degree rape charge and was released on $10,000 bail.
Owens is the older brother of the Syracuse basketball player BILLY OWENS, who was made the No. 3 pick in the N.B.A. draft this summer.
Michael Owens played three seasons at Syracuse as a running back, and in 1989, he gained 1,018 yards, the fifth best season of any runner in school history.
He was selected by the Kansas City Chiefs in the ninth round of the 1990 N.F.L. draft.
He was cut by the team and subsequently made an unsuccessful bid with the San Antonio Riders of the World League of American Football. (AP)


Study Shows Passing AIDS in Breast Milk Is Easier Than Thought
Mothers can transmit AIDS to their infants through breast milk at a far higher rate than previously believed, researchers have found.
The study raises the question of whether infected mothers in developing countries should continue to breast-feed.
The World Health Organization says they should because the risks of not breast-feeding are even greater.
But in developed countries, the advice has long been the opposite: infected mothers are advised not to breast-feed.


Cuban Prisoners Free a Hostage, Ending Impasse
Cuban detainees who seized 10 hostages and a cellblock of the Federal prison here eight days ago released a female hostage tonight in exchange for an opportunity to talk with a reporter.
The hostage was identified as Kitty Suddeth, a 34-year-old secretary at the prison and the mother of two children.
She was one of three women taken hostage.


Philip Morris Elects Chief
The board of the Philip Morris Companies yesterday elected Michael A. Miles chairman and chief executive.
He will succeed Hamish Maxwell, who will be retiring at the age of 65 in accordance with corporate policy.
The changes, announced in March, will take effect on Sept. 1.
Mr.
Miles, 51 years old, has served as deputy chairman at the cigarette, food and beer company since April.
He was previously chairman and chief executive of Kraft General Foods Inc., which was acquired by Philip Morris in 1988.
He joined Kraft Inc. as president and chief operating officer in 1982 after serving in several executive posts at Hublein Inc.


From the Subway Smoke: Questions
Broken bodies and twisted steel in the Lexington Avenue subway tunnel give awful evidence of the terrifying instant when routine travel exploded into a fatal accident.
Now, in the aftermath of five deaths and more than 200 injuries, an anxious public waits for answers.
The cause is still unknown but three apparent facts reverberate: An empty crack vial was found in the motorman's cab and a blood test showed alarming results . . . the train had reportedly been operated erratically before the crash, speeding and missing stations . . . earlier this year the motorman was suspended for a speeding violation.


Unhappy Guetterman Wants to Be Traded
Lee Guetterman has grown more and more disenchanted with his limited pitching role for the Yankees and right now a trade seems more possible for him than a significant spot on the staff.
Guetterman said yesterday that the trade request was recently made to General Manager Gene Michael.
His agent and lawyer, Jeffrey Moorad, and the Yankees said a trade request had not been made.
But a source familiar with the situation said the agent planned to call the Yankees in the coming days.


Despite Concerns, Subways Are Seen as Relatively Safe
Statistics show that subways are a relatively safe way to travel, according to Federal safety agencies.
And aside from its crime problems, New York City's system bears up reasonably well in comparison to others.
Each year about 1.8 billion passengers ride rapid-transit trains around the nation.
And although statistics from different sources sometimes conflict, they all present a picture of relative safety from accidents on subways.


Rumor in China: That It Knew of Soviet Plot
News about the Soviet Union from the official press here has been slow and sparse, with news traveling much faster by word-of-mouth than by Chinese radio or television, and one of the most striking tidbits being tossed about is the notion that China knew about the Soviet coup before it happened.
It seems virtually inconceivable that Soviet leaders would hint at their plans to China, and the popular suspicions say more about attitudes toward the Government and the predilection for conspiracy theories than about any real cooperation between the hard-liners in Beijing and Moscow.


Riders on the Ill-Fated Train Saw Trouble From the Start
Jerry Yambl was waiting at the head of the platform for the No. 4 train at the Kingsbridge station in the Bronx late Tuesday night.
Right away he thought something was amiss: the first car had run right by him.
It was the first indication, four stops from the route's start, of what several passengers later described as an erratic, frightening, ride at the tragic end of which their worst fears would prove too well founded.


Blue Rose? Why, of All Bloomin' Things?  Because of Its Pretty Price
TALK of roses that are blue, instead of the present range of colors from whites and creams and yellows to tangerines and reds, is not especially new.
There are tales that the Moors in Spain had them in medieval times.
If they did, their blue tones were produced by putting indigo water around their roots, to which they bloomed blue -- or bluish -- in protest, not out of genetic destiny.


When Day Turns Into Night
David Meehan roots for short afternoon matches at the United States Open.
He has nothing against baseliners, tie breakers and grueling, thrilling five-setters, as long as they aren't conflicting with dinner.
As the director of Stadium Operations for the National Tennis Center, Meehan is responsible for, among other things, crowd control.
It is not enjoyable work when the final Stadium match of the afternoon runs smack into the evening session, as it did Tuesday when Ivan Lendl needed 3 hours 37 minutes to handle Richard Krajicek in the first match of the day, condemning Meehan to an evening of crowd control frenzy.


The U.N. Today
General Assembly PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR THE LAW OF THE SEA -- 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.
General information phone: (212) 963-1234 Tours are conducted 9 A.M.-5:45 P.M.


Economic Reform Aiding Peronist Campaign
For Peronist party candidates seeking office on Sept. 8 in Argentina's mid-term elections, the hottest product they have to offer voters is the Economy Minister, Domingo Felipe Cavallo.
The situation is certainly unusual.
Mr.
Cavallo, who is not a member of the Peronist or any other party, has been taking to the hustings for the last two weeks, pleading with voters to vote Peronist so his plan to rejuvenate the economy will have a chance to succeed.


Critic's Notebook; Surrealism Finds Itself Riding New Wave
"He was a lover of love in a world that believes in prostitution," said Marcel Duchamp shortly after the death of Andre Breton in 1966.
A quarter-century later, Surrealism, the movement that Breton helped to found in France in the early 1920's and over which he regally presided, is suddenly everywhere being celebrated and revalued.
It was not long ago that Surrealism was widely dismissed.
Modernists had little use for the movement's anti-formalism, for its concerns with things like disorder, excess and exotica.
The antics of Salvador Dali, the movement's most famous practitioner and publicity hound, only solidified a perception of Surrealism as trivial and gimmicky.
These qualities were accentuated by countless advertising campaigns and other mass-market appropriations of the movement.


TENNIS: Inner-City Academy of Tennis and Hard Knocks; Where Promise Isn't Always Enough and a 15-Year-Old Struggles to Hold On to a Dream
Juan Garcia didn't think he could fit the United States Open into his busy schedule this week, even though his favorite tennis player, Boris Becker, had a late afternoon match on the day he held a ticket.
Garcia had his own match to play Tuesday afternoon at 3 o'clock, in the second round of the Bronx Championships at Pelham Park.
Plus, he needed his rest, after having been awake most of the previous night.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.37
5.59
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.30
5.37
7.47
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.31
5.43
7.44
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.62
7.69
8.71
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.05
8.12
8.91
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.05
9.10
9.95
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.98
6.99
7.64
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Disney Theme Parks Get a New President
Judson C. Green has been named president of Walt Disney Attractions, assuming responsibility for running the company's theme parks in California, Florida and Europe.
Mr.
Green, previously senior vice president and chief financial officer of the parent, the Walt Disney Company, succeeds Richard A. Nunis, who has been promoted to chairman of Walt Disney Attractions.


Call Leads Police to Bodies Of 2 Men Rolled in Carpet
The bodies of two men, each handcuffed and rolled up in a separate carpet, were found on the street in Queens early yesterday, the police said.
The head of each victim was covered with a plastic bag, said Sgt.
Mary Wrensen, a police spokeswoman.
She said neither victim had been identified.


Uncertain Future for a Russian Enclave
As Konigsberg, it was the easternmost outpost of German power for 402 years, ending in 1945.
As Kaliningrad, it has been the westernmost outpost of the Soviet Union for the last 46 years.
Now, with the politics and geography of the Soviet Union in question, the future of the small enclave on the southeastern coast of the Baltic Sea is murky.
Soviet authorities apparently intend to retain the city and surrounding district as part of the Russian republic.
But it will be isolated from Soviet territory when the Baltic republics achieve full independence.


Essay; After the Fall
I've been out of touch for a few weeks; anything happen while I was on vacation?
No Rip Van Winkle could be more delighted: Communism is dead.
The Soviet empire is breaking up.
This is a glorious moment for human freedom.


Auto Accidents Are Seldom Criminal
The death of a youngster who was accidentally struck by a car in Crown Heights raises a fundamental question about vehicular homicide in New York State: When is causing an accident criminal conduct?
Right now, few drivers involved in fatal accidents are indicted.
In Brooklyn last year, 202 drivers were involved in vehicular deaths but only 12 were indicted.
That does not mean the law is weak or unduly protective of drivers.
One aspect of the law should be strengthened, but otherwise it is fair and its prosecution has been reasonable.


BRIEFS
*
American Telephone and Telegraph Co., New York, signed a two-year, $15.4 million contract renewal with Southland Corp., Dallas, to provide long-distance telephone services to public telephones at 7-Eleven stores. *
Chase Manhattan Bank of Connecticut, Bridgeport, Conn., is considering moving the headquarters of its Citytrust Bank and Mechanics and Farmers Savings Bank units out of Bridgeport. *
Corning Inc., Corning, N.Y., and its Corning Lab Services Inc. unit acquired Wadsworth/Alert Laboratories Inc., North Canton, Ohio, an environmental testing company.
Terms were not disclosed. *
Digital Equipment Corp., Maynard, Mass., received a contract of more than $3.5 million from Electrabel, a Belgian utility company. *
Doskocil Cos., South Hutchinson, Kan., a meat processor, said most of its creditors and shareholders had approved its reorganization plan, enabling the company to proceed with a Sept. 4 confirmation hearing. *
General Electric Co., Fairfield, Conn., received two contracts totaling more than $80 million to supply power generation to Masspower, a joint venture that is building a 240-megawatt cogeneration plant in Springfield, Mass. *
Philips N.V., the Dutch electronics maker, and Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Tokyo, are expected to receive European Community approval for a joint electronics venture, community officials said. *
RF&amp;P Corp., Richmond, a rail-freight and real estate company, said its shareholders could receive $39 a share in a tender offer scheduled to begin on Friday.


The Shifting Frontiers of Empire
Conquest, colonization, revolution and war have for centuries swept back and forth across what is now the Soviet Union.
Old grievances over borders and ethnic minorities are surfacing again as the union begins to come apart.
Maps of Russia in 1700, Russia in 1796, the Russian Empire in 1914, the Soviet Union in 1922 and the Soviet Union showing locations of Republics in 1991.
"The Soviet Union's Republics in 1991"
Ethnic makeup in 1989 census (percent): Russia Ethnic Russian: 82 All others: 18 Ukraine Nationality the republic is named for: 73 Ethnic Russian: 22 All others: 5 Kazakhstan Nationality the republic is named for: 40 Ethnic Russian: 38 All others: 22 1.
Lithuania Nationality the republic is named for: 80 Ethnic Russian: 9 All others: 11 2.
Latvia Nationality the republic is named for: 52 Ethnic Russian: 34 All others: 11 3.
Estonia Nationality the republic is named for: 62 Ethnic Russian: 30 All others: 8 4.
Byelorussia Nationality the republic is named for: 78 Ethnic Russian: 13 All others: 9 5.
Moldavia Nationality the republic is named for: 64 Ethnic Russian: 13 All others: 23 6.
Georgia Nationality the republic is named for: 70 Ethnic Russian: 6 All others: 24 7.
Armenia Nationality the republic is named for: 93 Ethnic Russian: 2 All others: 5 8.
Azerbaijan Nationality the republic is named for: 83 Ethnic Russian: 6 All others: 11 9.
Turkmenia Nationality the republic is named for: 72 Ethnic Russian: 9 All others: 19 10.
Uzbekistan Nationality the republic is named for: 71 Ethnic Russian: 8 All others: 21 11.
Tadzhikistan Nationality the republic is named for: 62 Ethnic Russian: 8 All others: 30 12.
Kirghizia Nationality the republic is named for: 52 Ethnic Russian: 21 All others: 27 (Sources: Times Atlas of World History; Cultural Atlas of Russia and the Soviet Union; Central Intelligence Agency (population figures)


A Judge Orders A Times Union To Enter Talks
A Federal judge ruled yesterday that the union representing mailers at The New York Times must participate in arbitration over staffing disputes that have delayed the opening of a $450 million printing plant in Edison, N.J.
But Judge Lawrence M. McKenna of Federal District Court in Manhattan also said in his decision that The Times could not use arbitration to revise the terms of an existing contract, with New York Mailers Union Local 6, which expires in 1993.


Rent Control in New York Has a Short and Beneficial History
To the Editor:
A few contradictions and misconceptions in "A Relic Called Rent Control" (editorial, Aug. 13):


Books of The Times; Ad Industry Diagnosis: Brand Names Weakening
Whatever Happened to Madison Avenue?
Advertising in the 90's  By Martin Mayer  269 pages.
Little, Brown. $22.95.
Great advertising requires great clients, suggests Martin Mayer in his new book on the ad industry.
Alas, the great clients seem to be disappearing.
But why should the rest of us care?
If inspired and effective advertising does get made, what's in it for us, the weary targets of Madison Avenue?


Elias Friedensohn, 67, A Painter and Sculptor
Elias Friedensohn, a painter, watercolorist and sculptor and professor emeritus of art at Queens College, died on Monday at his home in Leonia, N.J.
He was 67 years old.
He died of cancer, said a spokesman for the college.


Fakes Aren't Funny
To The Home Section:
Selling frankly fake art is not in itself illegal, but it is definitely not "The Next Best Thing"  [ Currents, Aug. 8 ]  to buying an authentic work.


Santa Fe Journal; Atomic Age Interrupts A Dance With the Sun
The Pueblo Indians called this city "the dancing ground of the sun." D. H. Lawrence memorialized the looming Sangre de Cristo Mountains.
And this summer, residents and visitors to Santa Fe, a city in which the night can still be pierced by howling coyotes, have been routinely treated to sound and light shows as thunderstorms flashed across northern New Mexico, extending the white-water rafting season on the Rio Grande.
Yet for all the awesome power that nature routinely displays, many people in the nation's oldest state capital seem more concerned with the potential consequences of a force unleashed by humans at nearby Los Alamos National Laboratory, home of the atom bomb.


Cosmetic Makers Read the Census
Acknowledging the changing complexion of America, several of the nation's largest cosmetics companies are plunging into a new competition with special shades of makeup for black, Hispanic and Asian women.
The new lines by Revlon, Estee Lauder, Maybelline and others are partly a response to the rising number of Americans of non-European descent, analysts say.
But minority women are also becoming increasingly desirable customers, because as a group they are now younger than Caucasian women and are more likely to spend money on cosmetics, marketing studies indicate.


Prompted by Stock Dispute, U.P.I. Files for Bankruptcy
United Press International filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code yesterday in United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York.
The news agency's petition, which had been expected, said that it had approximately $65 million in liabilities and $22 million in assets, and that there were about 4,000 creditors.


Campaign Trail; The Issue in One Bronx Race: Getting Even
What often makes New York City politics such a vibrant spectator sport is its lack of subtlety.
Grudges that would be borne privately in other cities explode into public view here.
Tales of political paybacks and payoffs are worn proudly as emblems of power, not badges of shame.
So it is in the City Council race in the Bronx's 15th District, where former allies are engaged in a battle that is unabashedly about retribution.


Minnesotan Signs With Devils
CHAD ERICKSON, a 1989-90 all-America goaltender at the University of Minnesota at Duluth, signed a contract with the New Jersey Devils yesterday.
Terms of the agreement were not disclosed, but a statement from the university said that the 21-year-old junior, a 1988 Devils draft choice, had signed a multiyear contract.


To Avoid Catching a Cold, Don't Worry About It
Medical researchers have confirmed what many people instinctively believe: you are more likely to catch a cold when you feel "stressed out."
In the clearest demonstration yet of the relationship between emotions and infections, researchers in Pittsburgh and Britain found that high levels of psychological stress could nearly double a person's chances of catching a cold by lowering resistance to viral infection.


Chargers Send Tolliver to Falcons in Deal
The Chargers sent third-year quarterback BILLY JOE TOLLIVER to the Atlanta Falcons for an undisclosed 1992 draft choice.
Tolliver, 25 years old, lost his starting job five days ago to second-year quarterback JOHN FRIESZ.
"I'm young, I guess," Tolliver said.
"I don't have any excuses. I just didn't get it done." The N.F.L.'s 24th-rated quarterback last season after completing 52.7 percent of his passes for 16 touchdowns and 16 interceptions in 14 starts, Tolliver becomes Atlanta's third quarterback behind starter CHRIS MILLER and backup BRETT FAVRE. . . .
The injury bug that has dogged MARCUS DUPREE throughout his pro career has bitten the Los Angeles Rams' running back again.
A bruised left toe will keep him on injured reserve and out of uniform for at least the required four weeks.


The Bitter Victims of B.C.C.I.'s Fall
The people accused of engineering the huge fraud that brought down the Bank of Credit and Commerce International reside in various states of luxury, ranging from a villa in Karachi, Pakistan, to a hotel suite in Abu Dhabi to a yacht in the south of France.
But the victims are in places like Bradford, an old industrial city in northern England where Mohammed Aslam Choudary sadly surveys his idle workshop.
It used to employ as many as 60 people stitching up bed sheets, pillowcases and quilts, more than 10,000 sets a week.
Now the shop floor is deserted except for a few barren tables, unattended sewing machines and a dejected Mr.
Choudary, one of B.C.C.I.'s former customers.


Dollar Stages Broad Retreat On Report of Lower G.N.P.
The dollar declined on world currency markets yesterday after the Government reported that the United States economy had unexpectedly contracted in the second quarter.
Gold prices eased in domestic markets after settling mixed overseas.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery settled at $353.90 an ounce, off 50 cents from Tuesday.
The Republic National Bank of New York said gold slipped 10 cents an ounce, to a late bid of $354.25.


In the Nation; Big Tickets Revisited
The continuing collapse of the Soviet Union, despite Mikhail Gorbachev's effort to preserve its vestiges, raises hard questions about the U.S.
Senate's decision to spend $10 billion reviving an anti-missile defense abandoned 20 years ago.
A defense against whom?
The hard-liners in Moscow have been shown to be bumblers, rather than a threat to take power.
If one of the dissident republics got control of an ICBM, it might more likely fire it at the Kremlin than the U.S.
And whatever shreds of the former superpower that survive will need aid from the West, not war with it.


New Faces Rise in Moscow, As Do Some Once Shunned
Boris D. Pankin became the new Soviet Foreign Minister today on the basis of a single but rare deed.
Alone among the Soviet diplomatic corps, Mr.
Pankin, the Soviet Ambassador to Czechoslovakia, spoke out against the coup d'etat on Tuesday, Aug. 20, when tanks were still on the streets of Moscow and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev was still held captive in the Crimea.


Pralls Island Journal; To Colony Of Herons, Foul Marsh Is Home
To the uninitiated, Pralls Island in the Arthur Kill is a befouled marsh surrounded by an industrial wasteland and bathed by the region's most polluted waters.
But when Albert F. Appleton slogs through the uninhabited 88-acre island, his eyes skip past the washed-up tires and pints of Thunderbird wine and see nothing less than one of New York City's environmental jewels.
For Pralls is part of the city's new Harbor Herons wildlife refuge, home to New York State's largest colony of the elegant, long-legged wading bird.


Israeli Civic Watchdog Is Suddenly a Target
By both statute and practice, Miriam Ben-Porat is the conscience of the Israeli Government.
And these days she is pained.
Mrs.
Ben-Porat, a former Supreme Court Justice, is Israel's Comptroller General.
It is her job to audit Government agencies and their affiliates, then determine whether their performance has been "economical, effective and morally irreproachable."


Steinbrenner's Role In Signing of Taylor Perturbs McMullen
Not much is heard from George Steinbrenner these days, but he spoke up just in time for the Yankees to surrender to a 19-year-old high school pitcher from North Carolina, who never wanted to go to college but used the threat as an effective negotiating ploy.
Now others are beginning to speak out angrily about the Yankees' decision.
The signing of Brien Taylor to a $1.55 million contract instantly outraged other clubs because of the impact it will have on current and future negotiations with amateur draft picks.


Lives With a Common Bond In Death: Late-Night Work
When the doors of the IRT train swished shut behind them, none of the five could have imagined anything more than an uneventful early-morning journey.
Four were returning home from late work shifts -- one as a hotel housekeeper, another as a nurse's aide, a third as a porter, still another as a nurse.
The fifth was on his way to duty as a security guard.
One fondly hoped to see her husband and son for the first time in a month.
But by stepping aboard the same southbound subway train in the innocent calm of a muggy summer night, they found themselves entwined in a nightmarish trip that would be their last.


Lessons in Ignorance Breed Prejudice
To the Editor:
Your front-page article "Afrocentrism: Balancing or Skewing History?" (Aug. 11) brought back painful memories of a particular lesson I remember from my sixth-grade geography book.


Fernandez Shifts on Ban On Condoms
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez appeared yesterday to resign himself to allowing parents to bar their youngsters from receiving condoms, and he revealed proposals to make the idea work.
A month ago, a furious Mr.
Fernandez warned that a "parental opt-out" provision would "derail" the Board of Education's plan to make condoms available on request to all New York City high school students.


Bubble and Trouble in New York's Venerable Melting Pot
Few people speak unabashedly anymore about the ideal of the melting pot.
Years of ethnic and racial battling, varying degrees of progress by various groups toward America's mainstream and the yawning rift between whites and blacks -- all have made the concept an object of derision, amendment or outright dismissal.
Yet frayed as the image may be, a summer of tension in New York indicates that it still holds some mythic sway in a city that used to accept it as a municipal credo.
How else to explain why during a period of severe budget cuts, recession and violent crime, an outbreak of racial and ethnic incidents overrode all else and seemed to hold the city in its thrall?
A Collective Anxiety
From a month of racial firebombings and attacks in slowly integrating Canarsie, to the ethnically inflammatory statements of Prof.
Leonard Jeffries, to last week's conflagration in Crown Heights, the city seemed to react with particular anxiety to events that seemed to threaten the live-and-let-live milieu that many New Yorkers take pride in and view as crucial.


Apple Computer Offering Rebates
Apple Computer Inc. said it would offer rebates of $125 to $800 on certain Macintosh computers sold in the United States between Sept. 1 and Jan. 5, 1992.
To qualify, customers must also buy a printer or monitor or purchase three computers at once.
Apple said the rebates were intended to encourage buying during the back-to-school and Christmas seasons.


Nichols Is Familiar Face As Jets Prepare for Bucs
If Gerald Nichols lines up at defensive tackle for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers on Sunday in the regular-season opener with the Jets at Giants Stadium, it might surprise but not shock the guys across the line.
The 6-foot-2-inch, 260-pound Nichols, a defensive tackle chosen on the seventh round of the 1987 draft by the Jets, was waived by New York in the final cutdown on Monday, then was claimed by Tampa Bay on Tuesday.
That day, the Buccaneers also picked up defensive end Dexter Manley, the former Redskin who had been released by Phoenix.


Corrections
An article by Reuters in Business Day yesterday about the Resolution Trust Corporation's review of its dealings with Salomon Brothers referred incorrectly to the corporation's comments on the review.
A representative of the corporation, the agency overseeing the savings and loan bailout, mentioned the review in response to a reporter's questions.
But the corporation did not announce it on Tuesday or notify Salomon of it that day.


Rates Drop at 5-Year Note Sale
The Government held another successful Treasury note auction yesterday, as dealers snapped up $9.25 billion worth of new five-year notes.
The well-received auction, coupled with a number of other developments deemed positive by credit market participants, set off a rally in the secondary market for Treasury securities, where prices rose and interest rates moved lower.


Highland Penny Wins At Belmont
New York switched its racing scene from Saratoga to Belmont Park yesterday for a fall meeting of 48 days, and did it smoothly and almost privately before an opening-day crowd of 9,273.
That's about 40 percent of the daily average at Saratoga for the last five weeks, and not much bigger than some of the crowds that gathered during that time at the closed Aqueduct track in Queens to bet on televised races without ever seeing a horse in the flesh.


Ukraine and Russia Trying To Heal Their Injured Ties
Officials of the Russian republic and the Ukraine, meeting for emergency negotiations, sought to heal their damaged relations today and to search for some sort of "transitional" path to future association past the collapsing Soviet Union system.
In a message that ended a long day of anxious talks, the union's two most populous republics vowed joint action to prevent the "uncontrolled disintegration" of the national state.


Sophie Silberberg, Rights Worker, 78
Sophie Silberberg, who retired last year as the executive director of the Fund For Free Expression, a human-rights group based in New York, died on Saturday at her home in East Hampton, L.I.
She was 78 years old.
Family members gave the cause of death as cardiac arrest.


U.S. Says Schools Cost More but Achieve Less
The Education Department today made public a back-to-school report that Education Secretary Lamar Alexander said would give a "heightened sense of urgency" to passage of President Bush's proposed education legislation.
The report predicted record spending on education at all levels and an increased enrollment of children in preschool programs.
But Government officials said increased expenditures for each pupil had not translated into better educated students.


'Smart Card' Accord Is Signed by A.T.&amp;T.
The American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company said yesterday that it and a large Japanese company would explore how to further develop small credit-card-like devices that could carry information like a person's medical records or the repair history of an automobile.
A.T.&amp; T., which makes the cards known as "smart cards," and the Nippondenso Company, which makes the equipment that reads them, signed an agreement for the Japanese company to develop new applications of the technology.


Living the Life of Heisman Can Be Wearing
At the other end of the telephone line, the voice sounded a little worn, as if it had gone through this ritual too often for it to hold much interest anymore.
Ty Detmer knew the questions; he could recite the answers in short, effective bites, almost as if he were reading from a script.
This is how winning the Heisman Trophy last year has changed Detmer, the Brigham Young University quarterback, whose team opens its college football season tonight against the team many consider to be the preseason No. 1, Florida State, in the Pigskin Classic at Anaheim Stadium.
His celebrity has been reduced to a telephone conference call.


The Day's Highlights
What Shape the Union?
Ukraine on His Mind: Soviet and Russian delegates flew to the Ukraine today to sort out squabbles and border claims, while in Moscow President Mikhail S. Gorbachev issued ever more urgent warnings that the Soviet Union must survive, even if in a new and yet-undecided form.
Page A1.


The Right Way to Baltic Freedom
President Bush is being wrongly berated for going slow in restoring formal relations with the Baltic republics.
He has chosen the wise, if not the most obviously popular course.
By following rather than leading the pack, Washington avoids even appearing to promote the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
And it does so without diminishing the Baltic freedom that, wonderfully and unexpectedly, seems only days away.
Understandably, the long-captive peoples of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia are pained by Mr.
Bush's caution.
In the wake of the aborted Soviet coup, the three republics have moved boldly to control of their territories.
Their drive for full independence has now won the endorsement of the 12-nation European Community and of individual countries, notably Japan and four of the Nordic states.


YUGOSLAVIA TRUCE QUICKLY UNRAVELS
The explosion of mortar and cannon shells echoed through this Croatian town and surrounding villages again today despite a cease-fire agreement reached between army and Croatian leaders Tuesday night.
Tonight, Yugoslav army jets bombed targets in and near the town, and a large column of tanks was reported to be moving toward it from across the Serbian border.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 29
Neither Ted Williams nor Joe DiMaggio played today. Both teams had the day off.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economy contracted in the second quarter instead of expanding, revised U.S. data showed, suggesting that the recession lasted longer than had previously been thought.  [ Page D1. ]


U.S. JUDGE UPHOLDS SPEECH ON CAMPUS
Ruling that even racist and obnoxious student performances are protected by the First Amendment, a Federal judge has overturned the suspension of a fraternity at George Mason University that had run an "ugly woman" contest where a white man dressed in drag and blackface.
The judge, Claude M. Hilton, of the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia, on Tuesday rejected the university's argument that the Sigma Chi fraternity should be suspended for two years.


Copper Up to 4-Month High; Oil and Gasoline Prices Off
Copper futures prices rose to their highest levels in four months yesterday on improved demand and a near-term shortness of stocks.
High-grade copper futures for delivery in August settled 0.90 cent higher, at $1.04 a pound, on New York's Commodity Exchange.
The September contract ended up 0.75 cent, at $1.04 a pound, a level not reached since May 3.


Delve Deeper Into C.I.A.-Bank Connection; Pakistan Bias as Usual
Yo the Editor:
Recent anti-Semitic remarks by a Pakistani official made while defending the founder of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International (Business Day, Aug. 1) should be condemned by the world community.


Challenger Fails To Get on Ballot In Queens Race
New York State's highest court yesterday all but ended the race for Queens District Attorney, refusing to hear an appeal from the only Democratic challenger to the interim incumbent.
The Court of Appeals in Albany refused to hear an appeal from Vincent F. Nicolosi, who earlier this month was ousted from the contest by a lower-court ruling that held that his nominating petitions were rife with serious irregularities and "at least one case of patent fraud." It was the final appeal left to Mr.
Nicolosi, and the Court of Appeals denied it without comment.


Retired Officer Says He Killed 2 Who Tried to Rob Him in Queens
A retired police officer shot and killed two men in South Ozone Park, Queens, Tuesday night as they tried to rob him, the police said yesterday.
David Fernandez, 46 years old, told the police he had stopped his car at a public telephone on 129th Street and North Conduit Avenue about 11:10 P.M.
Tuesday to make a telephone call.


Massachusetts Condom Plan
In what is believed to be the first such statewide policy statement in the country, the Massachusetts Department of Education recommended today that high schools make condoms easily available to students.
The department also recommended that AIDS education programs be created for all grade levels and that high schools consider teaching students how to use condoms "to increase understanding and effect behavior change." Massachusetts is believed to be the first state to urge such a policy on all its districts.


Rent Control in New York Has a Short and Beneficial History; Let It Die
To the Editor:
"A Relic Called Rent Control" (editorial, Aug. 13) overlooks two important reasons not to lift the rent-control and stabilization laws:


Corrections
A brief article on the Business Technology page yesterday about a battery adapted for use in aircraft misidentified the parent of a company that makes the new fiber-nickel-cadmium battery.
It is the Acme Electric Corporation.
The article also misstated the type of battery now used in F-16 jet fighters.
It is a nickel-cadmium battery, not a lead-acid battery.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
MANY children who will be attending a new school next month picture the building's unfamiliar corridors as a treacherous labyrinth speckled with the shadows of potential failure and embarrassment.
Others see going to the new school as an adventure and look forward to meeting the challenges they will face.
Psychologists who study how children adapt to new schools have found several clear patterns that help predict which children are likely to have the most problems and which are likely to have the fewest.
"If your children have been successful at their old school, you can honestly reassure them that they'll be successful at the new school as well," said Dr.
Thomas J. Berndt, a professor of psychological sciences at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Ind.
"If they haven't been successful academically or have had behavior problems, the odds are those problems won't disappear by themselves. But the change of schools may make those children more receptive to making changes in their behaviors, so that they become more successful in the new school."
Helping children make those changes requires that parents and teachers understand their concerns, which are often unspoken.
Children who are fearful of attending a new school may express fears symbolically.
For example, a child may say that she is worried that she won't be able to find her classes.
But reassuring her that the classrooms are logically numbered seldom helps.
Beneath the words lies the fear of embarrassment in front of new peers, who will then label her as incompetent and an outcast.
"There are three things running through the child's mind," said Dr.
Sidney B. Simon, a professor emeritus of psychological education at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
"Is there any danger in this new school or neighborhood? Will I be accepted? And will I be
enough
-- smart enough, pretty enough, tall enough, have enough of the right clothes?"
Researchers have found that the children who have the easiest time adjusting to a new school are those who did well at their old school, have parents who are well-educated, and are not burdened with significant changes at home.
Earlier successes in new academic and social situations seem to give children a reservoir of self-esteem they can tap during stressful times.
Children who haven't had such successes, who have recently moved to a new house (especially one in a less-safe neighborhood) and who are coping with family stresses are at much greater risk for behavior problems at the new school.
"If the move to another school was caused by the parents' divorce, the child is faced with a double whammy," said Dr.
John Guidubaldi, a professor of school psychology and counseling at Kent State University in Ohio.
"The structure of his life at home has changed as well, which makes the world even less predictable and more overwhelming."
Normal transitions -- like junior high school to senior high school -- are generally less stressful.
But one is notorious for difficulties: going from elementary school to junior high school.
"The rate of behavior problems skyrockets," said Dr.
Jane C. Conoley, a professor of educational psychology at the University of Nebraska at Lincoln and a former president of the division of school psychology of the American Psychological Association.
"There's a large change in the culture of the school and also in teacher attitude," she explained.
"Junior high school teachers tend to be more oriented toward teaching a subject rather than teaching a student."
Researchers have found that the first week or two at school appear to be critical to a child's academic and social success.
"Your child will find a place in the school's pecking order within the first few days," said Dr.
Leonard A. Jason, a professor of psychology at DePaul University in Chicago.
"If she's having trouble at the beginning of the school year, that's a good predictor of later social and academic problems." FINDING NEW CLASSROOMS AND NEW FRIENDS
MOST children who will be attending a new school this year have at least a few worries about how they'll fare, both academically and socially.
Here are several things parents can do to make the transition as smooth as possible:
Visit the school before classes start.
Many schools have formal orientation programs for new students.
Others pair the new child with a "buddy" of the same age and sex who has attended the school and can show the new child the ropes.
A new school seems less intimidating when a child knows where the bathrooms are.
If the school has no orientation program, ask for permission to visit the school with your child before the semester begins.
"Walk through the child's schedule with her," advised Dr.
Thomas J. Berndt, a professor of psychological sciences at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Ind.
"Try to anticipate any problems, such as when she won't have time to stop at her locker between classes."
Minimize stress at home.
Even a child who is looking forward to attending a new school will feel extra stress.
"Maintain as much stability in the other areas of the child's life as you can," said Dr.
John Guidubaldi, a professor of school psychology and counseling at Kent State University in Ohio.
"Preserve the child's dining, television-watching and bedtime rituals."
Provide opportunities for your child to socialize.
Encourage your child to join extracurricular activities to meet a wider range of children.
"Organize a social event, like a slumber party or a trip to the zoo, so that other children can get to know your child away from school," said Dr.
Jane C. Conoley, a professor of educational psychology at the University of Nebraska at Lincoln.
If your child is an adolescent, let him know that his friends are welcome at your house.
Don't unintentionally add to the pressure.
Children want to please their parents.
Pumping a child too hard for information may send the message that what he's doing isn't good enough.
Dr.
Conoley warns, "Don't begin conversations every afternoon with, 'Did you meet anyone you liked today?' "


INSIDE
G.N.P. Is Down, Not Up
The economy contracted in the second quarter instead of growing, suggesting the recession lasted longer than previously thought.
Page D1.


New York State Weighs Canceling A Huge Canadian Power Contract
The future of a giant hydroelectric construction project in northern Quebec, already under siege from environmentalists, faces a new threat: a move by New York State to back away from a $17 billion, 21-year contract to buy power.
On Tuesday night, the New York Power Authority said it had reached an agreement with Hydro-Quebec to delay until Nov. 30, 1992, a decision on whether to buy one million kilowatts of hydroelectricity from the Canadian utility.
The New York authority had originally said it would decide by the end of this year and, if it agreed to the sale, begin buying the power in 1995.


Critic's Notebook; Surrealism Finds Itself Riding New Wave
He was a lover of love in a world that believes in prostitution," said Marcel Duchamp shortly after the death of Andre Breton in 1966. A quarter-century later, Surrealism, the movement that Breton helped to found in France in the early 1920's and over which he regally presided, is suddenly everywhere being celebrated and revalued.
It was not long ago that Surrealism was widely dismissed.
Modernists had little use for the movement's anti-formalism, for its concerns with things like disorder, excess and exotica.
The antics of Salvador Dali, the movement's most famous practitioner and publicity hound, only solidified a perception of Surrealism as trivial and gimmicky.
These qualities were accentuated by countless advertising campaigns and other mass-market appropriations of the movement.


Hawaiian Airlines Plan Is Approved
The parent company of Hawaiian Airlines said its shareholders approved a restructuring in which the company would sell a quarter of itself to Northwest Airlines.
Under the arrangement, HAL Inc. will sell 1.1 million common shares to Northwest.
The $4 million purchase follows an agreement between the carriers that includes joint purchasing programs.


With Minds on Homeland at War
For 1 hour 12 minutes on court 17, there was a safe haven in tennis for two Croatians far from the civil war in Yugoslavia.
Then, all too soon, Goran Ivanisevic had beaten Goran Prpic, 6-1, 6-3, 6-4, in a second-round match at the United States Open.
The racquets were packed away, neatly, in bags.
Chaos awaited, again.
There were phone calls to be made.


Calendar: Textile Show And a Lecture Series
Textile Designs  Wall Gallery at John Jay College, 445 West 59th Street; (212) 534-3377.
An exhibition of hand-printed decorative fabrics, textiles and accessories from Harlem Textile Works, a nonprofit art center, starts Tuesday and runs through Oct. 29.
Hours: 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Monday through Friday.
Free.
Lectures Plus  Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6868.
Lecture series, workshops, seminars and tours start Sept. 19 with a three-session class on the dyed textiles of Asia.
Lecture series include three Tuesday luncheons with the designers Dakota Jackson, Adam Tihany and Vicente Wolf.
There will also be illustrated talks on the industrial designer Henry Dreyfuss, who designed classic American products like John Deere farm equipment, the 20th-Century Limited train of the New York Central Railroad and the Honeywell round thermostat.


Penn State Is Classic in Trouncing Ga. Tech
The college football season began auspiciously for Penn State tonight and miserably for Georgia Tech.
In the Kickoff Classic at Giants Stadium, played before a record crowd of 77,409, the Nittany Lions trounced the Yellow Jackets, 34-22.
Trounce is the correct verb because this contest was over when Penn State went ahead by 34-3 in the second minute of the fourth quarter.
Less pertinent were the 19 points the Yellow Jackets managed to score in the final four minutes.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
BASF A.G., Ludwigshafen, Germany, announced that Juergen-Friedrich Kammer, chairman of its paint division, AG Lacke und Farben, would leave the company at the end of 1991. *
Furniture Corporation of America, St.
Louis, a manufacturer of upholstered furniture, named Glenn N. Rupp president and chief executive. *
Grow Group Inc., New York, a producer of chemical coatings and paint, named Joseph Quinn to the new position of executive vice president and chief operating officer. *
Huffy Corp., Dayton, Ohio, a manufacturer of bicycles, basketball equipment and juvenile products, named Charlton L. George vice president for finance and chief financial officer.
He succeeds Gary Morin, who has been appointed president of Washington Inventory Service Co., a Huffy subsidiary. *
Invest Financial Corp., Tampa, Fla., a subsidiary of Kemper Financial Companies Inc., which is owned by Kemper Corp., named Ellen McCorkle senior vice president and director of operations. *
Learning Channel, Bethesda, Md., a cable educational network owned by Discovery Communications, named John Ford senior vice president for programming. *
Fred Meyer Inc., Portland, Ore., a general merchandise retail chain, named Roger G. Miller chairman and chief executive. *
Western Waste Industries, Los Angeles, a solid-waste management company, appointed Mark D. Bozajian executive vice president and a member of its executive committee.


Big Night for Taylor (Wade, That Is)
His last name is Taylor and his agent is Scott Boras.
He is a young pitcher the Yankees rave about, he was at Yankee Stadium last night and he could be an integral part of the future.
Brien Taylor?
No, Wade Taylor.
He has those traits too, and he completed a special day for a couple of Taylors last night by pitching strongly into the seventh inning to lead the Yankees to a 5-1 victory over the Rangers.
The victory snapped a three-game losing streak.


Finnish Venture
The United Technologies Corporation said it had formed a venture in Finland that would use silicon sensor technology in high-volume industrial applications.
The new company, Vaisala Technologies, will develop, make and market silicon capacitive microsensors primarily for car manufacturers and suppliers, United Technologies said.
Partners in the venture are Vaisala Oy and the Finnish National Fund for Research and Development.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the recent violence in Crown Heights misidentified a spokesman for the Lubavitcher Hasidim.
He is Rabbi Shea Hecht.
An article on Saturday misstated the number of Hasidim arrested during the violence.
It was 4, not 44.


Transit Authority Will Renew Push for Random Drug Tests
The New York City Transit Authority last year routinely tested one-third of its employees for drug use.
Yesterday, after a crack vial was found in the motorman's cab in the Union Square subway crash, transit officials said they would renew their push for the right to randomly test any worker involved in any way with running a train or bus.
The Transit Authority has been trying to introduce random testing of subway and bus drivers for four years, but has run into opposition from the transit workers' union, which says the procedure could be used for harassment.


People
*
Craig Simpson, chairman and chief executive of McCann-Erickson Canada, will move to New York to work on the Coca-Cola Co. account at McCann-Erickson, New York.
A spokeswoman for McCann confirmed a report about Mr.
Simpson in this week's issue of the trade publication Advertising Age, but added that no other information would be available. *
Alan Burgis, senior vice president, has been promoted to director of client services at McCann-Erickson, Los Angeles, from management representative.


IRT Driver Charged in 5 Deaths; Crash Shuts Line and Ties Up City
The subway motorman whose train derailed early yesterday in a crush of sheared metal and battered passengers was charged with manslaughter last night.
The police said he had been drunk when he ran his train across a switch at high speed.
Five people were killed and more than 200 injured in the crash, the worst New York subway disaster in 63 years.
It plunged the city's transit system into chaos and left the Lexington Avenue IRT, the system's second-busiest line, so torn up that officials said it could be several days before it is running again.


Two Guys in a Pickup on the Prowl for Antiques
ROBERT LOUGHLIN likes to sit on the nubby chartreuse sofa in his Spartan trailer, circa 1954, with a Budweiser and the latest issues of the decorating magazines.
Elle Decor, HG, Metropolitan Home -- he buys them all.
He flips once through the pages, pausing to point out a Russel Wright lamp here, a Donald Deskey console there.
"Yeah, that's mine," he tells his partner, Gary Carlson, who is usually rustling up something in the microwave oven, like Spam.


Pop in Review
George Coleman
Fat Tuesday Through Sunday
The saxophonist George Coleman's show at Fat Tuesday on Tuesday night was a seminar on the uses of musical knowledge.
Mr.
Coleman and his band -- Harold Maburn on piano, Jamil Nasser on bass and Billy Higgins on drums -- were listening hard, and when one member of the group played something that might insinuate a style or a texture or a rhythm, the band was more than willing to follow and expand.
To hear four musicians improvise with that sort of literacy makes for an exceptional night.


John Mulligan Dies; A Priest, 79, He Led Seamen's Institute
The Rev.
Dr.
John Mosher Mulligan, who directed the 157-year-old Seamen's Church Institute in Manhattan during a period of great growth, died on Sunday at his home in Keene Valley, N.Y.
He was 79 years old and also lived in the Florida Keys, in Islamorada.
He died after a heart attack, said Andrea Lane, a spokeswoman for the institute.


29.07 Gain Lifts Dow to a Record of 3,055.23
Stock prices jumped sharply yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average surging past the record it set last week.
Traders were cheered by what they saw as a growing prospect of declining interest rates in the wake of new Government economic data.
After slipping 14 points in the week's first two sessions, the Dow gained 29.07 yesterday, or 1 percent, to close at 3,055.23, erasing the record set on Friday, 3,040.25.


Credit Markets; T.V.A. Is Selling Discount Notes
The Tennessee Valley Authority last week began a note program as an alternative borrowing source in case the Treasury's financing bank does not renew its credit line, which ends in October.
The agency said that since Friday it had sold $560 million in discount notes, $550 million of it in the first three days.
It sold an additional $10 million in notes yesterday.
Rates were offered yesterday for various maturities, with 5.49 percent for securities due in 1 to 26 days; 5.48 percent for notes due in 27 to 51 days, 5.47 percent for notes due in 52 to 89 days, and 5.45 percent for notes due in 90 to 177 days.
The T.V.A. can sell up to $2.5 billion in discount notes.


The Subway Crash: Terror and Rescue
FRIGHTENING TRIP: Long before the crash, riders had reason to worry.
Page B6.
COMMUTER CHAOS: The struggle to get around without a major subway line.
Page B7.
THE RESCUE EFFORT: Working in the dard and the heat to free trapped riders.
Page B9.


Arthur J. Quinn Dead; Retired Bank Executive
Arthur J. Quinn, former chief executive officer, president and chairman of the New York Bank for Savings, died on Saturday at his home in Southold, L.I.
He was 77 years old and also lived in Manhattan.
He died after a heart attack, said his son Kieran P. Quinn of Atlanta.


Dismissed Salomon Trader Sold Stock Before Scandal
Shortly before the Salomon Brothers scandal erupted, Paul W. Mozer, the bond trader the firm has blamed for ordering illegal trades, sold about $1.7 million worth of Salomon Inc. stock, the firm said yesterday.
When the sale of 46,000 shares was discovered after the firm disclosed illegal bond trading on Aug. 9, the proceeds were frozen in Mr.
Mozer's account in Salomon's private investment division, said a Salomon spokesman, who was asked about the transaction.
The firm's managing directors are required to conduct all securities transactions through the division.


St. Louis Rebuilding a Once-Grand Theater Area
Once called the Broadway of the Midwest, the long-neglected midtown theater district in St.
Louis is undergoing a renovation that may make it a model redevelopment project to rival Playhouse Square in Cleveland, the Music Center in Los Angeles and Lincoln Center in New York.
The $125 million Grand Center redevelopment project, which is expected to be completed by the turn of the century, is to include the construction of up to six new performing spaces for dance, theater, opera and chamber music, created in existing and new buildings, as well as restaurants, art galleries, craft stores and artists' studios and support facilities like prop and scenery building shops and rehearsal spaces.
And Grand Center is hoping to lure KETC, the public broadcasting station in St.
Louis, to planned new video facilities that could make the city a major advertising center.


CHRONICLE
The singer GLORIA ESTEFAN has accepted a partial settlement in the lawsuit she filed after a truck rammed into her tour bus last year, The Associated Press has reported.
Ms.
Estefan was severely injured in March 1990 but subsequently returned to performing.
A.P. said Ms.
Estefan settled this week with 7 of the 10 defendants named in the suit for a total of $8.5 million.
Lawsuits against three remaining defendants are pending.


A Feeding Frenzy for Swatches
AT 10 A.M. on Tuesday, 999 Swatch watches in the shape of red chili peppers, cucumbers and eggs with bacon went on sale at Dean &amp; DeLuca in SoHo.
Eight hundred people were waiting, and by 1:30 P.M., all the watches were sold for $100 each.
"I guess it's the limited-edition hype mentality," said Tom Thornton, the store's president.
"People were thinking investment."


Interpublic Forms Unit To Handle McDonald's
The Interpublic Group of Companies will consolidate more than $100 million in advertising for the McDonald's Corporation at a new unit, the McCann-Erickson Universal Group, formed to handle advertising for the fast-food chain.
Interpublic announced yesterday that it plans to shift $80 million in billings for McDonald's franchisees in local markets across the country from one operating company, Laurence, Charles, Free &amp; Lawson, New York, to another, the new unit at McCann-Erickson North America, New York.
The new unit will also handle all of McCann-Erickson's McDonald's accounts in 10 countries, with billings exceeding $20 million.


Home Video
Promotions and Packages
Autumn is a time of big new packages and promotions, some of them in many parts and with high price tags.
Next week, for example, Paramount begins to celebrate the 25th anniversary of "Star Trek" with tapes of the first three episodes of "Star Trek: The Next Generation," the television series. (Seventy-nine episodes of the original series are in circulation.) The price is $19.95 each.
In addition, the five "Star Trek" feature films will be reissued in two different boxed sets.
One will come in a slipcase and sell for $74.75; the other, with the five films in the letter-box format (bars across the top and bottom of the picture), will be sold in a cloth-bound box for $100.
Individually, the five are still available at $14.95 each.


Brutal Rebellion Pushing Northern Sri Lanka Back to a Pre-Industrial Era
About 70 miles south of here, on the ragged outskirts of a town called Vavuniya, a Sri Lankan Army major grimly waves a car past sandbagged bunkers reinforced with rusting sheets of corrugated iron.
Beyond the barrier, the major's authority ends, and that of one of the world's most ruthlessly violent rebel movements begins.
The car struggles into a jungle slowly digesting the remains of the society that once lived here.
Farm houses, bullet-pocked, their roofs torn away by fire or explosions, decay amid foliage run rampant.


Corrections
The Our Towns column on Tuesday misidentified the president of the New Haven Housing Authority's tenants association.
She is Velma Williams.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Placed Eric Turner, safety; Anthony Blaylock, cornerback; and Rob Woods, offensive tackle, on injured reserve.
Re-signed Randy Kirk, linebacker.
Claimed Odie Harris, defensive back, off waivers from Dallas; Bruce McGonnigal, tight end, off waivers from Pittsburgh; and Danny Peebles, wide receiver, off waivers from Tampa Bay.
Signed Archie Herring, running back; Pete Lucas, tackle; Charlie Oliver, safety; Tyrone Shavers, wide receivers; and John Thornton, defensive tackle, to the practice roster.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an obituary of Dr.
Irving Bieber, a psychoanalyst, was published in error.
It showed Dr.
Robert L. Spitzer, another psychiatrist, who was photographed alongside Dr.
Bieber in a 1973 discussion of homosexuality.


Young Scrambles Giants' Defense
In 12 years, Joe Montana has started 158 regular-season and playoff games in the National Football League.
In five years, Steve Young has started 10.
But when the Giants open their season here Monday night against the San Francisco 49ers, Montana will be on the sidelines with tendinitis in his passing elbow, and Young will be the 49ers' starting quarterback.


Trapped Riders Saved in Team Effort
Off-duty just after midnight, Officer John Debenedetto of the Transit Police was standing with a colleague on a Union Square subway platform waiting for a No. 4 train to take him home.
Headlights appeared in the southbound express tunnel.
Then the train's wheels screamed.
As the two officers watched, it derailed thunderously a hundred yards north of the station, smashing and twisting into a mash of crushed metal.


Pop in Review
String Faced
The Knitting Factory
"You don't see any horns up here," the bassist Fred Hopkins said Tuesday night from the stage of the Knitting Factory.
Mr.
Hopkins was speaking for String Faced, a new group that sets out to play idiomatic jazz for strings.
The lineup includes guitar (Bern Nix), violin (Jim Nolet), cello (Deidre Murray), keyboard (Nick Balaban) and drums (Newman Baker), and the string players all contribute compositions.


Gotti's New Lawyer Granted Delay in Racketeering Trial
The racketeering trial of John Gotti was postponed yesterday until Jan. 15 at the request of his new lawyer, Albert J. Kreiger, who was making his first court appearance for the reputed boss of the Gambino crime family.
At a brief courtroom conference, the postponement was granted by Judge I. Leo Glasser, who disqualified Mr.
Gotti's longtime lawyer, Bruce Cutler, in July on the ground that Mr.
Cutler's name came up in some taped conversations to be used as evidence in the trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.


Man With AIDS Virus Sues To Be a Macy's Santa Again
As a Santa Claus at Macy's two seasons ago, Mark Woodley heard hundreds of children tick off their fondest hopes and dreams.
Now Mr.
Woodley has a dream of his own: to be a Macy's Santa once again this year.
The department store has other ideas, so Santa is suing Macy's -- there is litigation on 34th Street.


NEWS SUMMARY
Soviet Turmoil A18-23
An urgent mission to the Ukraine was undertaken by delegates from the Russian republic and Soviet Parliament.
They are searching for common ground with the nation's second most populous republic, which, like many other republics, is seized with secessionist fervor.
Page A1


Delve Deeper Into C.I.A.-Bank Connection; Anti-Arab Myths
To the Editor:
Several articles on the Bank of Credit and Commerce International have made references to "Arab" or "Islamic" involvement with the bank in a manner reminiscent of the anti-Semitic assumptions about Jewish money's controlling various financial institutions.


Moody's Lowers Ratings on Some Salomon Debt
Moody's Investors Service Inc. dealt a mild blow to Salomon Inc. yesterday when it lowered by a notch the credit ratings on billions of dollars of Salomon's debt.
But Moody's kept the ratings at investment grade and Salomon said it did not expect the reduction to hurt.
The ratings agency announced it had lowered Salomon's senior debt to A-3 from -2, and its commercial paper to Prime-2 from its highest level, Prime-1, because of concerns over the Government-bond trading scandal that is plaguing the company and its main subsidiary, Salomon Brothers.


Palermo, Recovering, Says He's Not Angry
American League umpire STEVE PALERMO, who was shot in the back last month while chasing four robbery suspects, said Tuesday he is neither angry at his assailants nor sorry he got in their way.
"I think my wife's got the anger; I don't have the anger," Palermo said, fighting back tears at an emotional news conference at the Dallas Rehabilitation Institute in his first public remarks since the July 7 shooting.
"I'm going to walk again. Long before their punishment may be up. So who got the worst part of the deal?"


WILDER IS PRESSED ON MIDEAST STAND
Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia encountered some bumps on the campaign trail today over a television interview in which he seemed to discuss the possibility of assassinating Saddam Hussein.
Mr.
Wilder, a potential candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1992, said in an interview taped for the Public Broadcasting Service program "American Interests" that if he were President, "I would have tried to destroy him, however we could have."


Ann Taylor Sales Data
The Ann Taylor Stores Corporation said yesterday that its same-store sales fell 5 percent this month and that it believed the drop was responsible for the decline in its stock price yesterday.
The company said total August sales were up 10 percent and that same-store sales for the year so far were up 2 percent.
Same-store sales refer to sales in stores open at least a year.
The company said it expected a 3 percent gain in same-store sales for the year.
It said it "believes strongly that the August trend is not meaningful" and added that the company "is fully confident of its ability to achieve its operating expectations for the third and fourth quarters." The company's stock dropped $2.875, to $29.50, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.


U.N. Chief Seeks to Expand Africa Aid and to Cancel Deb
Five years after the United Nations carried out a wide-ranging plan to improve African economies, Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar says Africa is worse off than ever and has proposed extending and expanding the program.
Citing the United States' cancellation of $7 billion of Egypt's debt and forgiveness of much of the Polish debt, Mr.
Perez de Cuellar has proposed that donor nations also forgive or help pay off virtually all of Africa's combined $270 billion in debt.


3 Charged, 4 Still Sought in Breslin Assault
Three youths, including an 11-year-old boy, have been arrested on charges of assaulting and robbing the columnist Jimmy Breslin as he was covering the Crown Heights disturbances in Brooklyn, the police said yesterday.
Mr.
Breslin, who writes for New York Newsday, was assaulted on Aug. 21 by a crowd of youths, who forced him from a taxi cab, beat him up, stripped him to his underwear and robbed him, the police said.


Montana Vows to Keep Job
Feeling better but stuck on the injured-reserve list for the next four weeks, Joe Montana said today that he did not expect to lose his job as the San Francisco 49ers' quarterback no matter how well Steve Young performs as his replacement, starting Monday night against the Giants.
Montana, who hasn't practiced in two weeks because of tendinitis in his right elbow, was placed on injured reserve Tuesday for only the second time in his 12 years as a pro.
Asked if he expected to regain his starting role when he returns, which won't be before Sept. 29, Montana said: "I don't see why not. I've been through that once before." He was alluding to a back injury that limited his playing time in 1986.


Accident Has Eerie Echoes Of 1918 Crash That Killed 97
In the annals of New York City subway calamities, the worst remains the 1918 Malbone Street disaster: 97 people were killed and more than 250 were injured in a derailment in Brooklyn that had eerie parallels to yesterday's early-morning crash.
In both accidents, passengers described harrowing minutes before the crash, where the motorman sped into stations, overshooting platforms by several cabs and forcing passengers to rush through subway cars to get out of the train.
In both cases, the motormen sped through curves and lost control of their trains.
And both times, the motormen left the wreckage unscathed.


Market Place; Putting a Value On Triton Energy
THE remarkable surge in the price of Wall Street's hottest stock of 1991, the Triton Energy Corporation, appeared to have halted this week.
The shares, after closing at a record $47.125 on Friday, lost more than $8, including a plunge of $6.375 on Tuesday.
But yesterday, the shares added $2.25, to $41.25, with 1.4 million shares changing hands on the New York Stock Exchange.


Talks Held By Carolco
Live Entertainment Inc., a home video distributor, said today that it had begun merger negotiations with Carolco Pictures Inc., which already owns 54 percent of the company.
In June, Live Entertainment and Carolco said they were forming committees of outside directors with the intent of negotiating a transaction.
The companies have said little about any proposed deal but they have suggested one possibility would be for Carolco to buy out Live's shareholders, or begin a stock merger in which shareholders of both companies would emerge with a stake.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Race for Mazda's Amati Is Narrowed to 5
A frenetic summer in the world of automotive advertising continued yesterday when Mazda Motor of America announced five finalists for the estimated $50 million account of its new luxury car division, Amati.
The five named by the United States subsidiary of the Mazda Motor Corporation of Japan were Della Femina, McNamee, Los Angeles; Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco; Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, New York; Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, New York and Los Angeles, and Tatham/RSCG, Chicago.


Hawaii Lawsuit May Test Limits of Write-In Votes
Four states ban write-in votes, and 30 restrict them in some way.
Now a Hawaii case, brought by a man who asserts that there is a Constitutional right to vote for anyone of one's choice, is being appealed to the United States Supreme Court.
If the Court agrees to hear the case, a decision could set new guidelines for the authority of states to control access to the ballot.


Gatorade Still Champ in Sport Drinks
Every summer, it seems, another soft-drink maker or two makes a run at stealing a share of the small but growing market for sports drinks, which is dominated by Gatorade.
And every year, Gatorade fends off all comers, mostly small brands like 10-K, Snap-Up and Powerburst, which have siphoned off a negligible amount of sales.


Thrift-Shop Art With an Edge
LET others scour thrift shops for salt and pepper shakers, teapots or hand-painted ties from the 1940's.
Jim Shaw, an artist in Los Angeles, looks for paintings by amateur artists.
These paintings are not of bucolic landscapes or cocker spaniels looking poignant.
Instead, they are of shoes with faces, a still life of a flower nestled by a roll of purple toilet paper, or a lonely latchkey child.


Merck Executive Plans To Unite Manufacturing
Five months after being named senior vice president in charge of Merck &amp; Company's manufacturing, computer resources and public relations, John L. Zabriski is merging its manufacturing operations into a single worldwide division.
The reorganization encompasses 30 plants in 15 countries, which account for more than half of the company's assets, and 12,500 employees, about 30 percent of its work force.


Pop in Review
Peter Himmelman CB's 313 313 Bowery, at Bleecker Street Through tonight
Even in the era of the computer-driven band, the lone folkie persists, strumming a guitar and pouring out private confessions.
Peter Himmelman convened about five dozen fans on Tuesday night at CB's 313, the cafe annex to CBGB, for a concert that had a living-room atmosphere.
Between tunes, he offered conversational banter; he also played one song unamplified and invented another on the spot.


Officials May Switch Channels To Polish TV's Tarnished Emmy
The outrage from many critics and viewers over the perceived tastelessness and vulgarity of this year's Emmy Awards telecast has fueled a growing conflict between most of the television establishment -- including the three major networks and many of the Hollywood production studios -- and the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences.
The Emmy telecast, which was broadcast by the Fox Broadcasting Company on Sunday night, had a number of jokes that offended viewers, particularly one routine about masturbation considered so tasteless that Fox cut it from the tape-delayed edition of the show that ran on stations on the West Coast.
Other jokes and comments were filled with sexual innuendo.


The House You Just Plug In and Use
THE much-touted "smart house," which incorporates different wiring systems into one composite cable, is now available.
"You have several master switches, and from any of them you can turn on cable televisions scattered throughout the house, turn on the dishwasher, and control indoor and outdoor lighting," said Leon N. Weiner, chief executive officer, Smart House, a limited partnership formed by the National Association of Home Builders Research Center in Bowie, Md.


Sports News Plan for Cable
A new sports news service is being planned by the Liberty Media Corporation, a venture controlled by Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable-systems operator, and a partnership of NBC and the Cablevision Systems Corporation, a systems operator based in Woodbury, L.I.
The companies are planning to offer a service with 18 hours of programming daily that would be available to the regional sports cable networks they control.


The Jagged Pieces of the Soviet Empire; Ukraine Stands Up to Russia
If there is a new dawn in the Soviet Union, the rising sun has not yet brightened some darker recesses.
Rivalry among the 15 republics, repressed for decades, suddenly presents theoretically limitless opportunities for trouble.
Here are five specialists' views on the situation.
The declarations of independence in the Ukraine, Byelorussia and Moldavia represent an attempt to deal with the many problems that Moscow created and failed to solve.
In the Ukraine and Byelorussia, the lingering effects of the 1986 Chernobyl disaster top the list.


Even as Bush Counsels Prudence, West Seems Eager to Aid Soviets
Despite the best efforts of the Bush Administration to change the subject, debates over aid to the Soviet Union -- whether to send it, how much to send, when to send it, what kind to send -- are rapidly developing in the Western alliance and among politicians in Washington.
President Bush said again today in Kennebunkport, Me., where he is on vacation, that it was too early to discuss any major change in the position adopted at the London summit conference last month, where the seven leading industrial powers decided under pressure from the United States to offer no quick cash infusion to Moscow.


Woolworth's Lamston Talks
The Woolworth Corporation said yesterday that its F. W. Woolworth unit was negotiating with the Plymouth Lamston Stores Corporation to acquire the leases and inventory of the Lamston general merchandise stores.
Lamston's 26 stores are located in the New York metropolitan area.
Terms were not disclosed, but the Lamston stores would be converted to Woolworth or Woolworth Express general merchandise stores if the sale is concluded, the company said.


New Chorus Master For Metropolitan Opera
The Metropolitan Opera has named Raymond Hughes its chorus master, the company's general manager, Joseph Volpe, announced this week.
Mr.
Hughes succeeds David Stivender, who held the post from 1973 until his death in February 1990.
John Keenan was the acting chorus master in the interim.


Pop in Review
Mary Osborne
Village Vanguard Through Sunday
The guitarist Mary Osborne's show at the Village Vanguard on Tuesday night brought back an era when jazz stuck closely to pop entertainment.
Ms.
Osborne, a guitarist who made a name for herself in the 1940's and 50's performing with Billie Holiday and Mary Lou Williams, sang a few tunes and played guitar, and between songs she kept a little bit of patter going.
Ms.
Osborne retired to Bakersfield, Calif., several decades ago -- she last played the Vanguard in 1939 -- and there was some rust in the entertainment process.


Nicholas Schaffner, 38, Author Of Books About Rock Groups
Nicholas Schaffner, the author of several books about the Beatles and a recent biography of the rock group Pink Floyd, died yesterday at Beth Israel Hospital.
He was 38 years old, and lived in Manhattan.
He died of AIDS, his brother, Val, said.


Israeli Civic Watchdog Is Suddenly a Target
By both statute and practice, Miriam Ben-Porat is the conscience of the Israeli Government.
And these days she is pained.
Mrs.
Ben-Porat, a former Supreme Court Justice, is Israel's Comptroller General.
It is her job to audit Government agencies and their affiliates, then determine whether their performance has been "economical, effective and morally irreproachable."


Motorman's Limit: 3 Levels of Speed
What does a motorman do?
Starts a subway train running, speeds it up on straightaways, slows it at curves and switches and stops it at stations.
The tools needed to run a train are a key, a brake and a throttle that has three settings.


Shaving Gets a New Shape
PUDGY is a term of endearment when applied to babies. And, perhaps, razors.
The Pudgy Razor, which uses Gillette Trac II or Schick Super II blades, has a new silhouette and a new color.
Made of aluminum, it comes in silver, black or bright purple.


Braves Get Hand From Mets
Having evaporated when they had a chance to get in a title race themselves, the Mets melted tonight in the heat and hysteria of another team's fight for first place.
The Braves, with the sensational starting pitching and clutch offense that has distinguished them as a team on the rise, defeated the Mets, 3-1, and thereby moved into at least temporary sole possession of first place in the National League West, pending the outcome of the Dodger-Pirate game in Los Angeles.


Credit Markets; Farm Bank Issue Totals $2.3 Billion
The Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation, the financing arm of the Federal Farm Credit system, yesterday announced interest rates for a three-part $2.3 billion consolidated systemwide bond offering.
Investors are being offered maturities of three months, six months or one year through a nationwide group of securities dealers and dealer banks led by the corportation.


SOVIET LEADERS PRESS A REBELLIOUS UKRAINE TO REMAIN IN THE UNION
With the future of the Soviet Union possibly hanging in the balance, delegates from the Russian republic and Soviet Parliament flew to the Ukraine on Wednesday to search for common ground with the nation's second most populous republic, which like many others is seized with secessionist fervor in the wake of the failed coup.
President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and a number of other prominent figures, notably Mayor Anatoly A. Sobchak of Leningrad and Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the former Foreign Minister, issued ever more urgent warnings that the Soviet Union must survive, even if in a new and yet undecided form.


Residue From Oil Spill Continues to Threaten Bird Habitat


Blue Rose? Why, of All Bloomin' Things?  Because of Its 'Mystery'
GENETIC engineers in Australia say they have isolated the gene that controls the color blue -- and stuck it into the red red rose.
The quest, which has taken four years, is likened to the search for the Holy Grail by Michael Dalling, president of Calgene Pacific Proprietary Ltd., a genetic engineering concern in Melbourne.
But the blue rose is still a test-tube baby.


Taylor Finally Signs And Hits the Big Time
Final details had finally been settled and Brien Taylor's historic $1.55 million contract was finally signed.
Taylor had officially become a Yankee.
Scott Boras, who had operated under the title of adviser in the semantics of baseball economics, was officially becoming an agent.
Bettie Taylor, whose resoluteness had led directly to her son's wealth, now wore the hat of the team she had rooted for as a child in Beaufort, N.C.
There appeared to be more than enough happily-ever-after for everyone yesterday at Yankee Stadium.


Tokyo Journal; Is Big Business Getting Too Cozy With the Mob?
The hottest underground videotape in Japan right now is a grainy two-hour montage of a secret accession ceremony of a major organized-crime gang.
Many major businesses are said to be nervously checking the tape for familiar faces.
The reason for their concern is that in the last five years, organized crime, fattened by huge profits in Japan's fast-growing economy, has managed to infiltrate legitimate business to a degree never before imagined in a society that likes to think of itself as basically law-abiding.


Pentagon Budget Only Grows Every Year
To the Editor:
In the Aug. 6 article of your "Military-Industrial Upheaval" series, you state: "Nevertheless, it is a fact that about 12 percent has already been cut from the Pentagon budget in the last five years, and an additional 25 percent -- or more -- seems destined to go by the mid-1990's."


Layoffs Seen For Time's Magazines
Time Warner Inc. is considering layoffs at its magazine division in the next several weeks, several executives at the company said yesterday.
And the company may also redesign Time magazine over a longer term, said the executives, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Sports of The Times; Steinbrenner Massages The Media
JUST when I thought we had seen the last of George Steinbrenner, after I had actually whined in print that his absence made it that much harder for me to become engaged in the current baseball season, an Invisible Hand, surely his, pulled all the right emotional, financial and media strings to make 19-year-old Brien Taylor the future of the Yankees.
The art of Brien's deal is a great story, especially in an August when the local baseball teams are floating belly up.
A poor, black Southern factory worker guides her wide-eyed, gangly teen-ager into a reported $1.55 million contract.
Yankee management seems in disarray, the agent involved keeps a low profile and other major league owners, the Boys of Collusion, are understandably outraged; that Invisible Hand has also picked their future pockets by upping the ante for free agents.


Acting Out Dreams Of Athletic Prowess
ALTHOUGH Dr.
Benjamin Spock doesn't say so in any of his child-rearing books, if you're a parent, there's a good chance you and your family will end up at a sports mini-mall, usually a combination sports arena and video-game arcade, before you reach the golden years.
"These types of indoor family entertainment centers, and outdoor amusement parks, seem to be the trend for the 1990's," said Peter Irish, an official for the International Association of Amusement Parks and Attractions in Alexandria, Va.
"Two-income families have less leisure time, and they want to spend more of it engaged in social activities, especially ones that involve their children."


Standoff With Detainees From Cuba Is Beginning to Show Signs of Easing
The weeklong standoff between Cuban inmates and Federal prison officials here has given way to daily bursts of activity, with the release of one hostage on Wednesday night as the first positive sign that an end to the prison takeover could be near.
The freed hostage, Kitty Suddeth, a secretary at the prison, is suffering from undisclosed health problems and was hospitalized today in good condition, said her sister, Linda Burgess.


Direct Aid to Republics
President Bush and Prime Minister John Major of Britain announced today that some increased food aid to the Soviet Union would bypass the central authorities and be sent directly to republics struggling for greater autonomy.
The step was called "a natural evolution of policy."
Article, page A14.


Why Mayor Asked for Another Look at Quebec Hydropower
To the Editor:
You report (news article, Aug. 5) that Mayor David N. Dinkins asked New York State to delay signing a contract for Canadian hydropower.


Riders Distress Motormen With Searching Looks
It was a strange look, slightly askance, an assessing gaze held just a bit longer than anything conductors or motormen could recall encountering before.
And they resented it; angry at the unspoken intimation since the Union Square crash that they might not be quite sober enough to operate their trains as they always do, with the safety of their passengers uppermost in their minds.


Restaurants
From the outside, Ristorante da Umberto, hidden on an inconspicuous block off the Avenue of the Americas, has all the charm of a plumbing supply outlet.
As you pass through the two glass doors, though, you encounter one of the most animated dining scenes to be found in this languorous summer.
Da Umberto is the kind of low profile place that is fueled by steadfast repeat clientele.
My four visits revealed why.
Da Umberto has two spare but attractive dining rooms with soft gold-yellow walls, indirect lighting and a wall covered with wine racks.
The front room, with a long bar, is noisier than the back room, which faces the glass-fronted kitchen.
Much of the noise seems to float up to the high ceiling, however, resulting in a tolerable background hum.
With its sharp, congenial waiters and stylish crowd, da Umberto exudes a bustling elan that is fun to experience.


Commercial Credit $100 Million Offer
Commercial Credit Company, a unit of the Primerica Corporation, is offering $100 million in five-year notes due in 1996 through Lehman Brothers.
The notes have an 8 percent coupon and are priced at 99.794, to yield 8.05 percent, or about 81 basis points more than Treasury securities with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


A Venezuelan 'Tempest': Que Pasa, Prospero?
In Carlos Gimenez's Spanish-language version of "The Tempest," Prospero's island is a white sandy beach in the Caribbean.
It is a land detached from specific time, but linked to a mythic past.
The most impressive aspect of the set in the Rajatabla theater's production at the Delacorte Theater in Central Park is a huge carved head toppled in the sand.
Looking like an ancient god, it splits apart to reveal Prospero's laboratory in its interior: a brain within a brain.
At moments, spirits moving across the beach simulate the stance of pre-Columbian sculptural figures.
In contrast, there is a multi-level assemblage of platforms in the background, a modern construction site or launching pad, lined with workmen shooting sparks into the air.
This double-edge "isla" is full of noises: a roaring storm, animal cries and a score by Juan Carlos Nunez that freely interprets Shakespeare's suggestion of "solemn and strange music." The scenic, sound and lighting design merge to give an imaginative grounding to what is otherwise an elusive "Tempest."


U.S. Is Easing Restrictions On Exports of Technology
The Commerce Department today published a revised and much shorter list of products that can be exported only with the Government's permission.
The move reflected a more permissive stance by the United States after four decades of trying to keep the Soviet Union from obtaining militarily sensitive technologies.
Canceling or delaying publication of the new, more liberal list was widely debated during the unsuccessful coup attempt in Moscow last week as one way to retaliate against the hard-line Communist officials who sought to take power.
But no decision had been reached when the coup collapsed, two Administration officials said today.


Yet Another Italian Threat
JOHN SALLEY signed a two-year contract with the Detroit Pistons yesterday, ending a threat to play in Italy.
But now the Milwaukee Bucks are facing the same problem with their first-round draft pick, ANTHONY AVENT, who has threatened to play for the Italian team Salley spurned.


Jets Carrying 277 People Nearly Collide 7 Miles Over Cleveland
Two jet airliners carrying 277 people came close to a head-on collision seven miles over Cleveland on Saturday as radar controllers frantically tried to contact them, aviation officials said yesterday.
A pilot on one plane caught sight of the other plane and took evasive action.
The Federal Aviation Administration estimated the distance by which the planes missed as 100 feet vertically and half a mile horizontally.
The Cleveland Plan Dealer first reporterd the incident yesterday.


Sophie Silberberg, Rights Worker, 78
Sophie Silberberg, who retired last year as the executive director of the Fund For Free Expression, a human-rights group based in New York, died on Saturday at her home in East Hampton, L.I.
She was 78 years old.
Family members gave the cause of death as cardiac arrest.


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 30


Corrections
An article on Sunday about the Other Place, the Royal Shakespeare Company's new theater in Stratford-on-Avon, England, referred incorrectly to a director of the company who committed suicide in 1975.
The director, Buzz Goodbody, was a woman.


Smith Works on a Statement
Will he or won't he?
Only Ohio State tailback ROBERT SMITH knows for sure whether he will return to the football team when the Buckeyes open their season against Arizona on Sept. 7.
And according to his brother, SCOTT, he is preparing a statement that will reveal his feelings.


Market Place; Fund Groups Having Time of Their Lives
With individual investors growing more and more confident about both the stock and bond markets, cash is pouring into many mutual fund groups at a record rate.
Some mutual fund companies said yesterday that August would be the best month in their histories, in terms of taking in cash from customers.


Lawsuit Preparation Begins In Fatal Subway Derailment
A New York City police officer who was part of the rescue effort in the Union Square subway crash filed notice in State Supreme Court in Manhattan yesterday of his intention to sue the city for injuries he sustained in the rescue.


Why Mayor Asked for Another Look at Quebec Hydropower; Saving the Environment
To the Editor:
Hooray for Mayor David N. Dinkins, for having the greatness of vision to realize how misguided it is to buy yet more hydropower from Canada.
Buying power from Canada replaces environmental problems we can see with those we can't.


Chrysler Takes Steps To Lift Sales
Faced with an urgent need to increase its sales and market share, the Chrysler Corporation announced today a series of financing and incentive options to lure buyers.
One option commits Chrysler to buy back 1992 cars and trucks up to four years after they are purchased.
That program, called "Gold Key Plus," combines features of leasing and of buying.
As in leasing, customers work out a payment term with the dealer -- two to four years -- and pay only for the portion of the car's life they use.
The value after that period is agreed upon in advance and deducted from the price, which typically results in lower monthly payments than when the customer is paying the car's full price.
As in buying, the customers get title to their vehicles and must make a down payment.
Leasing Has Become Popular
Industry analysts generally applauded the new program.
Leasing increasingly has become popular with car shoppers who do not want the bother of selling or trading in a used car.
The percentage of consumers who lease vehicles has risen to more than 20 percent this year from 16.9 percent in 1988, according to CNW Marketing/Research in Bandon, Ore.


Betty Hudson Clark, Executive, 67
Betty Hudson Clark, retired executive director of the New York Building Council, died Wednesday after becoming ill in Jefferson City, Mo., where she had gone to visit her family.
A resident of Old Greenwich, Conn., she was 67 years old.
Mrs.
Clark, a former account executive, joined the construction-industry trade association of over 1,000 member companies in 1959 as an executive secretary and retired as executive director in 1987.
She was a native of Jefferson City.


The Last Flings of Summer: It's Your Last Chance; Tee Time in Hamptons
This is for golfers only: Gather a friendly foursome and go to the Hamptons to play some of America's best courses.
On the sandy slopes of eastern Long Island, these courses somewhat resemble many of the famous British and Irish links.
If possible, go for a few days in midweek, when the courses and Montauk Highway should be empty.
Or go for a weekend anytime through October, when the weather should be ideal.
I've always thought that golf was meant to be played in a sweater.


Quotation of the Day
"They check you out as you pull into the station. You can see the curiosity in their eyes, wondering whether you're straight or not." -- Algon Perch, a subway motorman.  [ B5:3. ]


Communists Struggling To Adapt in South Africa
When news of the coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in the Soviet Union ricocheted around the world, one of the more conspicuous silences came from the South African Communist Party.
Details of Mr.
Gorbachev's arrest, it said, were still sketchy.
Only the party's branch in midland Natal took a forceful stand, welcoming the seizure of power by Soviet hard-liners.


Dr. Edward W. Luka, Newspaper Founder, 58
Dr.
Edward W. Luka, president of the New Jersey Board of Medical Examiners and co-founder of the only Polish-language daily newspaper in the United States, died on Sunday at Beth Israel Hospital in Passaic, N.J.
He was 58 years old and lived in Garfield, N.J.
Dr.
Luka, a dermatologist, was a former trustee and past president of the medical staff of St.
Mary's Hospital in Passaic.
He had also been a trustee of the Medical Society of New Jersey's political action committee.
Gov.
Thomas H. Kean appointed him to the Board of Medical Examiners in 1982.


Envoy Accuses Army of Aiding Serbs
A European Community envoy said today that he had seen evidence during two days visiting the site of recent Yugoslav fighting that the federal army was siding with Serbian rebels against the forces of Croatia.
The envoy, Henry Wijnaendts, describing scenes of violence and destruction in the towns of Osijek and Vukovar, where fighting has raged for four days with dozens of dead, said the level of bloodshed inflicted by the army was difficult to reconcile with assertions that it is acting as a buffer between Serbs and Croats, Yugoslavia's largest ethnic groups.


The Atlantic Monthly Press Is Sold to One of Its Editors
Morgan Entrekin, a senior editor at the Atlantic Monthly Press, a respected independent publisher, announced yesterday that he had bought the company for an undisclosed sum after the collapse of its planned sale to the Boston-based Charles E. Tuttle Company.
The reason for the failure of the Tuttle deal, announced in June, was not disclosed.
Peter Ackroyd, the chief executive of Charles E. Tuttle, declined to comment.
Mr.
Entrekin would say only that "the more we went forward, the less sense it seemed to make to all of us."


The Last Flings of Summer: It's Your Last Chance; Plums and Proust
Beach plums are tart, hard little berries that grow on bushes near the beach.
They thrive in the same hot soil as poison ivy.
And picking them, at the summer's end, is one of those activities I have come to see as an ode to my childhood, to memory, to Proust's madeleine and all that.
If you like the tang of damson jam, for instance, wild beach plum jam will haunt you forever.
But how many of us have actually got through "Remembrance of Things Past"?
And how many of us truly enjoy standing in the boiling sun (my dog's paws were burning), picking wild beach plums that seem to refuse to fill up grandmother's old aluminum pot. (You know the one. It has a handle, and it bangs colorfully as you walk through the poison ivy to the beach.) You can never pick beach plums in a plastic bag, or some new Macy's pot.
This ritual requires beat up old hardware reeking of the past (like the time when you were 10 and braved the shiny green leaves and blew up to about the size of Oliver Hardy and had to take cortisone shots).


Money Fund Assets Off
The assets of the nation's 560 money market mutual funds decreased by $3.4 billion, to $463.23 billion, in the week that ended on Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
Assets of the 207 institutional funds decreased by $1.11 billion, to $138.46 billion.


Rising Stars of Resurgent Republics
Leonid M. Kravchuk
57 years old . . .
Chairman of the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet, in effect the republic's president . . .
Became chairman of parliament in J1990 . . .
Resigned position as second secretary of Ukrainian Communist Party in September 1990 to devote his time to government work . . .
Was sole high-ranking Ukrainian party official to address the founding congress of Rukh, the opposition movement, in September 1990 . . .
Supports orderly secession from Soviet Union . . .
Chief propagandist for Ukrainian Communist Party during the 1980's.


Martha Kirchner Married in Paris
Martha Graham Kirchner, a daughter of Richard G. Kirchner of Clinton Hollow, N.Y., and the late Jane B. Kirchner, was married yesterday in Paris to Jean-Francois Court, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Court of Dijon, France.
Pierre-Christian Taittanger, the Mayor of the 16th Arrondissement in Paris, performed the ceremony at his office.
Mrs.
Court, 40 years old, is the office administrator in Paris for the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
She graduated from the Dalton School and received a bachelor's degree in international affairs and a master's degree in international business administration from George Washington University.


Noted Futures Trader Files for Bankruptcy
Karsten (Cash) Mahlmann, a leading spokesman for Chicago's rapidly growing futures markets, filed for personal bankruptcy yesterday.
It was an extraordinary turning point in a 35-year career that saw Mr.
Mahlmann rise from a runner in Chicago's grain trading pits to become a four-time chairman of the world's largest futures market, the Chicago Board of Trade.


Mark Lawrence, 70, Producer on Broadway
Mark Lawrence, a composer, producer and advertising copywriter, died on Saturday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
He was 70 years old.
He died of prostate cancer, said his daughter, Wendy.


Editorial Notebook; The Second Baseman of Crown Heights
Moishe Friedman plays second base for the Predators, a softball team in Brooklyn's Antillean League.
His black teammates -- only one player besides Moishe is white -- know him as Mo, the slender guy with the ponytail, the yarmulke and the number 30 -- after his idol, Willie Randolph, the former Yankee.
Moishe is Jewish.
He is 23 years old, and like his brother Menashe, 21, he has lived in Crown Heights all his life.
Not until recently did it become life-threatening to be Jewish on President Street.
Then a Hasidic Jew lost control of his car and killed a small black child.
The child lived less than a block away, in the same building with one of Moishe's teammates, a slugging outfielder.


Their Missiles: Out of Control?
As the Soviet nuclear threat of the past 40 years recedes, it exposes a less fearsome but still unnerving possibility.
With the center losing political command, who controls the 27,000 nuclear warheads scattered across the vast Soviet expanse?
The coup and ensuing chaos demonstrate the overriding interest of leaders in Moscow and Washington in a tight rein over their arsenals.
The nuclear fears aroused by the coup are exaggerated.
They fail to recognize that the Kremlin has always taken extraordinary precautions to control its nuclear arms.
Control even tightened with the coup.
Still, there are further precautions Soviet leaders can take, like locking up all the warheads electronically.
Better yet, with U.S. cooperation they can further reduce their arsenal.


SOVIETS ARE URGED TO PURSUE REFORM
Senior officials of the world's leading industrial nations agreed today that the Soviet Union must urgently redouble its efforts to develop a comprehensive plan of economic reform in the wake of the failed coup in Moscow and subsequent political upheaval, diplomats here said.
In a meeting called to exchange views about ways the Group of Seven industrial democracies might further the pace of economic reform in the Soviet Union, officials gathered here said the failed challenge by Soviet hard-liners had accelerated the opportunities for closer economic cooperation between Moscow and the West.


The Last Flings of Summer: It's Your Last Chance; Suntans and Fat: Yes!
I had been good all summer.
The Hawaiian tanning oil was banished from my bathroom shelf with the first hint of summer last May.
The closets were crammed with canvas visors and straw hats with Scarlett O'Hara brims.
The desk was cluttered with sun-block lip balm, several pairs of sunglasses and nose guards.
My wardrobe had also been modified in accordance with American Church of Health regulations.
Tank tops were dutifully replaced by long-sleeved, 100 percent cotton shirts, shorts by full-length cotton leggings, my beloved sandals by espadrilles and little white socks.
Ankles burn first.


On My Mind; Three-Day Prisoner
Mikhail Gorbachev had a dozen chances, since his release from house arrest, to redeem himself in the minds of millions of men and women particularly important in the history and life of the Soviet Union.
Those three days as a political prisoner were written on his face and trembled in his voice as he talked of the shock of sudden captivity, the terror of his family, the collapse of his wife.


Crash Prompts M.T.A. to Impose Random Drug and Alcohol Testing
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority announced yesterday that it would begin random, surprise testing of its subway crews and bus drivers for drugs and alcohol in response to the subway crash on Wednesday that killed five people and left more than 200 injured.
Court papers released yesterday say that the motorman in the crash admitted to the authorities that he had been drinking before he reported to work and that he was falling asleep at the controls.


Review/Film; How a Cute Little Killer Doll Turns Bad
Chucky used to be such a cute little killer doll.
Though he was possessed by the soul of a notorious murderer, in the original "Child's Play" he had a certain wit about him as he toddled around in his tiny red sneakers searching for victims.
And even when he misbehaved, he was more likely to push pesky adults out a window rather than slit their throats with a butcher knife.
But the life of a horror hero is usually one long downward curve, and in "Child's Play 3" Chucky is simply vile.
He is a little bit like Jason from "Friday the 13th" and a little bit like the Terminator from the days when he was a killing machine.
Andy Barclay, who was 6 years old in the first movie just three years ago, has grown with soap-opera speed.
Now he is 16 and in military school.
When Chucky returns, intending to cast his voodoo spell and throw his soul into a human body, he chooses a boy named Tyler, whom Andy has to protect.
The idea of Chucky preying on a child's innocence is a major part of the series' effectiveness, but Tyler seems too old for the part.
The film never mentions his age, and everyone in the school treats him as if he were 6 or 8.
But he looks more like 11 and certainly seems old enough to wonder why a doll can have a reasonably intelligent conversation.
Much of Chucky's dialogue is unprintable, and Tyler doesn't think it's strange to have to tell a doll to watch his language.
The military-academy setting allows Chucky to put live ammunition in the rifles used for war games, to take hostages, and to escape to a nearby carnival, where he hides in a dark funhouse called the "Devil's Lair." Why war games were situated so close to a carnival may be a mystery of military strategy; maybe not.
In any event, "Child's Play 3," directed by Jack Bender, misses the sharpness and dark humor that the director and co-writer Tom Holland brought to the original.
Even the carnival seems bland, and the only touch of humor comes from the school barber, who takes inordinate pleasure in chopping the students' hair down to nothing.
His attempt to give Chucky a regulation haircut is his last mistake.
The most intriguing part of the film is the lifelike way Chucky walks, talks and slashes.
He is actually played by several mechanical dolls and is an impressive technological achievement.
But advancing the state of technology is probably not what the makers of "Child's Play 3" had in mind.
"Child's Play 3" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian).
It includes some bloody deaths and a lot of foul language.
Child's Play 3  Directed by Jack Bender; written by Don Mancini; director of photography, John R. Leonetti; edited by Edward A. Warschilka Jr. and Scott Wallace; music by Cory Lerios; production designer, Richard Sawyer; produced by Robert Latham Brown; released by Universal Pictures.
Running time: 90 minutes.
This film is rated R.  Andy Barclay . . .
Justin Whalin De Silva . . .
Perrey Reeves Tyler . . .
Jeremy Sylvers Shelton . . .
Travis Fine Whitehurst . . .
Dean Jacobson Voice of Chucky . . .
Brad Dourif


What's Bush's Problem With Family Leave?
It's 7 A.M. and you're ready for work when your child announces she's sick.
Or you get the call at work that your dad is in the hospital -- he just had a stroke.
Or your mom lets you know during your visit that she can't stand the convalescent home for another minute.
"Care-giving" and family used to be dismissed as "women's issues." But not anymore.
Women account for the fastest-growing segment of a labor force whose shrinking number of skilled workers is worrying the nation's employers.


Abby Kolbrener Married To Scott Greenspun on L.I.
Abby Kolbrener, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter D. Kolbrener of Hewlett, L.I., was married yesterday to Scott Greenspun, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Julian S. Greenspun of Brooklyn.
Rabbi Judea Nadich performed the ceremony at the Woodmere (L.I.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Greenspun, 24 years old, graduated from Clark University and is a nutrition student at Hunter College.
Her father is a lawyer in Garden City, L.I.


Mendelssohn Outdoors
Jens Nygaard is to lead the Naumburg Orchestra ina free concert of works by Mendelssohn, Sunday at 8 P.M. in Damrosch Park at Lincoln Center.
Arturo Delmoni is to be the soloist in the Violin Concerto, with Judith Pannill, a soprano, singing the concert aria "Infelice." Also on the program are the overture "Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage" and the "Scottish" Symphony (No. 3).
Information: (212) 799-1259.


Under Siege, Bhutto Waits For Her 'Fate'
Benazir Bhutto has not yet told her children that their father is in prison and that he could face the gallows.
"I don't tell them Baba is in prison," Ms.
Bhutto said, using the children's pet name for her husband.
"I don't tell them it's a prison. I just tell them we're going to see Baba. So they come and see Baba, and sometimes they see Baba in court, and sometimes they see Baba in prison."


Goods Seized by Microsoft
The Microsoft Corporation said today that it, in conjunction with United States marshals, had made a large seizure of counterfeit software.
Six individuals and 10 businesses said to have participated in a Los Angeles-based counterfeiting scheme may have been distributing illegal software throughout the United States for more than a year, Microsoft said.
The company has filed a civil suit against them in the Federal Court for the Central District of California.


SOVIETS BAR COMMUNIST PARTY ACTIVITIES; REPUBLICS PRESS SEARCH FOR A NEW ORDER
After three hours of anguished debate, the Soviet Parliament voted today to suspend all activities of the Communist Party pending an investigation of its role in the coup.
It was an action that confirmed the demise of the old regime even as the search quickened for new forms of association and order.
The fate of the party was already sealed before Parliament's vote.
Individual republics had closed its offices and seized its vast properties and funds and President Mikhail S. Gorbachev had quit as its General Secretary and had called on the leadership to step down.


Eagles Sign Brown
The Philadelphia Eagles signed defensive tackle JEROME BROWN yesterday, a day after signing two other key defensive players, SETH JOYNER and CLYDE SIMMONS, to three-year deals reportedly worth $3 million each.
Brown also signed three one-year contracts, the Eagles said.
Terms weren't disclosed, but Brown was reported initially to be seeking a deal worth $2 million a year, and had dropped that request to $1.6 million, which would have made him the highest-paid member of the Eagles. . . .
HENRY JONES, the Buffalo Bills' top draft pick, practiced with the team yesterday after signing a contract and ending his six-week holdout.
Team spokesman SCOTT BERCHTOLD declined to release details, but The Buffalo News said the defensive back's four-year contract was worth about $600,000 a year, including a $900,000 signing bonus.


NCR to Place Stock Privately
The NCR Corporation and the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company said yesterday that they had agreed to sell 6.3 million shares of NCR privately as part of the phone company's purchase of the computer maker.
The companies had announced earlier this month that they would sell the stock to the public in a step to obtain regulatory approval of their merger as a "pooling of interests." Such approval would provide favorable tax treatment for A.T.&amp; T. But regulators would not grant approval because NCR had repurchased some of its stock from the public in the two years preceding the May 6 merger announcement.


After the Breakup: E Pluribus . . . What?
The Soviet Union, born of the 1917 Revolution, was pronounced dead this week after a lingering illness.
The cause of death was diagnosed as a congenital defect called Communism.
But even as the politicians delivered their funeral orations over the decomposing superpower, a process of reincarnation was under way.


A Release of Tears, but Hostages Remain Behind Bars


Corrections
A picture caption in The Home Section yesterday about Villa Lewaro in Irvington-on-Hudson, N.Y., misidentified the woman shown.
She is A'lelia Walker Robinson, not Mme.
C.
J.
Walker, photographed around 1929.
The related article also referred incorrectly to the distinction attained by Mme.
Walker.
She was the first black woman in the United States to become a millionaire; she was not the first black millionaire.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about problems with a nuclear reactor in Scriba, N.Y., referred incorrectly to the operation of three nuclear plants there.
The New York Power Authority, a state agency, operates the James A. FitzPatrick Nuclear Power Plant.
The Niagara Mohawk Corporation operates two reactors at the Nine Mile Point plant.


Pierce Rallies as Her Dad Rants and Raves
Up in the metal bleachers by Court 3, Jim Pierce was rocking back and forth yesterday to an internal stopwatch, rubbing his wrists, muttering, looking below to his 16-year-old daughter, Mary, for some sort of cosmic vindication.
Here was the ultimate tennis father, an invention of somebody's fiction.
He was screaming at his daughter and at the linesmen, his Florida twang cutting through the crowd noise at the National Tennis Center with encouragement and obscenities until another spectator told him in no uncertain terms, "Shut up!"


Pennsylvania Senate Race Kicks Off, Presaging '92 Presidential Campaign
The only United States Senate campaign in the nation was joined today, with Dick Thornburgh and Harris Wofford trying out ideas and themes that both parties hope will enable them to gain ground in the 1992 Presidential election year.
Mr.
Thornburgh, the former two-term governor, resigned two weeks ago as United States Attorney General and officially began his campaign today before jubilant supporters in a downtown hotel.
Demonstrators delayed the rally for more than 30 minutes, protesting positions by Mr.
Thornburgh that they said limited access to abortions and discouraged AIDS research and treatment. .


Paying Last Respects to a Soviet Military Leader


Struggling Going Into Pennant Drive? Cheer Up, You're Pitching to the Yanks
David Wells had not won a game for the Blue Jays in over a month.
The pennant race was passing by and all he could manage was loss after loss.
Wells went from being ready and steady to unprepared and unreliable and Toronto's lead frittered away.
With September on the horizon, Wells finally received a wakeup call last night and proved there is still time to contribute to the pennant push.
The left-hander pitched a complete game, silenced New York on eight hits and lifted the Blue Jays to a 6-2 victory at the Stadium.
Toronto won its fourth game in a row and increased its first-place lead over Detroit to two and a half games.
The Yankees have lost six of their last eight.


Former New York Battler Now a Peacemaker at U.N.
One morning not long ago, Venezuela's representative to the United Nations, Diego Arria, entered his 46th Street office and stared out the second-floor window at the makings of an international incident.
The mission's neighbor, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, had erected scaffolding, capped with coils of barbed wire that not only sprawled across the property line, but also blocked Mr.
Arria's view.


The Case Judge Thomas Shouldn't Have Heard
To the Editor:
"A Step Back for Judicial Ethics" (editorial, Aug. 12), regarding when judges should disqualify themselves for a case, should have taken the next logical step: Should Judge Clarence Thomas have recused himself in the appeal of Alpo v.
Ralston Purina?


Motorman's Frayed Life Was Recently Brighter
His was a life frayed by splintered romances and some unfulfilled longings, as friends and co-workers tell it, but also brightened by career advancement and the promise of a new family.
Several colleagues said they knew Robert Ray to take a drink or two before he reported to work, but expressed disbelief that he might have been so impaired that he lost control.


Sounds Around Town
Harum-Scarum Trio
The Gories, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
En route to the Mississippi Delta, this Detroit trio must have taken a wrong turn at Albuquerque: the Gories' harum-scarum version of punk, blues and rockabilly is as beat-up and dented as a roadside wreck.
With the Raunch Hands, who work a relatively tamer groove in the same genre.
Tonight at 11.
Tickets are $6.
Shabba Ranks
Shabba Ranks, the Beacon Theater, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street, Manhattan, (212) 496-7070.
If the computerized rhythms and heavy bass riffs of reggae dancehall helped break down the barriers between reggae and modern club music, then Shabba Ranks further tears away the distinctions between reggae and hip-hop.
His voice is a blur of pops, bops and throat catches, squeezing syllables into beats at machine-gun speed.
The music is tough and spare, as if he's more concerned with drilling his words into your head than giving you a deep groove to wallow in.
With Crystal and Coco Tea.
Sunday at 7:30 P.M. and midnight; tickets are $25 to $30.
Hackberry Ramblers
The Hackberry Ramblers, Tramps, 45 West 21st Street, Manhattan, (212)727-7788.
Only six of the seven members of this Louisiana Cajun-Western outfit will be onstage tonight; one is staying home to go alligator hunting.
Of the remaining members, one is 81 years old, one is 79 and three more are past their late 50's; onstage all of them wear white cowboy hats, white shirts, black pants and crazy bola ties while kicking up a Cajun-Western storm.
The violinist Luderin Darbone and the guitarist and accordionist Edward Duhone founded the band in 1933 in the town of Hackberry, La., and 58 years later they still know how to turn "Jolie Blon" into a dance-floor spinout.
Johnny Faulk twirls his upright bass while Ben Sandmel, the drummer, whoops and hollers.
Tonight at 8:30 and 11:30; tickets are $12.50.
The Week's Rock Album
Meat Puppets: "Forbidden Places" (London).
The Meat Puppets play hard rock for people with soft minds: No matter how fast the guitar solos or how heavy the power chords, this Arizona trio displays a fundamental lack of the aggression usually associated with the genre.
Flooded with trippy, naturalistic images like "On this day we were miles away/We saw a clock up in the sky," the Puppets' lyrics are better suited to the realities of the inner world than the outer; their preferred roots idiom is country rather than blues, which means the ballads come in three-quarter time.
After seven records with the California independent label SST, "Forbidden Places" is the band's first release on a major label, and the producer Pete Anderson (who has also worked with Dwight Yoakam and Michelle Shocked) keeps the sound more focused, less indulgent, than in the past.
So bang your head, gently.


Who Are We to Extinguish Even a Beetle?
To the Editor:
"Species Loss: Crisis or False Alarm?" (Science Times, Aug. 20) attempts to portray a divergence of scientific opinion over how quickly species are disappearing and just how disastrous those extinctions are to human and other survivors.
But by pitting biologists like Edward O. Wilson against an economist like Julian Simon, you present a false dichotomy.


The Last Flings of Summer: It's Your Last Chance; Room to Roam
What's the biggest park in New York City?
If you answered Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx, consider yourself a city- trivia maven.
Pelham Bay, three times the size of Central Park, contains a staggering array of recreational and natural features, many of them unknown to New Yorkers.
The best part for those looking for a late-summer fling is: a lot of what Pelham Bay offers is free.


Diner's Journal
Vietnam in TriBeCa
Vietnamese food has never really flourished in New York City, and many of the Vietnamese restaurants downtown are as unpredictable as the stock market.
So when a tip about an authentic new place in TriBeCa came my way, I couldn't strap on my Roller Blades and head down fast enough.


TRANSACTIONS
BASEBALL National League ATLANTA BRAVES -- Activated Sid Bream, first baseman, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Randy St.
Claire, pitcher, outright to Richmond of the International League.
CINCINNATI REDS -- Fired Ray Rippelmeyer, assistant director of player development.
NEW YORK METS -- Recalled Anthony Young, pitcher, from Tidewater of the International League.
Placed Chuck Carr, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
BASKETBALL National Basketball Association DETROIT PISTONS -- Signed John Salley, forward, to a two-year contract.
FOOTBALL National Football League BUFFALO BILLS -- Signed Henry Jones, defensive back.
CINCINNATI BENGALS -- Signed Carl Zander, linebacker.
KANSAS CITY CHIEFS -- Signed Mike Bell, defensive end, and Todd McNair, running back.
Signed Mike Perez, quarterback, to the practice roster.
Placed Bill Jones, running back, on the reserve-suspended list.
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed J.B. Brown, cornerback, and Ferrell Edmunds, tight end.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed Reggie Moore and James Bradley, wide receivers, and Mark Hayes, offensive tackle, to the practice roster.
NEW YORK GIANTS -- Signed Mark Ingram, wide receiver; Dave Meggett, running back; and William Roberts, guard, to two-year contracts, and Murray Garrett, defensive lineman, and Steve Clark, tight end, to the practice squad.
PHILADELPHIA EAGLES -- Signed Jerome Brown, defensive tackle, to three one-year contracts.
HOCKEY National Hockey League HARTFORD WHALERS -- Signed Adam Burt, defenseman, to a multiyear contract.
East Coast Hockey League RICHMOND RENEGADES -- Named Dave Allison coach.
TRACK AND FIELD  INTERNATIONAL AMATEUR ATHLETIC FEDERATION -- Suspended Delisa Floyd, 800 meters runner, for four years for testing positive for amphetamines at the World Track and Field Championships.


Ex-Democratic Chief Expects Presidential Bid by Bentsen or Cuomo
A former chairman of the Democratic National Committee said today that Democrats need a candidate of national stature to seek the Presidential nomination, like Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas or Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York.
The former chairman, John White, predicted that one of those men would eventually enter the race, despite their protestations that they had no plans to run.
If neither does, said the former party chairman, prominent Democrats ought to consider voting for slates of uncommitted delegates and the possibility of a brokered convention, in which Democrats would choose a compromise candidate to break a deadlock.


For Transit Union, a Change of Heart on Drug Testing
After four years of strenuous opposition to random drug testing, it took one horrendous accident to change the mind of Sonny Hall.
Yesterday, as workers were still clearing the wreckage of New York City's worst subway disaster in 63 years, Mr.
Hall, the president of Transport Workers Local 100, said that he and his members had decided to accept random testing not only for drugs but for alcohol as well.


As 49ers Head East, 3 Giants Strike It Rich
The last three unsigned Giants returned to the flock today.
Mark Ingram and Dave Meggett signed two-year contracts and took part in the afternoon practice.
A half-hour after the practice ended, William Roberts signed a three-year contract.


Lebanese General Is Spirited to France
Michel Aoun, the renegade Christian general who led a two-year fight against the Lebanese Government, left Beirut for France today after French officials whisked him out of Lebanon in a spectacular operation that involved speedboats as well as decoy cars and airplanes.
The secretive departure ended a 10-month standoff in which the Lebanese sought to detain General Aoun so he could face trial on embezzlement and other charges while the French sought to guarantee his freedom.


Mindy Herzfeld Is a Bride
Mindy Herzfeld, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jacob Herzfeld of Willowbrook, S.I., was married last evening at the Sands in Atlantic Beach, L.I., to David Eisenman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Eisenman of Teaneck, N.J.
Rabbi Jacob Reiner, an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated.
The bride, 23 years old, is a magna cum laude graduate of Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is to begin studies next month for a law degree and a doctorate in the history of medicine at Yale University.
The bridegroom, 26, is entering his senior year at the Yale Medical School.
He graduated magna cum laude from Columbia University, where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Yes, Test to Prevent Tragedy
"Other than alcohol," there were no drugs in Robert Ray's system after he drove a Lexington Avenue subway train far too fast into the derailment that killed five passengers and injured more than 200, the police report.
That's a whopping exception.
Alcohol is a lethal drug for all drivers, calling for the strictest prohibitions in a transit system that serves 3.5 million riders daily.
Although it's late for Wednesday's victims and millions still inconvenienced by the disaster, local and national governments must act swiftly to protect transit riders everywhere.


New York and Suburbs Act to Revive a Dying L.I. Sound
On this point, there is no dispute: Long Island Sound is badly polluted.
Now the question is who is going to pay to clean it up.
In its simplest terms, the issue pits the urban giant, New York City, against the suburbs and farms of Long Island and Connecticut.


On Stage, and Off
Neil Simon Detour
Neil Simon's "Jake's Women" is coming to the Neil Simon Theater in late March, nearly two years after it was supposed to have arrived on Broadway.
This time it will star Alan Alda, and this time, the author says, he thinks he's got it right.


Abroad at Home; The Power of an Idea
Exulting in another's defeat has its dangers.
Military triumphs have a way of turning out hollow.
Exultation leaves a bitter taste.
But the disintegration of Soviet Communism is something else.
Tyranny fell not to arms but to an idea.
And it is our idea: America's, the West's.
Whatever difficulties follow now -- and they will be profound -- we are entitled to this moment of celebration.


Night Goes Smoother For Connors This Time
Mr.
Midnight, Jimmy Connors, lighted up the twilight shift at the United States Open again last night.
Connors, the five-time Open champion who turns 39 on Monday but is playing a game that spills over with teen-age insouciance, sprinted into the third round of his 21st Open following a kinetic performance against a far less nimble veteran, Michiel Schapers, the 31-year-old qualifier from the Netherlands.
Connors, who preened, pranced, and played an ageless brand of tennis for the record-paying crowd of 19,582 cramming the Stadium Court to view the latest chapter of his renaissance, humbled Schapers, 6-2, 6-3, 6-2, in less than two hours.
Considering the 4-hour-40-minute marathon he endured in his first-round comeback victory against Patrick McEnroe on Tuesday, Connors said the brevity of last night's match was the preferred tonic for his aches and pains.


Treasury Prices Continue to Rally
The rally in the credit markets continued yesterday, as a fresh series of weak economic reports helped to push Treasury bond prices up and interest rates down.
The increasing signs of a limp recovery from the recession is likely to put more pressure on the Federal Reserve to reduce interest rates further to stimulate economic activity.


There's Bubka and Foster, Then Rest of Planet
From the start it was a night for the masters, one so daunting that rivals assumed second place could be their highest aspiration.
By the close of the fifth day of competition at the world track and field championships tonight, Sergei Bubka of the Soviet Union and Greg Foster of Chino Hills, Calif., each a defining practitioner of his craft, had become the first athletes to win world titles three times, following victories in Helsinki eight years ago and in Rome in 1987.


Israel Says Airman Is Hostage of Iranian Guards
Israel's chief hostage negotiator said today that a missing Israeli navigator whose plane was shot down in 1986 is most likely alive and being held by the Iranian Revolutionary Guards.
But, he said, Israel is still demanding solid information about the navigator, Ron Arad, and six other missing Israelis before it releases any of the Arab prisoners it is holding.


The Last Flings of Summer: It's Your Last Chance; In the Forest Primeval
One of the largest remnants of the primordial forest that covered southern New York before the European settlers began their industrious reconfiguration of the landscape can be found not in the Catskills or on Bear Mountain, but in the Bronx.
Right in the middle of the New York Botanical Garden are 40 acres of forest that, unbeknownst to most city dwellers, has never been clearcut, slashed, burned, uprooted, cultivated or otherwise reinvented by human beings.
To learn about the intricate dynamics of an old-growth forest, and to get a sense of what the entire city looked and felt like half a millenium ago, you can take a guided tour of the forest tomorrow or Monday afternoon.
On it the guide is likely to point out oaks and hemlocks that are 300 years old, three or four times the age of the average tree in the Catskills.
But original forest means more than ancient trees.
"The soil hasn't been disturbed, and the organisms in the soil are of the type that have been there for hundreds of years," said Dr.
Mark J. McDonnell, the New York Botanical Garden forest ecologist.


HEALTH UNITS DEFY U.S. ON AIDS RULES
Saying that the risk of transmitting the AIDS virus from health-care workers to patients is insignificant, dozens of medical groups have refused to cooperate with the Government in setting guidelines for infected workers, health officials said yesterday.
The action throws into confusion the Government's effort, which calls on professional groups to devise lists of high-risk procedures that AIDS-infected doctors and other health-care workers should avoid.


T.W.A.'s Pilots Union Is Losing Its Chairman
Kent T. Scott, the head of the pilots union at Trans World Airlines and a 23-year employee of the airline, is resigning from the union and taking early retirement from T.W.A., saying he was frustrated by "the most inept direct management of a major airline one could conceive."
In a letter to the 3,000 T.W.A. pilots, Mr.
Scott said he was "extremely discouraged and frustrated at the lack of progress that has been made in the area of employee relations at T.W.A."


Rival Files Antitrust Suit Against Intel
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. filed an antitrust suit today against the Intel Corporation, opening a new front in the bitter feud between the Silicon Valley semiconductor companies.
The lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in San Jose, Calif., accuses Intel of trying to monopolize the market for microprocessors and other chips used in personal computers.


Noted Futures Trader Files for Bankruptcy
Karsten (Cash) Mahlmann, a leading spokesman for Chicago's rapidly growing futures markets, filed for personal bankruptcy yesterday.
It was an extraordinary turning point in a 35-year career that saw Mr.
Mahlmann rise from a runner in Chicago's grain trading pits to become a four-time chairman of the world's largest futures market, the Chicago Board of Trade.


Foes in Cambodia Wind Up Talks Hopefully
The Cambodian Government and rebel groups ended three days of negotiations today without forging a comprehensive peace treaty but with what the warring factions said was optimism that a final settlement would be reached this year.
"After 12 years of war, we cannot solve all the problems and heal the wounds in only three meetings," said the nation's exiled head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who has emerged as the central mediator in efforts to conclude the civil war.
"We are not gods."


Holiday on Monday
Monday is Labor Day.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK Parade: Begins at 11 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street and heads north to 72d Street.
Government offices: Closed.
Post Office: Express mail and special delivery only.
Main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed.
Parking: Sunday rules.
Sanitation: No pickup, recycling or street cleaning.
Schools: Closed.
Financial markets: Closed.
Transportation: Transit Authority buses and subways on Sunday schedules.
L.I.R.R. and Metro-North on holiday schedules.
NEW JERSEY Government offices: Closed.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: Closed.
Schools: Closed.
Transportation: N.J.
Transit on weekend schedule.
CONNECTICUT Government offices: Closed.
Post offices: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: Closed.
Schools: Closed.
Transportation: Metro-North on holiday schedule.


Ending a Bureaucratic Romp, Yeltsin Tries to Show Critics He Is No Despot
After a week of growing alarm in the nation over the power he has accumulated since his triumph over the coup, President Boris N. Yeltsin of the Russian republic moved today to reassure neighboring republics and his political opponents that he is not bent on replacing Communism with a resurgent Russia.
Just as the Russian republic's delegation returned from the Ukrainian capital, Kiev, with an agreement on the two republics' future relations, the newspaper Pravda announced that it would start publishing again on Friday -- not as the voice of the now-crippled Communist Party, but as an independent paper of "civic consensus."


BRIEFS
Debt *
Palm Beach County, Fla., yesterday priced $70 million in school district tax-anticipation notes through competitive bidding won by J. P. Morgan.
The notes, due to mature on Sept. 4, 1992, have a 5 percent coupon and are priced at a premium toyield 4.50 percent.
Moody's rates the issue Mig-1.


Books of The Times; Love, Guilt and Change in a Family
Saint Maybe  By Anne Tyler 337 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
To followers of this author's novels, members of the Bedloe family will be instantly recognizable as Anne Tyler creations.
This family of likable eccentrics lives, of course, in Baltimore, and to outside eyes, it comes across as the neighborhood's "version of the ideal, apple-pie household: two amiable parents, three good-looking children, a dog, a cat, a scattering of goldfish." Claudia, the oldest of the children, has recently married and started a family of her own.
Danny has just announced his engagement to a pretty young woman named Lucy.
And Ian, the youngest, has "crowds of loyal friends" and "the prettiest girl in the junior class" as his sweetheart.


Hasidim Won't Try to Stop A West Indian Celebration
Lubavitcher leaders from Brooklyn relented yesterday in their calls for the cancellation of an annual festival central to the life of the city's growing Caribbean community after a series of meetings with blacks seeking ways to calm racial tensions in Crown Heights.
Instead, representatives of the Hasidic group, meeting with Mayor David N. Dinkins at City Hall, asked for increased police protection for this weekend's West Indian carnival.
They came away satisfied that the Mayor would honor their request.


F.C.C. Grants TV Time Shift
The Federal Communications Commission today gave a California television station temporary permission to begin broadcasting prime-time network programs one hour earlier than usual.
The move will allow KCRA- TV, an NBC affiliate in Sacramento, to start broadcasting network programs at 7 P.M., rather than at 8 P.M., and broadcast the "Tonight" show at 10:35 P.M. rather than at 11:30 P.M.
The schedule will last from Sept. 16 to June 1.


Award to a Mezzo
The second Marian Anderson Award Benefit Concert is to take place on Sunday at 8 P.M. at the Charles Ives Center for the Arts at Western Connecticut State University in Danbury.
The soprano Sylvia McNair, who won the award last year is to sing Samuel Barber's song cycle "Knoxville: Summer of 1915," with the Ives Symphony Orchestra under the direction of Serge Fournier.
Andre Watts is the soloist in Beethoven's Fifth Piano Concerto, and the mezzo-soprano Denyce Graves will receive this year's $25,000 award.
Tickets are $15 to $100.
Information: (203) 797-4002.


The True Heroes of the Soviet Union
Communism died and Russia was reborn in Moscow in a 48-hour period from early morning on Aug. 19 to early morning on Aug. 21.
But it was all both far more dangerous and far more liberating than we may have yet realized.
On the surface, things seemed surprisingly ordinary.
Many Muscovites barely interrupted their schedules; international meetings continued, and television narrowed back to a single channel presenting diversionary ballet and sporting events.


Pop/Jazz; Mary Osborne Makes a Return After 10 Years
The poster for Mary Osborne on the wall of the Village Vanguard shows a handsome woman holding a guitar.
Her head is thrown back, her long hair tumbles over her shoulders, her hoop earrings glimmer.
The woman in the picture just turned 70 years old, but her pose is youthful, demure, almost coquettish, like an update of a 1940's Hollywood movie still.
Similarly, when Ms.
Osborne comes onstage to lead her trio -- her weeklong engagement at the Vanguard continues tonight and tomorrow and concludes Sunday -- she has the charmingly self-conscious manner of one who is just getting her first shot at the big time.
She smiles a lot between renditions of standards like "Body and Soul" and "It's Wonderful," and frowns slightly in concentration as she plays her soft, lyrical solos.
Her giant old Gibson sunburst guitar is almost as big as she is.
Ms.
Osborne's New York City appearance this week, her first in 10 years, is a return of sorts.
During the 1940's and 50's she established herself as a staple of New York's jazz scene, performing at off-night jam sessions in clubs like the Vanguard, leading her own trio, freelancing as a side guitarist, performing on radio shows.
In 1941, she toured with the jazz violinist Joe Venuti, replacing his longtime accompanist, Eddie Lang; in the mid-40's she backed people like Coleman Hawkins, Mary Lou Williams and Mercer Ellington.
In the late 40's, she led her own groups at spots like Kelly's Stables and the Hickory House at a time when 52d Street seemed the center of the jazz community.
"Kelly's was like playing for the world," she said in a recent interview.
"Every celebrity, every movie star, every musician, every band leader -- everything. It got to the point where no matter where you went, you couldn't be nervous, because everybody was there all the time."


McCaw And Pactel In Accord
In a deal that moves the nation closer to a national network of cellular telephone service, two of the largest owners of cellular-telephone franchises announced yesterday that they planned to cooperate in some of the biggest cities in the country, including San Francisco, Dallas and Kansas City.
Their plan covers some 9.5 million potential customers.
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc., the nation's largest provider of cellular service, and the Pactel Corporation, a unit of the Pacific Telesis Group and the third-largest provider of cellular service, said they intended to form a 50-50 joint venture.
McCaw would contribute some five million potential subscribers, and Pactel would add 4.5 million potential subscribers and pay McCaw $100 million in cash.


For Jets' Defensive Line, Fretting Is Over and the Real Sweating Begins
Nothing breeds anxiety on a football team as much as the day of the final cut to the 47-player roster limit.
When it happened here three days ago, looks of relief could be seen everywhere.
Especially from the vicinity of the Jets' defensive line.
"I was a little scared when I came into the locker room and saw my name wasn't over my locker," defensive end Mark Gunn, the Jets' fourth-round draft choice out of Pittsburgh, recalled today.
"Then somebody told me that Mike Kensil wanted to see me. Mike Kensil is the guy who tells you you've been waived. That turned out to be a joke. They play a lot of jokes on me because I'm a rookie."


Coke Planning Ukraine Office
The Coca-Cola Company said today that it planned to open an office in Kiev, the capital of the Soviet republic of the Ukraine, within the next month as part of an expansion of its operations in the Soviet Union.
Coca-Cola also said it would transfer responsibility for operations in the Baltic republics of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia to its Nordic division, which has offices in Finland, Sweden and Norway.
It said the change was made because of the traditional relationships between the regions.


Apparatchik to Nationalist: Ukrainian's Fancy Footwork
It was only last weekend that Leonid M. Kravchuk, the fleet-footed leader of the Ukraine, made a hurried decision to abandon his Communist Party career and fully join the republic's drive for independence, which was roaring forward as the Soviet Union's political integrity came apart.
The incongruities of the current Soviet trauma are such that this morning Mr.
Kravchuk could lean back in his chair in the Parliament and confidently entertain questions about what it is like being the head of a theoretical nuclear superpower called the Ukraine.


The Day's Highlights
Shaping a New Union
In Transition: After three hours of anguished debate, the Soviet Parliament voted to suspend all activities of the Communist Party pending an investigation of its role in the coup.
It was an action that confirmed the demise of the old even as the search quickened for new forms of association and order.
And after hurriedly arranged negotiations, delegations of Ukrainians and Russians concluded an interim agreement to respect territory and deal with each other to fill the fast-spreading vacuum of political power.
Page A1.


AIDS Campaign Gets A Corporate Sponsor
Ads Against AIDS, the advertising industry's first national educational campaign to fight the disease, has signed its first corporate sponsor.
Kenar, a New York clothing manufacturer and retailer, has donated $25,000 to the organization, which is developing AIDS public-service ad campaigns to be introduced at a benefit in New York on Nov. 6.


Big Program Is Proposed For Chips
A Government advisory committee issued a report today outlining the technical directions of a proposed program to improve the competitiveness of the American semiconductor industry.
Known as Micro Tech 2000, the program would try to accelerate development of advanced computer chips, so that by the year 2000 the American industry would be able to produce chips that would not otherwise be possible until three years later.
American semiconductor executives have said that Micro Tech 2000 could be more ambitious than Sematech, the industry consortium in Austin, Tex.


Corrections
A map yesterday showing the ethnic makeup of Soviet republics reversed two labels.
Estonia was No. 1, Lithuania No. 3.


At the Bar; Two Moscow lawyers embark on a mission to create a new order of Soviet law and justice.
Two Moscow lawyers, Aleksandr Domrin and Olga Razbash, met here this week, but only briefly.
He was hurrying home, summoned by the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation.
She had just arrived in the United States, only days after emerging from behind the barricades protecting Boris N. Yeltsin and his nation's first steps toward democracy.
But even with their very different itineraries, the two lawyers shared a mission, one that could best be described as a kind of legal agronomy.
Each hopes to help plant a new order of law and justice in their homeland, whose soil has been left parched and depleted by 75 years of Communism.
The courts, the law, the legal profession -- it is as if all have been irradiated by a Chernobyl of cynicism.


Former New York Battler Now a Peacemaker at U.N.
One morning not long ago, Venezuela's representative to the United Nations, Diego Arria, entered his 46th Street office and stared out the second-floor window at the makings of an international incident.
The mission's neighbor, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, had erected scaffolding, capped with coils of barbed wire that not only sprawled across the property line, but also blocked Mr.
Arria's view.


The Last Flings of Summer: It's Your Last Chance; Girth in the Afternoon
For a man of a certain end-of-summer age, I'd suggest a fling inspired by a second-rate Hemingway novel, "Across the River and Into the Trees," if the man can find a consenting woman to accompany him.
The book was published on Sept. 7, 1950, when Hemingway was a beat-up 51-year-old who had not had a novel come out in a decade.
It is about a beat-up, 50-year-old United States Army colonel with a bum ticker.
He mostly hangs out in Venice with an Italian countess, enjoying the views and eating and drinking well.


Ex-Kent Smoker Blames Filter of Past for Illness
Shortly after he began smoking Kent cigarettes in the early 1950's, Peter Ierardi dissected a few of its much-touted Micronite filters, just to see if they were performing as advertised.
The advertisements were, after all, why he had switched to Kents after four years of smoking Kools.
He had read the claims in Life magazine or The Philadelphia Inquirer or heard them on "The Web," the mystery series he watched on his family's new Dumont television every Sunday night.


Texaco Capital
Texaco Capital Inc. yesterday priced for sale $150 million in 30-year debentures through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers.The debt securities were given an 8.875 percent coupon and priced at 99.75, to yield 8.889 percent, or about 87.5 basis points more than the Treasury's 30-year bond issue.
Noncallable through maturity, underwriters said the debentures are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.37
5.52
8.00
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.30
5.30
7.44
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.31
5.31
7.40
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.57
7.62
8.74
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.00
8.05
8.96
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
9.05
9.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.97
6.98
7.64
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Seminoles Put Dent In Detmer
Ty Detmer won the Heisman Trophy last December, but nothing much has gone well for the Brigham Young University quarterback since then.
That unhappy pattern continued tonight as Detmer endured a long evening and the Cougars suffered a season-opening 44-28 loss to Florida State in the Pigskin Classic at Anaheim Stadium.
Detmer was sacked three times and thrown for a safety by a Florida State team that had been ranked No. 1 nationally in most preseason polls.
Detmer's only significant moments of success came in the fourth quarter when he threw two touchdown passes -- both of them meaningless -- that extended to 24 the number of consecutive games in which he has thrown at least one scoring pass.


CHRONICLE
BREE WALKER-LAMPLEY, the former anchorwoman for Channel 2 in New York whose disability has provoked controversial remarks, gave birth to a son who has the same condition.
The boy, AARON JAMES LAMPLEY, was born on Wednesday with ectrodactyly, which causes fingers and toes to become fused.
Ms.
Walker-Lampley and her husband, JIM LAMPLEY, are both anchors for for KCBS television in Los Angeles.


Last Flings of Summer
Looked at a calendar lately?
Do you have beach plums to pick, a diet to destroy, a summer movie to see, a leafy wood to wander, a weekend invitation to wangle?
If you're fond of waiting till the last minute, it's here.
Do it, or rue it.
Suggestions, page C18.
And what's doing for the last holiday of summer, page C19.


Sidney Silverman, 79, Ex-College President
Sidney Silverman, the founding president of one of New Jersey's largest community colleges, died on Tuesday at Englewood Hospital.
He was 79 years old and lived in Hackensack, N.J.
He died of complications resulting from a kidney disease, his so, Michael, said.


TV Weekend; An American History Of Plural Marriages
To many Americans the notion of a man having more than one wife may seem sinful, or worse, sexist, but to a few it is strictly in accord with God's will.
What some lawbooks call "unlawful cohabitation," thousands of residents of Montana, Utah and Arizona call "celestial marriage." Their travails are sympathetically treated in "A Matter of Principle: Polygamy in the Mountain West," tomorrow night at 8 on Channel 13.
This straightforward history begins in the 19th century with the appearance, growth and movement west of the Mormons, whose attachment to polygamy shocked other Americans and brought the group prosecution and persecution.
Polygamists were disenfranchised and their property was confiscated.


NEWS SUMMARY
SOVIET TURMOIL A10-14
All activities of the Communist Party were suspended by the Soviet Parliament pending an investigation of its role in the coup.
The action confirmed the old regime's demise even as the search quickened for new forms of association and order.
Page A1
News analysis: The Soviet Union, born in 1917, was pronounced dead after a lingering illness.
The cause of death was a congenital defect called Communism.
But a process of reincarnation is under way.
A1


U.N. Chief to Report on Iraq-Kuwait Island Battle
Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar today called reports of an attempted infiltration of Bubiyan Island by scores of heavily armed Iraqis one of the most serious incidents since the end of the Persian Gulf war.
Kuwait said on Wednesday that its air and land forces thwarted an Iraqi attempt that day to infiltrate Bubiyan Island, with the Kuwaiti military capturing 47 intruders and sinking 7 of 12 small watercraft carrying other Iraqis.


A Retirement At Softech
Softech Inc. said yesterday that its chairman, president, and chief executive, Justus F. Lowe Jr., was retiring, effective immediately.
Douglas T. Ross, founder of the computer-software company and its chairman emeritus, has been elected chairman.
Norman L. Rasmussen, a longtime director of the company, has been appointed interim president and chief executive.


Republics to Get Direct Aid In a New U.S.-Britain Plan
President Bush and Prime Minister John Major of Britain announced today that some new food aid to the Soviet Union would bypass the Soviet central authorities and be sent directly to the republics struggling for greater autonomy.
The decision by the two nations reflects a recognition that political power in the Soviet Union has diffused rapidly since the unsuccessful coup attempt by hard-liners there last week.


Citibank Tests Secured Card
Citibank is testing a special type of credit card for people with poor credit records.
Under the pilot plan, a customer would receive a so- called secured credit card after buying a certificate of deposit as collateral against the unpaid credit card balance.
The deposit, a minimum of $300, would be equal to the credit line.


Amid Heat and Fumes, Workers Repair Station
Workers chopped and sliced mangled subway cars yesterday, while others tried to return cars to their tracks in a repair job in Union Square station that might best be compared to changing a car's tires in a hallway or performing surgery in a sauna.
Returning Union Square to a functioning subway station will take at least until Tuesday, officials at the Metropolitan Transportation Authority said yesterday.


George V. Bobrinskoy Jr., Lawyer, 57
George V. Bobrinskoy Jr., a lawyer who represented heirs to the estates of Ernest Hemingway and Igor Stravinsky, died at his home in Chicago on Sunday.
He was 57 years old and also lived on his farm in Harvard, Ill.
He died of lung cancer, a spokesman at his law firm said.


Zone of Brain Linked to Men's Sexual Orientation
The brains of homosexual men are structurally different from those of heterosexual men in a region thought to influence male sexual behavior, a scientist says he has found.
The discovery, if confirmed, would be the first detection of a distinct pattern in the brain that could help explain sexual preference among men.


Animation Festival: Big Picture And Small
Brief comments on mundane problems and overviews of the fate of mankind are entertainingly mixed in "The Festival of Animation 1991," opening today at the Cinema Village Third Avenue.
This collection is not to be confused with "The 23d Tournee of Animation," which opened on Wednesday at the Angelika Film Center.
The two shows are less competitors than extensions of each other.


Mrs. Taylor Says Scout Tried To Pressure Her Into Pact
The mother of Brien Taylor, who signed a record $1.55 million contract with the Yankees on Wednesday, says a scout from the Major League Scouting Bureau, representing himself as reporting directly to Commissioner Fay Vincent, attempted to pressure the family to accept an offer nearly $1 million lower than the final agreement.
Bettie Taylor, whose conviction about her son's value in the baseball marketplace was a decisive factor in the largest contract in the history of the amateur draft, said that Don Koonce, a scout from Fayetteville, N.C., refused to leave her home during an unsolicited visit on Aug. 13.


The Case Judge Thomas Shouldn't Have Heard; Nobody's Shill
To the Editor:
The distinguished historian John Hope Franklin criticizes Judge Clarence Thomas in "Booker T. Washington, Revisited" (Op-Ed, Aug. 1).
Dr.
Franklin accuses Judge Thomas "and his handlers" of covering up for America's corporate monopolies while they cynically exhort the dispossessed to rely on themselves.


Brooklyn Prepares, And Braces, For a Parade
In the basement of St.
Francis and Blaise Church, dozens of teen-agers rehearse their ebulliently percussive steel-band music.
In storefront windows on Nostrand, Church and Flatbush Avenues, costume makers toil at elaborate waistbands and headdresses.
Nearly everywhere in Crown Heights, people are preparing for the boisterous annual celebration of the new world of central Brooklyn: the West Indian American carnival and parade.
This year, though, they are preparing under a cloud.
In the aftermath of the violence that exploded in Crown Heights last week, tension is still high in this polyglot community of Caribbean immigrants, American-born blacks and Hasidic Jews.
That has festival organizers, Hasidic leaders and city officials worried that this normally raucous but happy parade, to be held for the 24th year on Monday, could become a flashpoint for new trouble.


Review/Film; A Matter Of Mistaken Eminence
The title of Peter Richardson's good-humored new English farce, "The Pope Must Die," does not refer to the incumbent Pope, who, at the start of the film, is in the process of dying, and taking his own sweet time about it.
It is a call to small arms against his successor.
He is Father David Albinizi (Robbie Coltrane), an obscure, rotund, steel guitar-playing priest who, through a clerical error, is crowned Pope David I and, in a few short weeks, almost shuts down the Vatican.


Development For Olympics Divides Japan
A noisy growl from bulldozers echoes through the pine forests and rice fields of the Japan Alps these days.
Workers are hurriedly laying the groundwork for highways, railroads, ski slopes, skating rinks and an array of other costly playgrounds for winter sports fans.
The work is furiously paced because next to downhill racing, the fastest moving activity in the nation's most majestic mountain range in coming years is likely to be the construction of the buildings and transportation network for the 1998 Winter Olympic Games.


Where to Join the Chorus for Summer's Swan Song
Here is a sampling of Labor Day weekend activities in the three-state region.
New York City
ANNUAL WEST INDIAN CARNIVAL, all weekend in Brooklyn.
Events include STAY-IN-SCHOOL REGGAE CONCERT, today, 1 to 4 P.M.; free for youngsters.
WEST INDIAN-AMERICAN DAY CARNIVAL ASSOCIATION REGGAE NIGHT, with Shabba Ranks, Cocoa Tea, Shelley Thunder, Leroy Sibbles, Richie Stevens, Reggie Steppers, Krystal Pinchers, Ruff Kut, Rydim Steppers.
Tonight at 8; tickets are $25.
STEEL-BAND PANORAMA, with Explainer, Iwer George, Lady Wonder, M.C.
Tommy Joseph, Lambert and the Matadors.
Also with Queen of the Bands competition.
Tomorrow at 8 P.M.; tickets are $20.
DIMANCHE GRAS, with Sparrow, Super Blue, Stalin, Swallow, Tambu, Duke, Francine, Denyse Plummer, Iwer George, Allrounder, Soca Kid, the O'Malay Dancers, Ken (Professor) Philmore and Designer, Moko Jumbie, Ole Mas Characters.
Also: King of the Bands and Queen of the Bands competitions.
Sunday at 8 P.M.; tickets are $20.
All concerts at the Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Washington Avenue, (718) 638-5000, where doors open at 7 P.M.
Information: (718) 774-8807 or (718) 773-4052.
KIDDIES CARNIVAL PARADE, starting at St.
John's Place, between Brooklyn and Kingston Avenues; ending at Brooklyn Museum.
Tomorrow, 10 A.M; free.
KIDDIES CARNIVAL COMPETITION, at Brooklyn Museum; Sunday, 1 to 4 P.M.
Information: (718) 773-4052 or (718) 774-8807.
CARNIVAL PARADE, Monday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M., beginning at Utica Avenue and Eastern Parkway.
Floats, carnival bands, steel bands, West Indian food.
Information: (718) 773-4052 or (718) 774-8807.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
Andersen Consulting, New York, a technology-services unit of Arthur Andersen Worldwide Organization, promoted Larry R. Levitan to regional managing partner of the Northeastern United States from managing partner of the New York area office.
William T. Van Lieshout was named Mr.
Levitan's successor. *
Bank One Lafayette N.A., Lafayette, Ind., named Joseph H. Seaman president and chief executive.


Critic's Choice/Art; Of Ad Reinhardt, Priest of Modernism
Only four viewing days remain for "Ad Reinhardt," the Museum of Modern Art's outstanding retrospective of one of America's most single-minded painters.
Reinhardt, who died in 1966 at the age of 53, was the maverick member of the Abstract Expressionist generation, known for his lampooning cartoons about the art world and such wry esthetic dictums as "The mystery of art is not a mystery."
But Reinhardt was also a kind of Zen priest of modernism.
He never painted any other way but abstract and, excepting a few flurries of brushstrokes in his earliest canvases, his idea of abstract was always resolutely geometric and hard-edged.
Starting with a series of little-known collages made of tiny magazine clippings from the late 1930's -- which speak of an unexpected affinity for that determined nonpurist Kurt Schwitters -- the exhibition plots Reinhardt's course to his final black paintings with a magisterial pace.


New Officer at Disney
The Walt Disney Company named Richard D. Nanula chief financial officer today.
He succeeds Judson C. Green, who on Wednesday became president of Walt Disney Attractions, the operator of the company's theme parks.


U.S. Runner Fails Drug Test
Delisa Floyd, the 30-year-old two-time national champion at 800 meters from Houston, has become the first athlete to fail a drug test at this year's world track and field championships.
Officials of the International Amateur Athletic Federation announced today that Floyd's urine sample, taken after the semifinals on Sunday by random selection, had traces of an amphetamine, a substance that is banned for its performance-enhancing qualities.
Floyd finished last in her race.


The Case Judge Thomas Shouldn't Have Heard; Natural Law
To the Editor:
Prof.
Michael W. McConnell (Op-Ed, Aug. 16) accuses me of being inconsistent because I attacked Judge Robert Bork for refusing to recognize rights beyond those spelled out in the Constitution and yet criticize Judge Clarence Thomas for supporting such rights when he endorses natural law.
If, as he misleadingly says, Judge Thomas had indeed "made clear that the natural rights he speaks of" are merely such generalities as "human rights are equality under the law," I would applaud.


Sports of The Times; Courier Finds Road Is More Like Home
THERE was a difficult lesson for a 21-year-old to learn: that home was no longer a total refuge.
Jim Courier made the discovery this June when he returned home after winning the French Open.
He had always gone home to be just another big blond kid in Dade City, Fla., wearing a Cincinnati Reds ball cap.
Now he was famous.
Now he was hunted.


Prosecutor Kennedy Wins First Trial, Easily
He may have flunked his first two bar examinations, but when it counted yesterday John F. Kennedy Jr. won his first prosecution as an assistant district attorney against a defendant the police call the Sleeping Burglar.
Perhaps it was not the most difficult case a rookie prosecutor could have been given: the defendant was found asleep in his victim's locked apartment with her jewelry in his pocket.


Accounts
*
Combine Optical, Port Washington, L.I., to Frankfurt Gips Balkind Advertising, New York, for its first ad campaign.
An agency spokeswoman said billings are $1.5 million.


CHRONICLE
Blondie Bumstead, 61 years old but still the ageless wife of the equally ageless Dagwood Bumstead and mother of those perennial teen-agers, Cookie and Alexander, is about to join the modern world: she's getting a job.


The Last Flings of Summer: It's Your Last Chance; Inviting an Invitation
There are those who long to have a summer house, and there are those who prefer to have a friend with a summer house.
Friends require so much less maintenance.
The only problem with friends is that they sometimes get so busy fixing the house and earning money to pay for it that they forget to invite you out for the weekend.
At this point, with summer's end in sight, it becomes your responsibility to pitch in and remind them.
Cadging an invitation should ideally be done indirectly, like tossing off a few reminiscences about that wonderful clambake you all had on the beach. ("How long ago
was
that?") Digging out old photographs can be helpful. If this doesn't make them feel guilty, you may have to resort to pure bathos as you bravely recall that your last trip out of town was in March: "But really, the city hasn't been bad. You get used to it. When I leave the bedroom window open and listen to the traffic, I can just about persuade myself it's the surf pounding out there." It doesn't hurt to follow this with a compliment on their tans.


The Last Flings of Summer: It's Your Last Chance; Salsa the Night Away
For fans of salsa, there's a full-time, 9-to-5 party this weekend.
On Sunday night at the Palladium, 126 East 14th Street in Manhattan, Merengazo '91 starts at 9 P.M. and continues to 5 A.M. with six merengue bands from the Dominican Republic and New York City.
The club will very likely be full of dancers in glittery gowns and flashy suits, shaking anatomies to the galloping beat that now challenges Cuban and Puerto Rican rhythms for dominance in salsa.
The headliner at the Palladium is Sergio Vargas, a huge star in the Caribbean who sometimes slows down the beat to belt a ballad.
Also on the bill are Milly, Jocelyn y Los Vecinos, who answer merengue's macho double-entendres with a female perspective; Los Hermanos Rosario, who add a hint of Puerto Rican bomba to their merengues; the New York band Gran Manzana, and Iris y Franklin.
Admission is $15 before 11 P.M. for men but women are free; $20 after for all.
Information: (212) 473-7171.


Will Shafroth Dies; Court Expert Was 97
Will Shafroth, who helped shape the current Federal judical system, died Aug. 23 at the Stewart Health Center in the Springmoor retirement community in Raleigh, N. C. He was 97 years old and lived at Springmoor.
He died of complications after a stroke, his son, Stephen, of Chapel Hill, N.C., said.


John W. Boylan, 76, A Kidney Researcher
Dr.
John Wilson Boylan, an internist who specialized in experimental kidney medicine, died on Tuesday at the University of Connecticut Health Center in Farmington.
He was 76 years old.
His family gave the cause of death as heart failure and complications from a yearlong illness.
Dr.
Boylan, who lived in Guilford, Conn., was born in Plattsburgh, N.Y.
He graduated from the Long Island College of Medicine, and later became associated with the University of Buffalo, where he was a professor of medicine and physiology.
He was also president of the Buffalo Academy of Medicine.


Precious Metal Prices Drop On Fears of Soviet Selloff
Silver futures prices fell to six-month lows yesterday and other precious metals also dropped on fears that political upheaval in the Soviet Union could cause a huge selloff of gold.
On New York's Commodity Exchange, gold for September delivery was $3 lower, at $350.90 an ounce, and September silver was 10.1 cents lower, at $3.82 an ounce.


Russell Edwards, 82, an Ex-Editor Of Society of The New York Times
Russell Edwards, a former society editor of The New York Times, died on Wednesday at the Grand Islander Health Center in Middletown, R.I., where he had lived for six years.
He was 82 and had lived in Newport, R.I., since he retired in 1976.
He died of a ruptured aneurism, said his stepdaughter, Alison Hamilton.


Malt Liquor Marketer Is Sued by Rap Singer
A rap singer who is an outspoken critic of malt-liquor marketing practices filed suit Wednesday in Federal District Court in New York over the use of his voice in a radio commercial for St.
Ides malt liquor.
The spot, which was produced for the malt liquor's marketer, the McKenzie River Corporation, San Francisco, included a snippet of a song sung by Chuck D. of the popular group Public Enemy.
It ran at least several hundred times from July 4 to Aug. 12, when the company pulled it off the air after receiving an angry letter from the singer's lawyers.
The singer objects to what he says is the industry practice of aiming malt liquor ads at black youth.


Dollar Gains After Report That Fed Won't Cut Rates
The dollar edged higher against most leading currencies yesterday, bolstered by reports that the Federal Reserve would not immediately lower interest rates.
Currency analysts said the dollar initially fell in response to two reports that underscored the economy's weakness.
The Government reported that in July, Americans' incomes fell for the first time in six months and new-home sales slumped 8.5 percent.


INSIDE
Housing Sales Tumble
Sales of new homes plunged 8.5 percent in July, the Government said, suggesting consumers are not confident of economic recovery.
Page D1.
Suits Over Cigarette Filter
A tobacco company is facing lawsuits asserting that Kent cigarettes caused cancer, not with nicotine but with the asbestos in their filters.
Page B20.


Nancy Hale and David E. McKinney Are Married
Nancy Coates Hale and David Ewing McKinney, both of New Canaan, Conn., were married there yesterday at the First Presbyterian Church.
The Rev.
B.
Harrison Taylor, the bridegroom's brother-in-law, officiated.
Mrs.
McKinney, 45 years old, is a lawyer.
She graduated from St.
Louis University and received a law degree from Pace University.
She was a widow.
She is the daughter of Virginia Coates of St.
Louis and the late Dr.
Thomas Coates, who was a physician.


BRIEFS
*
AON Corp., Chicago, an insurance holding company, said that its subsidiary, Combined Insurance Co. of America, would sell its 50 percent interest in Orient AON Life Insurance Co. to its joint-venture partner, Orient Corp.  *
Applied Solar Energy Corp., City of Industry, Calif., whose major stockholder is American Cyanamid Corp., will be acquired by Westar Capital, Costa Mesa, Calif., an investment firm, for about $6 a share.


Robbers Kill East Side Bartender
A bartender was shot and killed and two other men were wounded during an attempted robbery by two armed men last night at Muffins Pub, a popular bar at 699 Second Avenue in Manhattan, the police said.
The two gunmen entered the bar, which is between 37th and 38th Streets, around 11 P.M. and announced a holdup.
One of the gunmen went to the rear of the bar while the other approached the bartender, witnesses said.


Dow Slips 5.59 Points From Record
Stock prices slipped a bit yesterday from Wednesday's record highs, with investors apparently worried about the pace of the nation's economic recovery and easing off as the Labor Day weekend neared.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 5.59 points, to close at 3,049.64.
The Dow dropped 16 points in the first 90 minutes before moving upward around noon.
But the rally lost steam during the remainder of trading.


Aches and Gains: Gooden Ailing, Young Excels
For the Mets, the intrigue off the field once more dominated the night.
Dwight Gooden's mysterious right-shoulder malady is still significant enough that he will again miss a scheduled start, and that is alarming.
But for once, there also took place on the field a bit of intrigue that was encouraging in the extreme.
Anthony Young, in his first major league start, acquitted himself with style even if he didn't wind up with a victory as the Mets lost to the Braves, 2-0, at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium.
The victory kept the Braves in sole possession of first place in the National League West.


If All Else Fails, Try Plain English
What's in a corporate name?
For many the answer has always been simple: At Ford Motor, you find Fords; at Coca-Cola, Cokes; at Campbell Soup . . . you guessed it.
A decade or so ago, though, many companies took a detour into a land of strange, foreboding names like Primark, Unisys, Allegis and alphabet-soup names filled with X's, from CSX to USX.
As they ballooned into conglomerates, companies did not want their identities linked to a solitary product and grasped for something universal, compact, unrecognizable.


Dorsey Out For 4 Games?
Eric Dorsey, the Giants' starting left defensive end, will apparently be sidelined for four weeks.
In Saturday's 24-3 exhibition loss to the New England Patriots, Dorsey sprained his right knee, the same knee that underwent arthroscopic surgery in the off season.
Coach Ray Handley said similar surgery seemed likely now, so Dorsey might be headed for injured reserve.
Mike Fox will take over for him, with John Washington backing up all three positions on the defensive line.


A Man and Machines
Friends of the motorman describe a life of trouble and promise; they say career advancement had brightened a life of longings.
Page B5.
Equipment exists that could have prevented the derailment. Page B4.


More Actions By Salomon To Aid Image
Salomon Brothers, in another series of moves to restore confidence, has hired a new crisis-management public relations firm, bade farewell to its old one and brought in a leading accounting firm to review the troubled company's internal compliance controls.
The firm also said it was setting up a permanent compliance committee at the board level that would have the responsibility of seeing that "all regulatory procedures are followed to the letter."


At the Movies
'Star Trek VI'
"The secret -- as near as I can figure out -- to dealing with this stuff is to try not to repeat yourself, to go off on a different tack every time," said Nicholas Meyer.
"This stuff seems to work best, as far as I'm concerned -- and perhaps this has always been the secret of it -- when it reflects issues or problems that are of current interest here and now. And insofar as I'm willing to tip anything that the movie is concerned with, that statement will have to suffice."


Our Towns
Do you remember when the town library had a wooden desk decorated with crayoned drawings and a little rubber stamp set for two weeks from today?
You had to sign the book cards personally and this provided an opportunity to see who had read those books before and how long they had kept them out.
The typical librarian was a kindly woman who remembered mothers and fathers from their grade-school days in undersized wooden chairs decorated with bunnies and elves.
The librarian seemed to be at the desk at every moment and to know without looking that your book was checked out or right over there.
A striped cat with a literary name usually snoozed somewhere, tolerating petting on certain days.
The floor creaked over by Biography.
And a large library fine -- anything over, say, 15 cents -- was a source of genuine social embarrassment.


Dust Off the Throne? Shine Up the Crown? A Romanov Muses
The pretender to the Romanov throne, Grand Duke Vladimir Kirillovich Romanov, has told a Finnish newspaper that monarchy might be a solution to the Soviet Union's problems, the Tass press agency reported yesterday.
Tass, quoting the Finnish newspaper Uusi Suomi, said the Grand Duke Vladimir, great grandson of Emperor Aleksandr II, was staying in Finland, on a visit that started Wednesday at the invitation of the owners of an estate near the city of Povro where he was born 74 years ago.
His parents fled after the Russian Revolution overthrew the centuries-old Romanov dynasty, and he left Finland in 1920 with them at the age of 3, Tass said.


The Case Judge Thomas Shouldn't Have Heard; Poverty's Scars
To the Editor:
I found the Op-Ed article by Guido Calabresi about Clarence Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court (July 28) fun to read, provocative and wrong.
Mr.
Calabresi, dean of Yale Law School, asks how the present Justices of the Supreme Court can know what discrimination
really
means?
"How can they understand what fear of police, prosecutorial or state abuse and brutality is? . . . they sound like what they are: people who neither through personal experience nor academic thought could ever imagine themselves erroneously crushed by the power of the state."


Parcells on Airwaves: Coach in Him Lingers
There's plenty of head coach left in Bill Parcells.
The prickly, sardonic style, impatience and ability to press psychological buttons didn't abandon him when he left football for television.
It was all in abundance earlier this week as he and Mike Francesa of WFAN prepared for the debut of their weekly preview show, "Around the NFL," at 10 o'clock tonight on the MSG Network.
A few scenes from Parcells's new life:


Delta to Take Over Shuttle Sunday
The name will change but that is about all when Delta Air Lines Inc. takes over Pan Am's hourly shuttle service from La Guardia Airport in New York to Boston and Washington on Sunday.
Delta said yesterday that members of its frequent-flier program who take the shuttle would earn double mileage credits -- 2,000 miles a flight -- through Oct. 1.
Customers will receive an additional 1,000 miles for round trips made in a single day.


Correction
Roman Szporluk, the author of an Op-Ed article that appeared yesterday, was misidentified.
He is professor of Ukrainian history at Harvard University.


Sounds Around Town
Terry's Trumpet
Clark Terry, the Cat Club, 76 East 13th Street, Manhattan, (212) 505-0090.
Clark Terry's trumpet peals out notes, speeding into the high register with contagious exuberance.
This New York Swing Society presentation, opening the Sunday swing-band series, should make his music even more physical, as Mr.
Terry leads a seven-piece band for a floor full of dancers.
Doors open at 7 P.M., with music beginning at 8; tickets are $12, $4 for the elderly.
Ray Barretto
Ray Barretto, Village Gate, Bleecker and Thompson Streets, Manhattan, (212) 475-5120.
Ray Barretto's conga drums have driven some of the best, brassiest bands in salsa; he also knows his way around jazz, so his septet's music is a pleasure for stationary listeners as well as dancers.
Tonight through Sunday with sets at 9:30 and 11:30.
About 1 A.M., Mr.
Barretto and Tania Maria, the Brazilian pianist, jam for the late-night diehards.
Tickets are $15, with a two-drink minimum.
Sharrock Band
Sonny Sharrock Band, the Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, Manhattan, (212) 219-3055.
Sonny Sharrock's guitar blares and crashes and zooms through pieces with the elemental power of free jazz and the impact of rock.
Tomorrow at 9 P.M. and midnight; tickets are $12, or $10 in advance


The Last Flings of Summer: It's Your Last Chance; An Indoorsman's Idyll
I intend to say goodbye to summer the same way that I said hello: indoors.
Not for me the crawling traffic to and from the beach, or the punishing rays of the sun.
Instead, summer will be ushered out amid the clicks and hums of the air-conditioner; the telephone, to order in a Chinese feast or two, and the videocassette recorder.


The Spoken Word
WALKING TOUR AND LECTURE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, Manhattan.
"Peddler's Pack" walking tour, Sunday at noon; "Streets Where We Lived" walking tour, Sunday at 1 P.M.; "House of Heritage" lecture, Sunday at 2 P.M.; walking tour fee, $12 ($11 for students and the elderly); lecture: $7 ($6 for the elderly, $5 for students).
Information: (212) 431-0233.
GALLERY TALKS AND LECTURES, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"American Life in American Art," by Amy Winter, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "John Baldessari," by Ms.
Winter, tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.; free with museum admission of $5 ($3 for students and the elderly).
Information: (212) 570-3611.


Testimony On Brokers In Tokyo
Testifying before Parliament on the recent string of stock market scandals, the former top executives of Nomura Securities and Nikko Securities admitted today having had much closer and longer-term ties to a widely known organized crime boss than they had previously acknowledged.
In addition, the executives said for the first time that top officials at the two brokerage houses had condoned the improper practice of compensating some customers for stock market losses, an admission that is likely to increase demands for reform of the scandal-plagued securities industry and damage the reputations of the firms and their managements.


Steinbrenner Snipes; Michael Fires Back
General Manager Gene Michael reacted angrily yesterday to derogatory comments made by George Steinbrenner about the record-setting $1.55 million contract given to the No. 1 draft choice, Brien Taylor.
Michael defended himself in a short and fiery meeting with reporters two hours before last night's game against the Toronto Blue Jays.


The Atlantic Monthly Press Is Sold to One of Its Editors
Morgan Entrekin, a senior editor at the Atlantic Monthly Press, a respected independent publisher, announced yesterday that he had bought the company for an undisclosed sum after the collapse of its planned sale to the Boston-based Charles E. Tuttle Company.
The reason for the failure of the Tuttle deal, announced in June, was not disclosed.
Peter Ackroyd, the chief executive of Charles E. Tuttle, declined to comment.
Mr.
Entrekin would say only that "the more we went forward, the less sense it seemed to make to all of us."


Review/Art; Comics, Furniture, Etc.: Nearly Art and Gaining
Anyone interested in art knows that there's also an even larger territory of not-quite-art that is, in some ways, equally exciting.
This sprawling, ever-changing limbo harbors all kinds of activities and achievements, including the creations of unrecognized geniuses that will eventually be recognized as art. (For many, two recent passers-through of the genius order might be the free-form ceramics of the turn-of-the-century American potter George Ohr and the extravagantly patterned drawings of Martin Ramirez, an untrained Mexican artist who spent half his life in a California mental hospital.)
But whether its constituents are genius-scale or not, are passing through or staying put, the area of not-quite-art can be stimulating for viewers.
The terrain has few established signposts directing one toward the good, the bad or the indifferent, yet the material is rarely intimidating; personal experience and intuitive reaction count for a lot.
At least this is the case with four of this weekend's exhibitions, each of which focuses on things made for somewhat humbler uses that are inexorably edging toward art or near-art status as they become more and more appreciated for purely visual reasons.


Not a Staged Reading
To the Editor:
Thank you for your article about me, "From Cartoons to a Play About Racism" (arts pages, Aug. 14; National Edition, Aug. 17).
I made an idiotic mistake when I called the Chicago production of "The Good Times Are Killing Me" a "staged reading." I wanted to describe the City Lit Theater Company's style of staging works.
I discovered (to my deep mortification) that a staged reading means actors on stage, working from scripts.
The City Lit production was a full, gorgeous and lively one, which enjoyed a long life and won six Jefferson awards.
LYNDA BARRY Chicago, Aug. 22, 1991


Newest Safety Equipment Lacking At Union Square Switching Point
For almost a decade, the Transit Authority has been slowly replacing safety equipment designed to prevent a crash like the one that killed five passengers early Wednesday morning.
But there was no new equipment just north of the Union Square station, where a motorman roared through a switch in New York's worst subway disaster in 63 years.


What's Wrong With This Picture?
If you are a basketball fan you will know right away that the United States Postal Service committed a foul.
The 29-cent stamp issued Wednesday, commemorating the centennial celebration of James Naismith's founding of the game, depicts two hands above the basket, one of them dunking a ball, the other one trying to block it.
But that's goaltending.
The referee would immediately award the offensive player with 2 points because a defender cannot reach over the rim to block the ball.
Digger Phelps, the former Notre Dame basketball coach, who serves on the Postal Service's Stamp Advisory Committee, said that the stamp artist, Lon Busch of Ellisvill, Mo., did not mean to depict a goaltending violation.
Besides Phelps said, "It's legal under international rules."
That would be fine for the more than 30 countries that have issued stamps since the celebration began last January.
Yes, but this is the United States and goaltending was eliminated in 1946 when Bob Kurland, the first 7-foot all-American was playing for Oklahoma A&amp;M and swatting the ball out of the basket.
Oddly enough.
Kurtland is currently the president of the Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass., where the game was invented.


Securities Backed By Home Loans
A $109.5 million asset-backed offering by the American Financial Corporation of Tampa, was priced yesterday through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The certificates, secured by home equity loans, are being sold through an American Home Equity Loan Trust 1991-A that was established soley for this issue.


Jamaica Tourist Accord By Young &amp; Rubicam
Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. and the Justice Department yesterday announced a settlement of perhaps the final point of contention in their dispute over the agency's handling of the Jamaican Tourist Board account.
A Justice Department spokesman said that a civil complaint was filed against the agency, charging it with violating Federal law by not reporting controversial payments it made to a Jamaican agency called Ad Ventures from 1981 to 1986.
No further action is expected, he added, because Young &amp; Rubicam agreed to provide records of the $894,626.80 it paid to Ad Ventures.


Feared Soviet Commandos Ask for Asylum in Europe
The commander of a unit of elite Soviet "black beret" troops active in the fight against Lithuanian independence appealed today to European countries to grant asylum to him and his 80 men.
"As a result of recent events, the Soviet Union has ceased to exist as a unified entity," said Maj.
Vladislav Makutanovicz, the commander of the much-feared shock troops.
"Today we are considered outlaws in our own country. So, we are ready to leave the Soviet Union for any country that respects human rights."


Corrections
An answer in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Aug. 13 about feline rabies misstated New York State's regulation on vaccinating cats.
Rabies vaccinations are required only in counties with raccoon rabies.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Sales of new single-family homes fell sharply and unexpectedly in July, the Commerce Department said, in a troubling sign that consumers lack confidence in the economic recovery.
Sales plunged 8.5 percent from the previous month.  [ D1. ]


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Aug. 6 about a sonic boom from the space shuttle that set off seismic tremors misidentified the journal that described the event.
It was Nature, not Science.


Economic Scene; Urgent Question On Aid to Soviets
AS the Soviet Union struggles on the brink of economic collapse and political dissolution, the urgent question facing the United States and its partners in the Group of Seven industrialized countries is what posture to take on foreign aid to the nation and its seceding republics.
President Bush is still holding to the cautious approach to Soviet aid that Western leaders agreed to during the London economic summit conference in July.
In the midst of the incredible events that began 10 days ago with the attempted coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, President Bush said he had "seen nothing to make me change my mind" about the group's agreement not to give Moscow direct financial aid until more fundamental steps are taken to establish a market economy.
The Western leaders also agreed to offer the Soviet Union only technical assistance and associate membership in the International Monetary Fund.


Pop/Jazz; Mary Osborne Makes a Return After 10 Years
The poster for Mary Osborne on the wall of the Village Vanguard shows a handsome woman holding a guitar.
Her head is thrown back, her long hair tumbles over her shoulders, her hoop earrings glimmer.
The woman in the picture just turned 70 years old, but her pose is youthful, demure, almost coquettish, like an update of a 1940's Hollywood movie still.
Similarly, when Ms.
Osborne comes onstage to lead her trio -- her weeklong engagement at the Vanguard continues tonight and tomorrow and concludes Sunday -- she has the charmingly self-conscious manner of one who is just getting her first shot at the big time.
She smiles a lot between renditions of standards like "Body and Soul" and "It's Wonderful," and frowns slightly in concentration as she plays her soft, lyrical solos.
Her giant old Gibson sunburst guitar is almost as big as she is.
Ms.
Osborne's New York City appearance this week, her first in 10 years, is a return of sorts.
During the 1940's and 50's she established herself as a staple of New York's jazz scene, performing at off-night jam sessions in clubs like the Vanguard, leading her own trio, freelancing as a side guitarist, performing on radio shows.
In 1941, she toured with the jazz violinist Joe Venuti, replacing his longtime accompanist, Eddie Lang; in the mid-40's she backed people like Coleman Hawkins, Mary Lou Williams and Mercer Ellington.
In the late 40's, she led her own groups at spots like Kelly's Stables and the Hickory House at a time when 52d Street seemed the center of the jazz community.
"Kelly's was like playing for the world," she said in a recent interview.
"Every celebrity, every movie star, every musician, every band leader -- everything. It got to the point where no matter where you went, you couldn't be nervous, because everybody was there all the time."


Continental Bank
The Continental Bank Corporation of Chicago has ceased all foreign exchange activity in Singapore as part of a plan to close its office there by year's end, a company spokeswoman said.


Shhh! Bed-and-Breakfasts Thriving in the Shadows
Across Manhattan, hundreds of people have furtively turned their spare bedrooms and vacant apartments into bed-and-breakfast operations, creating a thriving cottage industry that offers tourists an informal, inexpensive alternative to hotels.
They have done so under the often discriminating eyes of landlords and co-op boards and around, if not always against, city and state laws.


COMPANY BRIEFS
*
BSN Corp., Dallas, a sporting goods company, is negotiating a $33 million offer for its Maxpro sports division with a company that it did not name. *
Carlton Cards Ltd., a unit of American Greetings Corp., Cleveland, will purchase the Celebration, Paperchase and Card Gallery card and gift store operations from Smithbooks.
Terms were not disclosed.


23-Year-old Long Jump Record Broken


Your Money; Saving for College By Using a Trust
With classroom doors opening across America, a visit to the bursar's office cannot be far behind, and some parents have done their homework better than others.
The families who get an A+ in financial planning are those who have set up a Section 2503(c) trust to build a college fund with strong tax advantages.
John Dadakis, a partner at Rogers &amp; Wells in New York, said, "I recommend it for a lot of my clients -- younger professionals, grandparents."


Observer; Irate Stirs the Reader
It's astonishing what stirs the ire.
With me, for instance, it's phrases like "stirs the ire." The minute I see somebody writing "stirs the ire," my blood boils, I seize a quill and get off a poisonous letter to the author.
"Dear Phrase Coiner," I write, "It's not 'stirs the ire,' you poor hack. The correct expression is 'stires the ir.' "
Yes, dear reader, I know this letter makes no sense to you, and since the poor boob who wrote "stirs the ire" wouldn't get it either, I never mail the letter but tear it up after adding a few pedagogical flourishes, as for instance:


Patents; New Uses For Hulls Of Peanuts
Americans consume well over a million tons of processed peanuts every year, in forms from peanut butter to peanut candies and oils.
But the hulls, which constitute about a quarter of a peanut's weight, are largely discarded and create a significant waste-disposal problem.
A company in the heart of Georgia's peanut country has patented a process that it says can convert the hulls into a useful carrier material for concentrated agricultural chemicals.
The company also suggests that the material can be modified to make a biodegradable cat-box filler.


Sri Lankan President Delays Debate on His Impeachment
President Ranasinghe Premadasa, accused of abusing his powers, today suspended Parliament for a month and thereby delayed debate on an impeachment motion against him backed by two Cabinet ministers.
Opposition members said that about 120 members of Parliament in the opposition and the Government had signed a motion citing 24 cases of alleged abuse of power, corruption and illegal family deals.


Southeast Bank Deal Is Seen
Federal bank regulators are expected to announce in the next week a federally assisted buyout of the Southeast Banking Corporation, banking analysts said today.
Southeast, the second-largest banking company in Florida, has said repeatedly that it is seeking a merger or capital infusion from private investors.
It had a loss of $262.8 million for the first six months of 1991.


A Tad Uncomfortable at the Weekend Helm?
In the middle of a sailboat race when someone calls for room at the mark, you must think fast.
You or the other boat will have to give way, depending on your relative positions.
Your ability to judge the situation could spell the difference between winning or losing.
Also, any miscalculation could result in a collision.


Porsche Cuts Staff In U.S. by 23%
Porsche Cars North America Inc., a marketing operation of the German maker of luxury sports cars, laid off 23 percent of its staff, citing a depressed auto market.
The layoffs affect 77 of the operation's 339 workers.
"This is a clear indication of how hurtful the luxury tax has been, on top of the effects of the recession, in our key markets," the company's president, Brian Bowler, said.
Through the first seven months of this year, 2,844 Porsche


Corrections
An article on the Media Business page yesterday about the possibility of layoffs in the magazine division of Time Warner Inc. misstated the company's debt from the 1989 merger of Time Inc. and Warner Communications Inc.
It is $8.9 billion as of Aug. 22, not $11 billion, and the company has met all obligations on its debt.


Dow Declines 6.04 Points, to 3,043.60
Stock prices dropped slightly yesterday in lackluster trading that analysts attributed to the approaching holiday weekend.
The Dow Jones industrial average ended at 3,043.60, off 6.04 points for the day but up 3.35 for the week.
Computer-based program trading accounted for much of the Dow's decline yesterday.
A 20-minute sell program had a lot to do with the Dow's declining more than 12 points around 11:30 A.M.
The Dow began to rebound after noon but never rose above its opening level.


Will Shafroth Dies; Court Expert Was 97
Will Shafroth, who helped shape the current Federal judical system, died Aug. 23 at the Stewart Health Center in the Springmoor retirement community in Raleigh, N. C. He was 97 years old and lived at Springmoor.
He died of complications after a stroke, his son, Stephen, of Chapel Hill, N.C., said.


Bank Official in Japan Tells of Being Fooled Into Loans
Testifying today before a special parliamentary committee investigating financial scandals in Japan, the president of the Industrial Bank of Japan said a restaurant owner had tricked officials into lending her $1.8 billion, including $440 million still outstanding
Yo Kurosawa, president of Japan's top long-term credit bank, said the restaurant owner, Nui Onoue, had used fake deposit certificates as collateral for a portion of the loans she obtained.


The Day's Highlights
The Old Order Changes Further
K.G.B.
TO BAN SECRET INFORMERS: The new head of the Soviet K.G.B. said he would ban the agency's use of secret informers, as part of a move to turn the once-fearsome watchdog of the Communist state into a law-abiding intelligence agency.
The new Defense Minister said the army would be freed from Communist political control.
Page 1.
CHANGE REACHES KALININGRAD: In Kaliningrad, the conservative capital of a small Russian enclave between Lithuania and Poland, people are beginning to speak out against Communist rule.
Page 1.
CONFLICT AT WRITERS UNION: The Moscow police tried to shut the Russian Writers Union, a bastion of conservatives, but its leaders refused to leave and gathered writers for a vigil.
Page 4.
Republics Look Ahead and Look Back  UKRAINE CHARTS ITS FUTURE: The Ukraine seems to be rushing gladly toward a separate future of its own.
A wooden cage was built around a statue of Lenin scheduled for demolition, and the head of a fledgling bank has begun acquiring promising parcels of real estate.
Page 1.
LITHUANIAN'S TRIUMPH AND DRAWBACKS: Lithuania's success in breaking away from the Soviet Union is a triumph for the republic's leader, Vytautas Landsbergis.
But some Lithuanians say his radical nationalism and brusque style have created unnecessary problems.
Page 5.
Aftershocks: Economic, Intellectual and Religious
TIGHT OIL SUPPLY FORECAST: The Soviet Union's acting oil minister cut the estimate of his country's oil production for this year, fueling nervousness that global supplies could be extremely tight this winter.
Page 7.
IMPACT ON INTELLECTUALS: With Communism's fall in the Soviet Union, the questions about organizing human society seem likely to give way to specific issues like poverty and health care, political analysts say.
Page 1.
U.S.
COMMUNIST LEADER REACTS: Gus Hall, the chairman of the American Communist Party, said he opposed the attempt to overthrow President Gorbachev but shared the coup leaders' fear that Mr.
Gorbachev's reforms would lead to chaos in the Soviet Union.
Page 10.


No Midnight Miracle for McEnroe
John McEnroe didn't quite match the late-night electricity generated by Jimmy Connors and after 4 hours 33 minutes of a match that lurched to a halt at 1:27 A.M. today, he couldn't turn the lights out on Michael Chang.
McEnroe was thus eliminated in the third round of the United States Open early this morning, 6-4, 4-6, 7-6 (7-1), 2-6, 6-3, out-quicked, outslugged and often lobbed dizzy by his 19-year-old opponent, who is 12 years his junior.


There's No End in Sight At Hartford Statehouse
Will Connecticut's legislature ever go home?
Last week escape finally seemed possible after eight full months of debate on budget and taxes in the longest legislative session in modern Connecticut history.


General Dynamics Unit to Lose Its Manager
The General Dynamics Corporation said yesterday that John E. McSweeny, the general manager of its Convair division, would retire on Nov. 1.
Mr.
McSweeny, 55, has headed Convair for nine years and has been with General Dynamics for 30.
General Dynamics said it had not yet named a replacement for Mr.
McSweeny.
Until a replacement is named, the company said, Convair will be overseen by Michael C. Keel, the corporate executive vice president for missiles and electronics.


Kathryn Cravens, News Correspondent And Ex-Actress, 92
Kathryn Cravens, one of the first women to be a news commentator on coast-to-coast radio, died on Thursday at her home in Burkett, Tex.
She was 92 years old.
Miss Cravens retired to Burkett in 1962, moving back into the home in which she was born.


Perils of Satirizing Academic Foolishness
To the Editor:
I am writing in response to Joel Connaroe's "How I'm P.C." (Op-Ed, July 12) and Joyce Carol Oates's letter (" 'Can't Take a Joke?' the Bigot Asks," Aug. 13).
Joseph Epstein, the object of their unwarranted and unprovoked attacks, is one of the country's leading writers and editors, a man of letters of great humanity and distinction.
He has edited The American Scholar for more than 15 years with intelligence, grace, wit and wisdom while writing some of the best personal essays of our time.


Continental A.G. Sees Loss
Continental A.G., the world's fourth-biggest tiremaker, said today that its pretax profits fell by more than two-thirds in the first half of 1991 and that it was closing its financially troubled Canadian tire plant to help cut costs.
The German company, whose profits fell to 31.5 million marks, about $18.2 million, in the first six months from 100.5 million, or about $57.9 million, a year earlier, said the move would drag it into losses in 1991.


If Only Our Favorite Movie Houses Were Disabled Accessible
To the Editor:
Your survey of favorite movie houses in Manhattan was charming but glaringly deficient in one respect ("Movie Houses: The Oases of Summer," Aug. 9).
Despite your attention to physical detail, like the leg room between seats, no mention was made of accessibility for physically disabled patrons.


Orders Rose by 6.2% in July; Best Since 1970
Orders for manufactured goods in July posted their biggest surge in more than two decades, the Commerce Department said today, offering solid evidence of a revival at American factories amid mixed signals elsewhere in the economy.
Orders for both nondurable and durable goods -- expensive items expected to last three or more years -- shot up 6.2 percent for the month, to a seasonally adjusted $248.2 billion, the agency said.


Sports of The Times; Powell's Long, Long, Long Jump
Now after Mike Powell's record-breaking long jump, the question is asked anew: What are the limits of human potential?
How much farther can a person jump?
How much higher?
How much faster can he run, or swim, or hop and skip?


Boeing 707 Ended
The Boeing Company said its military unit will not resume production of the 707 aircraft because of insufficient new orders.
The 707 was Boeing's first line of commerical jet airliners.
The last passenger model was delivered in 1978, but versions for the military continued to be made.
Boeing said its last order for a military 707 was received in early 1987.
"The gap in orders has now widened to more than four years, making re-establishment of a production program costly and difficult," the company said in a statement.


Tyson Testifies Before Grand Jury
MIKE TYSON yesterday appeared before a grand jury in Indianapolis that is investigating an accusation that the former heavyweight champion raped a beauty pageant contestant in that city last month.
Tyson, who has not been charged in the incident, had no comment before or after he spent three and one-half hours in the jury room.
DON KING, the promoter for Tyson's fights, arrived in a separate elevator and remained in an adjacent office while Tyson testified. (AP)


Economy Index Up, But Some Key Areas Remain in a Slump
After a week of confusing signals about the American economy, a pattern appears to be emerging, one that shows strength in manufacturing but weakness in important service sectors like retailing, real estate and financial services.
The strength in manufacturing was clearly evident in yesterday's Commerce Department report that the Government's index of leading indicators had jumped 1.2 percent, the largest monthly increase in three years.


Pierre Guillaumat Is Dead at 82; French Oil Executive and Official
Pierre Guillaumat, often called the architect of France's energy independence and the first president of ELF-Aquitaine, France's largest oil company, died on Wednesday.
He was 82 years old.
Mr.
Guillaumat's family declined to indicate his cause of death, Agence France-Presse said.


Italian Group In Texas Deal
A group of Italian investors led by SCI, a large development and construction company, said it acquired 1.8 million square feet of commercial office space from the Texas bank unit of the NCNB Corporation for approximately $120 million.
In addition to SCI, investors include Roev General Inc.; subsidiaries of the Pirelli Group and Fiat, and other Italian businesses.


CHRONICLE
ROGER CARAS, the television reporter and author of nearly 60 books on nature and animal life, will become president of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals next month.
Mr.
Caras, 63 years old, who joined ABC News 17 years ago as its wildlife correspondent, is returning to his former career in conservation and animal preservation.
"The immediate tasks before us," Mr.
Caras said by telephone from the society's headquarters in Manhattan, "are absolutely no different than when the society was founded in 1866: alleviating pain, fear and suffering."


Yankees Give the Jays a Thumping
The Toronto Blue Jays may have found their way back to the right path to the post-season, but they hit a major bump in the road last night.
That bump, otherwise known as the New York Yankees, hit back, thumping the first-place Blue Jays, 9-2.


Julia R. Christ Is Wed to Paul Jay Clark
Julia Ryan Christ, the daughter of Angela Stewart of Fairfield, Conn., and Philip J. Christ of Aptos, Calif., was married yesterday in Garden City, L.I., to Paul Jay Clark, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul F. Clark of Lido Beach, L.I.
The Rev.
Francis R. Allen performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Clark, 27 years old, is a deputy Nassau County attorney.
She graduated magna cum laude from Long Island University and received a law degree from Hofstra University.
Her father, who is retired, was a district manager in New York for New York Telephone.


A Question of Oversight
The crash that killed five passengers on a New York subway train this week raised a question asked repeatedly after transit disasters: Why does the Federal Government, which contributes hundreds of millions of dollars a year to local subway systems, do almost nothing to insure that they are operated safely?
Even before the crash, there were calls for more aggressive supervision of transit safety.
And at the very least, the accident on the Lexington Avenue line seems likely to add force to calls for Federal regulations on alcohol and drug tests for transit workers.
The motorman is accused of driving the train while drunk, and evidence mounted yesterday that he has a history of alcohol abuse.  [ Page 25. ]


Review/Pop; Rough and Honky-Tonk, Mellowed to a Bayou Beat
Glenn Croker's acoustic guitar has the words "Pure Cajun" inscribed on the body.
But that description doesn't fit his band, the Hackberry Ramblers, which made its New York debut at Tramps on Thursday night after 58 years of working at dances and shows, mostly around Hackberry, La.
The Hackberry Ramblers are a country-Cajun band, playing two-steps, waltzes, boogie-woogies and country songs, with words in English and Cajun French.
On Thursday night, the group also took a request for "Johnny B. Goode," revamping it as a rakish country shuffle.


5th-Seeded Fernandez Wilts in the Heat
After being quietly positioned as the fifth-seeded player in the women's draw, Mary Joe Fernandez left the United States Open yesterday with hardly a whisper.
The steady baseliner from Miami dropped a 6-1, 6-2 decision to Radka Zrubakova of Czechoslovakia, who believed she had a chance to win only when she realized that Fernandez "was playing weird."
The 20-year-old Fernandez had a partial explanation.
She said that during the fourth game of the first set, she pulled a muscle in her hip, one that been occasionally nagging her for some time.


Key Rates
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
8.50
8.50
10.00
DISCOUNT RATE
5.50
5.50
7.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
5.43
5.49
8.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.34
5.30
7.37
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
5.37
5.31
7.37
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
7.64
7.57
8.73
30-YR. TREAS. BOND
8.05
8.00
8.97
TELEPHONE BONDS
9.00
9.00
9.97
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
6.97
6.97
7.64
*Estimated daily average, source Salomon Brothers **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bridgman to Run Freshman Senators
A 14-year N.H.L. career and a recently acquired degree from the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of Business have earned MEL BRIDGMAN the opportunity to build the expansion Ottawa Senators from scratch.
The former center was named general manager of the Senators, who will make their debut a year from now. . . .
DOUG SMAIL, a left wing who was with the Minnesota North Stars last season, was signed by the Quebec Nordiques as a free agent on yesterday. . . .
The Montreal Canadiens signed their free-agent captain, GUY CARBONNEAU, to a four-year contract.
The 31-year-old center will earn about $3.1 million over the length of the contract, which includes a $225,000 signing bonus.(AP)


Holiday on Monday
Monday is Labor Day.
Here are holdiday schedules.
NEW YORK Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
Banks: Closed Parking: Sunday rules.
Sanitation: No pickup, recycling or street cleaning.
Schools: Closed.
Financial markets: Closed.
Transportation: Buses and subways on Sunday schedule.
L.I.R.R. and Metro-North on holiday scheudle.
NEW JERSEY Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: Closed.
Schools: Closed.
Transportation: N.J.
Transit on weekend schedule.
CONNECTICUT Government offices: Closed.
Post office: Express Mail and special delivery only.
Banks: Closed.
Schools: Closed.
Transportation: Metro-North on holiday schedule.


Diagnosing the Cure: Insurers Look Over Doctors' Shoulders
Your doctor says you need an operation, though it's not an emergency.
Several days before you are admitted to the hospital, you get a telephone call from a company that wants information about your medical condition.
Your answers might determine how much your insurance company reimburses you later for the procedure.
The company, a utilization review company, specializes in evaluating the health care doctors recommend.
Such companies say they are advocates for the patient and help keep medical costs down, but many doctors consider such monitoring of their work by an outside group to be time-consuming, inefficient or demeaning.
Increasingly, consumers are caught in the crossfire.


Rebel Chief Ousted in Sudan
Three commanders of the Sudan People's Liberation Army have said they ousted their leader after accusing him of turning their eight-year war into a "reign of terror." The three commanders said on Wednesday that the removal of Col.
John Garang was necessary to turn the movement toward democracy.


Schools and the Mediocrity Trap
At a time when all New York City schools are facing severe budget cuts, can alternative schools and programs be exempted?
The fair answer is no.
But even so, in a system faulted for stifling creativity, school administrators ought to protect innovative programs.
The question is raised by the precarious fate of the Bronx New School, an alternative elementary school that has lost its executive director -- and possibly its mission.
The school's problems stem partly from budget cutbacks and partly from political conflict in the local school district.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the pretender to the Russian throne referred incorrectly to his residence.
The pretender, Grand Duke Vladimir Kirillovich Romanov, lives in Paris and has a country home at St.-Briac-sur-Mer in Brittany, in western France.


Soviets Estimate Oil Production Will Drop in '91
The Soviet Union's acting oil minister today lowered the estimate of his country's oil production for this year, feeding a growing nervousness among Western analysts that global oil supplies could be extremely tight this winter.
Nobody is predicting serious shortages; oil inventories are neither especially high, nor extremely low.
But many analysts believe prices could jump about $2 from the current $22 for a barrel of the benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude.


Housing Index Declines
The typical American family's ability to buy a house fell in July, the National Association of Realtors said today.
The housing affordability index, it said, indicates that a family with a median income of $36,414 had 110.4 percent of the income needed to qualify for a mortgage on 80 percent of a median-priced home.
The July median price was $103,000, up $1,000 from June.
The index in June was 111.5 percent, the lowest since it was 107.4 percent in August 1990.


Serbia Promises Reply on Truce Plan
Serbia, the last remaining holdout, said today that it would offer "a constructive reply" on Saturday to the European Community's initiative calling for a cease-fire between Serbs and Croats to be monitored by community observers and followed by a peace conference.
Serbia's Foreign Minister, Vladimir Yovanovic, said in a televised interview that he expected the republic's Government to issue its decision on whether to accept the proposal issued last Tuesday and accepted since by the leaders of beleaguered Croatia.


EXECUTIVE CHANGES
*
BMW of North America Inc., Woodcliff Lake, N.J., the U.S. unit of Bayerische Motorenwerke A.G., named Wolfgang Stofer executive vice president of finance.
He succeeds Christian Penner, who has been named to a senior management position at the parent company. *
Burger King Corp., Miami, a unit of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., named Sidney J. Feltenstein Jr. executive vice president for brand strategy.


Serbia Promises Reply on Truce Plan
Serbia, the last remaining holdout, said today that it would offer "a constructive reply" on Saturday to the European Community's initiative calling for a cease-fire between Serbs and Croats to be monitored by community observers and followed by a peace conference.
Serbia's Foreign Minister, Vladimir Yovanovic, said in a televised interview that he expected the republic's Government to issue its decision on whether to accept the proposal issued last Tuesday and accepted since by the leaders of beleaguered Croatia.


Light Bulbs for All
To the Editor:
To promote power conservation, Con Edison is selling energy-efficient compact fluorescent light bulbs to its customers at a discount.
The rub is that the bulbs will be made available only to direct electricity customers.
Those who live in buildings that purchase power and allocate costs to the various apartments cannot buy these beneficial bulbs at a discount.
This seems shortsighted.
I have written to the Public Service Commission, and will leave the lights on until I get an answer.
STEPHEN LEE CRYSTAL New York, Aug. 12, 1991


Dollar Climbs in Response To Positive Economic Data
The dollar headed higher yesterday in response to several positive economic reports, surprising some traders who had expected uneventful pre-holiday activity.
Gold was lower.
On the New York Commodity Exchange, gold for current delivery settled at $348.10, down $2.80 from late Thursday.
The Republic National Bank later quoted a bid of $348.00, down $3.20 from late Thursday.


Dr. Dudley Dillard, 77, Professor and Author
Dudley Dillard, a professor and author who was a specialist in Keynesian economics and the history of the North Atlantic Community, died Wednesday at Leland Hospital in Riverdale, Md.
He was 77 years old and lived in University Park, Md.
He died after a heart attack, said Mahlon Straszheim, chairman of the of the economics department at the University of Maryland.


Continental Bank Is Quitting Treasury Role
The Continental Bank Corporation, saying it would rather cut its own costs than have an acquirer do the cutting, announced today that it was leaving the Government securities business and was consolidating its operations abroad.
As a result of these and other actions, the bank will reduce its work force by an additional 5 percent, or 250 people, to just under 5,000, having already cut its staff by 45 percent since Thomas C. Theobald joined the company as chairman and chief executive in 1987.


Pittsfield Journal; In Remembering Dead, A Lively Battle Erupts
At St.
Joseph's Cemetery here, the dead rest peacefully under a verdant lawn and chiseled gray stones.
It is the living who haunt the place.
For decades, families in this western Massachusetts city of 52,000 people have been free to decorate the graves at St.
Joseph's pretty much as they pleased.
But that changed this spring, when new rules limited families to one flowerpot for each plot and banned all other ornaments.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Gamez Shoots 6 Under


Greyhound Wins Approval for Its Reorganization Plan
A Federal judge today cleared the way for Greyhound Lines Inc. to emerge from bankruptcy and continue as the only intercity bus network linking the nation's small towns and major cities.
Under the reorganization plan approved by Judge Richard S. Schmidt of the Federal Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of Texas, Greyhound would become a public company and would repay creditors about 37 cents on the dollar on $539 million of debt the bus company owed when it entered bankrutpcy proceedings in June 1990.


When Mets Need a Hero, Miller Steps In
By night's end, Keith Miller had played right field, left field and second base.
Most important, though, Miller had played the role no member of the Mets appeared capable of filling for weeks.
Miller had performed in the clutch at the plate, and as a result the Mets had outdueled the Reds, 3-2, at Riverfront Stadium tonight.
"Miller was worth his weight in gold," Manager Bud Harrelson said of his utility man.


New Issues Born From Communism's Death Knell
When Communism died its formal death in Moscow, it seemed as though there was a corresponding death knell in this country and in Western Europe.
Dead also, or, at least, considerably faded, was the question that has produced the fiercest arguments and the sharpest conflicts among intellectuals in more than 70 years, arguments about Marxism-Leninism and social revolution, about the nature of the Soviet Union and about the existence of Communism as a major ideological force in a bipolar world.


S.&amp; L. Case Convictions
The chairman of the failed Midwest Federal Savings and Loan Association, his daughter and two former executives were convicted yesterday of racketeering involving the institution's collapse.
The failure is expected to cost taxpayers $1.2 billion.
Hal Greenwood Jr., chairman of Midwest, faces up to 155 years in prison and $6.25 million in fines for what prosecutors said was a plot to enrich himself and the other defendants while concealing huge losses.


CHRONICLE
PRESIDENT BUSH and his wife, BARBARA, have been enamored of "Forever Plaid," the Off-Broadway musical that spoofs the music and the squeaky-clean images of male pop groups of the 1950's, since they saw the show in New York in July.
The President had the cast perform at the White House in early August and at his vacation home in Kennebunkport, Me., at a reception Thursday for the British Prime Minister, JOHN MAJOR, and his wife, NORMA MAJOR.
The cast was invited to stay an extra day to play a round of golf and attend a picnic with the Bushes and the Majors.
This probably means that the President is one up on JONATHAN BUSH, his brother, who has seen the show six times and even celebrated his birthday with the cast.


Big East Taking The Field
The Big East, the major Eastern football conference envisioned for at least three decades, will make its mark today.
The league's logo has been painted on the field at Rutgers Stadium in Piscataway, N.J., where the Scarlet Knights will play Boston College in the first game of the Big East Football Conference.
The second contest takes place tonight when West Virginia meets Pittsburgh at Mountaineer Field in Morgantown.


Corrections
A chart yesterday describing the relationship of the Ukraine to the rest of the Soviet Union misstated the land area proportions.
The Ukraine represents 2.7 percent of the Soviet Union's total land area, Russia 76.2 percent and other republics 21.1 percent.
The chart also misstated the total land area of the Soviet Union.
It is 8,649,000 square miles.


Jews Saying Restraint On Brooklyn Was Mistake
After a week of silence, mainstream Jewish organizations have begun to call the racial violence in Crown Heights a dangerous manifestation of anti-Semitism and not just a product of local Hasidic-black tensions.
In the first few days after a black child, Gavin Cato, was killed by a Hasidic driver Aug. 19 and a Hasidic student, Yankel Rosenbaum, was killed in apparent retaliation the next day, the organizations took a cautious and even-handed approach, deploring the violence that followed and mourning the deaths on both sides.
But yesterday, in remarks echoed by the leaders of other groups, the national director of the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith said the approach had been a mistake.


There's No End in Sight At Hartford Statehouse
Will Connecticut's legislature ever go home?
Last week escape finally seemed possible after eight full months of debate on budget and taxes in the longest legislative session in modern Connecticut history.


Kennedy in Appearance At Grand Jury Session
Senator Edward M. Kennedy today testified before a Palm Beach County grand jury considering evidence of possible obstruction of justice during the investigation of rape charges against his nephew, William K. Smith.
In brief remarks to reporters after an 80-minute court appearance this morning in West Palm Beach, Mr.
Kennedy said he was responding to a subpoena.
"We were invited down here to participate in this process and we welcome the opportunity to do so," he said.
Afterward, Mr.
Kennedy left the courthouse with a private investigator who has been aiding Mr.
Smith's lawyers.


Woman Raped While Jogging in Central Park
A man claiming he had a knife raped and robbed a 34-year-old woman early yesterday while she was jogging in Central Park, the police said.
The incident happened not far from the site where another woman was attacked while jogging and almost killed by a gang of youths in April 1989 in a case that drew nationwide attention.


Turner Effort On Cartoons
Turner Broadcasting System Inc. said today that it was in talks to buy assets from Hanna-Barbera, the film and television producer best known as the creator of the Flintstones, the Jetsons, Yogi Bear and other animated cartoon characters.
Atlanta-based Turner said it had started formal negotiations to buy the cartoon entertainment assets of Hanna-Barbera Productions Inc., a subsidiary of the Great American Communications Company.


G.N.P. Gain In Germany
Western Germany's gross national product surged strongly from April through June, but the Government said today that the expansion would slow in the second half of the year.
The Federal Statistics Office said G.N.P., a broad measure of the economy, which includes income from overseas, rose 4.8 percent in the second quarter, resulting in first-half growth of 4.5 percent.


Quotation of the Day
"I knew I could do it. I knew it would take the perfect situation: the perfect track, a big meet, me being behind, my last jump. Well, it didn't work out exactly that way. It wasn't my last jump. But everything else worked out perfectly." -- Mike Powell, after breaking the world long-jump record.  [ 30:3. ]


Public &amp; Private; Not So Itsy Bitsy
There's a scene in "Annie Hall" in which Woody Allen goes into Annie's bathroom to kill a spider he says is as big as a Buick.
That actual spider is now living between two pink phlox within spitting distance of the screened porch.
I say spitting distance because it's one of those elderly-man-in-rocker-with-chewing-tobacco phrases that we affect out here in the country, where city people come to be at one with nature, wear the stuff they bought from Eddie Bauer and pay exorbitant prices for firewood.
If this spider ever appeared on the wall of my office in the city I would call building security and then try to kill it with a fire extinguisher.
Here she has become a regular part of our family, and her family will soon be a regular part of our family, too.
One day she went AWOL from the web and when we finally tracked her down she had lost half her body weight and left a thing like a dingy grape in one corner of the screen.


Evidence Points to History Of Drinking by Motorman
Evidence mounted yesterday that the motorman on the Lexington Avenue line train that crashed on Wednesday had a history of alcohol abuse, raising questions on why his supervisors at the Transit Authority continued to allow him to operate trains.
Two independent toxicologists said in interviews that the level of alcohol in the motorman's blood, as reported by the police and prosecutors, strongly indicated that Robert E. Ray had a chronic drinking problem.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
After a week of confusing signals about the economy, a pattern appears to be emerging, one that shows strength in manufacturing but weakness in important areas like retailing, personal incomes, real estate and financial services.
Underscoring the strength in manufacturing, the Index of Leading Indicators jumped 1.2 percent, the largest monthly increase in three years.  [ Page 1. ]


Guidepost; Your Pet and the Vet
To keep your pet healthy, make sure it gets regular checkups and the proper immunizations.
The Animal Medical Center, a major veterinary hospital in Manhattan, suggests this guide to pet health care.
CHECKUPS New pets should get several vaccinations in the first year.
Afterward, a yearly visit for booster shots and a checkup is usually sufficient, unless the pet is chronically ill or very old.
A checkup should include a dental exam, a stool sample for parasites and, for dogs, a blood test for heartworms.
SHOTS AND PILLS Cats should have a single shot that protects against feline panleukopenia, rhinotracheitis and calicivirus, and a rabies vaccination.
Some also need shots against feline leukemia virus or pneumonitis.
Dogs should have a shot that protects against distemper, hepatitis and parainfluenza, and parvovirus and rabies vaccinations.
Most dogs should take heart-worm prevention pills during the mosquito season.
Some need shots against coronavirus, bordetella, leptospirosis or Lyme disease.
MEDICAL RECORDS "My Cat's Lifetime Guide to Good Health" and "My Dog's Lifetime Guide to Good Health" are booklets for medical histories.
They are 50 cents from Scratchex Pet Skin Care Center, Box 328, White Plains, N.Y. 10602.
"Our Pet's Health Record," a folder for veterinary records, is free from Quaker Professional Services, 585 Hawthorne Court, Galesburg, Ill. 61401.


A Lament by America's Top Communist
Gus Hall, the chairman of the American Communist Party, yesterday warned of a frightening new wave of "witch hunts," "mass hysteria" and McCarthyism.
He was talking about about persecution of Communists in the Soviet Union.
"I view it as legislative insanity and hysteria," Mr.
Hall said in perplexed tones about the Soviet Parliament's vote to suspend all activities of the Communist Party.
"Those of us who learned the lesson of McCarthyism see this as a wrong turn, there is such similarity in what is going on."
It was a confusing, "Through the Looking Glass" moment in history for the 80-year-old Minnesotan, who took over the leadership of his party in 1959 afterbeing convicted of plotting to overthrow the United States Government and serving eight years in the Federal prison in Leavenworth, Kan.


Louisiana's Abortion Curbs Won't Get a Quick Hearing
A Federal appeals court today denied Louisiana's request for a quick decision on the state's strict new abortion law.
The three-judge panel that issued the ruling gave no reason for its decision.
After a Federal district court found the law unconstitutional, the state had asked the panel, from the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, either to hold an expedited hearing of the case or to send it directly to the United States Supreme Court.


Gorbachev: Larger Than Life
In the impassioned debate over preserving some form of Soviet union, Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev may not carry the day.
But that will not be for want of personal courage, eloquence and leadership.
Betrayed by faithless comrades, he now calls for justice and unity rather than vengeance.
Belittled by democratic opponents, the Soviet President has by force of character put himself at the center of the struggle to prevent the violent disintegration of a far-flung empire.


Robert G. Segel, 56, Publishing Executive
Ronald G. Segel, who headed two American branches of a British publishing concern, died yesterday at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston.
He was 56 years old.
Mr. Segel, a resident of Weston, Mass., died of lung cancer, his family said.


Corrections
An article on Monday about programs to involve the elderly in school districts misstated the method of adopting school budgets in Connecticut.
In most communities, they are included in municipal budgets and are not subject to a separate popular vote.
But in regional school districts, the vote is separate.


A Japanese Glass Ceiling for U.S. Managers?
To the Editor:
The timing of hearings in a House subcommittee concerning alleged discrimination in hiring and promotion practices at the managerial level in Japanese-owned companies in the United States seemed unfortunate, coming upon the 46th anniversary of the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.


Letter: On Health Care; Reform Needs a Government Structure
To the Editor:
In your crusade on health care reform, you certainly sound like a true believer.
In editorial after editorial (May 26 and 27, Aug. 6), you purport with evangelistic zeal to provide the one and only answer to health care reform.
Unfortunately, you have confused the two parts of the question:


Coke's Largest Bottler Plans Key Acquisition
Coca-Cola's largest bottler said today that it plans to acquire the Johnston Coca-Cola Bottling Group in a $439 million stock deal that would put about 55 percent of the domestic Coke bottling system under one organization.
Johnston, based in Chattanooga, Tenn., is the largest independent Coke bottler.
It bottles and distributes Coke products in 10 states, and is responsible for about 11 percent of Coke products sold in cans and bottles.


JWP Buying 34% Of Recycling Unit
JWP Inc. said it agreed to buy 914,840 shares of Resource Recycling Technologies Inc., representing a 34 percent stake in the company.
The purchases were made from "certain shareholders" for about $9 million in cash.
Under terms of the purchase agreement, Burton Koffman, the chairman of Resource Recycling, and Richard Koffman, vice chairman, will resign, as will other members of the Koffman family.
Rupert Walters, president of JWP's energy and environment group, will become chairman of Resource Recycling, said JWP, which is based in Purchase, N.Y.
Resource Recycling is based in Vestal, N.Y.
Lawrence Schorr will remain


Imerina-Tsiafahy Journal; Madagascar, Where the Dead Return, Bringing Joy
His hands and feet caked with red soil and his face streaked with sweat, Jean Louis Raharison smiled with joy.
He had just dug his wife's remains out of her grave and danced with her disinterred body stretched high above his head.
Ten more corpses, sheathed in straw mats, were heaved up the stairs of the underground tomb onto the grassy knoll here, as a band of clarinets and trumpets struck high-spirited tunes and relatives lunged at the dead.


Penguins' Coach Has Brain Surgery
BOB JOHNSON, who led the Pittsburgh Penguins to their only National Hockey League championship last season in his first season coaching the team, had emergency surgery yesterday to remove a brain tumor that surgeons believe is malignant.
"This was a complete shock," said the Penguins' team physician, DR.
CHARLES BURKE, as Johnson lay in critical condition at Mercy Hospital in Pittsburgh.
"His condition was very serious last night, almost to the point of being life-threatening. That is why we operated."


U.S. AGENTS STORM PRISON IN ALABAMA, FREEING 9 HOSTAGES
In a predawn raid that lasted just three minutes, Federal assault teams stormed a prison cellblock today, freed 9 hostages and took custody of the 121 inmates who rebelled 10 days ago in an effort to block their deportation to Cuba.
The hostages, seven men and two women, barricaded themselves in a room with mattresses once the assault began and escaped injury, an Immigration and Naturalization Service official said.
One of the Cuban detainees suffered minor injuries in the assault, on the Talladega Federal Correctional Institution.
The operation was carried out without a shot being fired, officials said, although nonlethal percussion explosives were apparently used.


Small Victory for Milli Vanilli Fans
The record company and distributor for the lip-synching duo Milli Vanilli have agreed to pay modest refunds to music buyers and concertgoers who thought they were hearing the real thing, a lawyer involved in the case said on Thursday.
Proof of ownership of the group's hit single, "Girl You Know It's True," entitles purchasers to a $1 refund.
Album and cassette owners will get back $2, and compact disk buyers will get a $3 refund, said Thomas Tyrrell, a lawyer representing a CD buyer and a concertgoer involved in the class-action suit.


Andrea Holmes Wed to T. E. Ware Jr.
Andrea Roberts Holmes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Garrick Holmes of Geneva, was married yesterday in New York to Thomas Earle Ware Jr., the son of Ann Gilkey Ware of Brooklyn and Mr.
Ware of Reston, Va.
The Rev.
Herbert G. Draesel Jr. performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Holy Trinity.
Mrs.
Ware, 28 years old, is a manager in the fragrance department at Tiffany's in New York.
She is a cum laude graduate of Wellesley College.
Her father is the editor in chief of M &amp; A Europe, a business magazine published by IMC Business Communications in Geneva.


Orion Pictures
The Orion Pictures Corporation said yesterday that it was not able to make payments on three separate classes of debt due yesterday, today and Sunday.
The financially troubled movie studio, which announced an agreement in principle on Aug. 15 for a restructuring of its capitalization, said yesterday that it would not make $2.5 million in interest payments due yesterday on its 10 percent subordinated debentures due in 1994.
Orion also said it would not make a scheduled payment of $50 million in principal due on Aug. 31 on a revolving credit agreement with its banks.
The company said it was in talks with its banks on "this and other issues." Orion's shares fell 62.5 cents each yesterday, to $1.75, on the Big Board.


Traffic Alert
West Indian carnival and parade: Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn will be closed on Monday from Utica Avenue to Washington Street from 10 A.M. to late evening.
Holiday Closings
A listing of Labor Day closings appears on page 24.


CHRONICLE
The lawsuit filed by Rock Hudson's male lover against the late actor's estate ended last week with a settlement, said the lawyer for MARC CHRISTIAN, who was Mr.
Hudson's companion.
The lawyer, KENT L. RICHLAND, said yesterday that the amount of the settlement would not be disclosed.
Mr.
Christian had sued the estate shortly after the actor's death at the age of 58 in October 1985.
He charged that Mr.
Hudson had concealed from him the fact that he had AIDS.
In 1989, a Los Angeles Superior Court jury awarded $21.75 million to Mr.
Christian.
That amount was later reduced to $5.5 million, a figure that was upheld after an appeal by lawyers for Hudson's estate.
Mr.
Christian had also sued Mr.
Hudson's personal secretary, MARK MILLER, charging that he had conspired with Mr.
Hudson to conceal his illness.
That suit was settled separately.


Bergner Finance Plan Approved
Maus Freres S.A. of Switzerland said that United States authorities approved a finance plan for its P. A. Bergner &amp; Company subsidiary, the heavily indebted department store company.
A Maus Freres spokesman said the Federal Bankruptcy Court for the Eastern District of Wisconsin granted interim approval for a package that included a $175 million credit and a credit line of $250 million from the Chemical Banking


Writers at the Barricades: A Vigil by Slavophiles
The Moscow police tried today to shut down the Russian Writers Union, a bastion of ardent patriots, in the latest wave of recriminations from the failed coup last week.
Leaders of the union refused to leave the building and gathered more than 100 writers for an overnight vigil, asserting that the country's ascending anti-Communists had mounted their own campaign of political repression.


'Carjackers' in Detroit Stalk Drivers, Stealing at Gunpoint and Taking Off
In this area where public transportation is scarce and the car is king, the latest genre of urban crime is particulary unnerving.
Gunmen in increasing numbers are confronting motorists on freeways, at intersections, in parking lots and at fast-food outlets, robbing them and then fleeing in the victims' cars, which are then sometimes used in additional holdups.


About New York
Many of the bad things that can happen in the underground adventure known as the New York City subway system have happened to Roy Lee, a lawyer who commutes everyday on the No. 2 or No. 3 train from his Upper West Side home to his office in lower Manhattan.
Mr.
Lee has been viciously squeezed in doors, lost his glasses on the tracks, and waited for trains for what seemed hours as the public-address system cackled an incomprehensible message.
He has dodged subterranean thugs.
During power failures he has sat in darkened cars with people who do things like commune with spirits from other planets.


Soviet Parliament: 'Doors to Discredit Opened by Ourselves'
Following are excerpts of a session of the Supreme Soviet in Moscow today, as translated by CNN:
VALENTIN M. FALIN, chief of the Communist Party's International Department and a Gorbachev supporter: Distinguished chairman, colleagues, yesterday I made a short speech here, and meanwhile there was a search going on in my apartment, and it was ordered by Deputy General Procurator Lisov based on Article 167 of the criminal code of the Russian federation.
At 12 o'clock, there was a a break here, and I called my wife to ask her what her health was, and what her mother's health was, because she is an invalid.
And my wife asked me to come as soon as possible because there was a search going on in my apartment.


Philippines Downturn
The Philippine economy weakened further during the first half of the year and unemployment soared to its highest level since World War II, the Government said today.
The National Statistics Coordination Board said real gross national product totaled $12.8 billion, down less than half of 1 percent, the lowest growth rate since President Corazon C. Aquino took office in 1986.
The average annualized inflation rate for the six-month period rose to 16.97 percent, compared with 13.1 percent in the comparable period last year, the board said.
The Philippine Labor Department said unemployment rose to 17 percent, up from 15 percent in June before the volcanic eruptions of Mount Pinatubo.


Corrections
A list of holiday closings yesterday included an incorrect reference to a parade.
There will be no Labor Day parade in New York City this year.


A Japanese Glass Ceiling for U.S. Managers?; One-Sided Hearings
To the Editor:
Not since the notorious Senator Joseph R. McCarthy's Subcommittee on Un-American Activities in the early 1950's has the prestige of Congress been so badly abused by a few grandstanding politicians.


Kennedy in Appearance At Grand Jury Session
Senator Edward M. Kennedy today testified before a Palm Beach County grand jury considering evidence of possible obstruction of justice during the investigation of rape charges against his nephew, William K. Smith.
In brief remarks to reporters after an 80-minute court appearance this morning in West Palm Beach, Mr.
Kennedy said he was responding to a subpoena.
"We were invited down here to participate in this process and we welcome the opportunity to do so," he said.
Afterward, Mr.
Kennedy left the courthouse with a private investigator who has been aiding Mr.
Smith's lawyers.


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League


MOLDAVIA FACING A FUEL BLOCKADE
Ethnic Russians threatened to cut off power and gas to the rest of the breakaway republic of Moldavia today after their leader was arrested on suspicion of backing the coup against President Mikhail S. Gorbachev last week.
The City Council of Tiraspol, capital of the Russian-speaking Dnestr region, said it would shut down a major gas pipeline, cut off electricity and block roads and rails unless a leader of the local Russian minority, Igor N. Smirnov, is freed.


Soviet Turmoil; Back to Normal Duty for Soldiers of the Coup


Ted and Joe, 1941: August 31


Jets' Offense Bracing For Possible Slowdown
Starting receivers Al Toon and Rob Moore, two of the top flyers in the Jets' offense, might be a little slow on takeoff in the team's regular-season opener at Giants Stadium against Tampa Bay on Sunday.
At this point, Moore, who has a slight pulled hamstring and is listed as probable for the game, is better off than Toon.
Moore practiced with the team today and didn't appear to show any ill effects of his hamstring injury.


'I Can Read! I Can Read!' she Exclaimed
To the Editor:
As a parent and bookstore owner, I was touched by Anna Quindlen's "Enough Bookshelves" (column, Aug. 7) about books in her young family's life.
I recall a similar experience 20 years ago when my daughter was a first grader.
She was sitting on a sofa looking at a book and suddenly exclaimed: "I can read! I can read!" That joy never left her, or her parents in all of our children's discovery of the printed word.
She went on to graduate from college with honors in English.
She now works as a cook in a posh restaurant, but she's still a voracious reader.
WARREN CASSELL Greenwich, Conn., Aug. 11, 1991


Buying New Shoes for Growing Feet
The back-to-school shopping rush is well under way, and shoes are usually on the lists of things youngsters need as they start a new school year.
Parents should take special care to see that their children get the right footwear.
"A child's foot can change sizes up to 34 times before the age of 10," said Tom Brunick, director of the Athlete's Foot Wear Test Center in Naperville, Ill., an independent research center that evaluates children's athletic shoes.


Militant Lithuanian Now Gives Pause
Lithuania's success in breaking away from the Soviet Union is a crowning and personal triumph for the republic's leader, Vytautas Landsbergis.
But even at this moment of victory, as Lithuanian sovereignty is being recognized by growing number of countries, some Lithuanians say Mr.
Landsbergis's radical nationalism and brusque style have created unnecessary problems for their new country.


Walter F. Diehl Union Leader, 84
Walter F. Diehl, the international president of the stage and film workers' union Iatse from 1974 to 1986, died on Monday at his home in Allendale, Fla.
He was 84 years old.
He died of a heart attack, said a union spokesman, Walter Blanchard, in Los Angeles.


Popularity of 2 Movies Is Unabated in the Videos
The United States Open may be a tough ticket, but this weekend there are a pair of new movies at the local video store that may be almost as hard to come by.
On Aug. 22, Fox Home Video released "Home Alone," one of the largest box-office attractions in movie history, starring Macaulay Culkin as an 8-year-old left by himself to defend the suburban family homestead against burglars.
Six days later Orion issued Kevin Costner's three-hour "Dances With Wolves," also one of the most popular films of the year, which stars Mr.
Costner as a Civil War cavalry officer who rides West and befriends a tribe of Lakota Sioux.


Back in Miami, Beamon Remains Down to Earth
For 23 years, Bob Beamon had always drawn bigger crowds abroad than at home.
And yesterday, he was surrounded by merely half a dozen members of the news media at the Dade County Parks and Recreation Department office in Miami.
It was the day after his 45th birthday.


New Soviet Security Chiefs Pledge to Revamp Agencies And To End The Use Of Fear
The new heads of the K.G.B. and the Soviet defense forces announced plans today to reform their organizations, but each insisted on the need to keep them from fragmenting.
Vadim V. Bakatin, the head of the K.G.B. said at a press conference that he would ban the use of secret informers, as part of a move to turn the once-fearsome watchdog of the Communist state into a traditional intelligence agency, operating within the strict limits of the law.


White Sox to Determine if Bo's Ready
BO JACKSON will be examined by White Sox trainer HERM SCHNEIDER over the weekend, and the team will decide by tomorrow when the outfielder will be activated, a spokesman said yesteday.
Jackson, who injured his hip in January while he was playing football with the Los Angeles Raiders, has been on a rehabilitation program with White Sox farm clubs in Sarasota, Fla., and Birmingham, Ala., the past week, going 5 for 15 as a designated hitter.
General Manager RON SCHUELER said he was happy with Jackson's progress.


The Last Drive-In in New Jersey Is Fading to Black
New Jersey, the birthplace of the drive-in movie, will lose its last outdoor screen when the Route 35 Drive-In goes dark for good next week.
Rising real-estate prices, the trend toward compact multiple-screen indoor theaters and the arrival of the VCR have conspired here, as they have in other states, to ring down the curtain on the drive-in, which often offered more real romance, adventure and family entertainment in the parking lot than was available vicariously from the screen.


Dr. Florence B. Seibert, Inventor Of Standard TB Test, Dies at 93
Dr.
Florence B. Seibert, who invented the first reliable tuberculosis test and helped improve the safety of intravenous injections, died on Aug. 23 at the Palm Springs Nursing Home in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
She was 93 years old.
The cause of death was not disclosed.
Teresa Hicks, an aide who helped care for Dr.
Seibert at the home, said she had been in declining health in the last two years and suffered from complications from childhood polio.


K.G.B. to Allow Defector's Family to Leave
The new chairman of the K.G.B. said today that the family of a K.G.B. defector, Oleg Gordievsky, will be allowed to join him in Britain.
Mr.
Gordievsky's wife, Leila, and their two daughters had been barred from leaving the country by the secret police agency, but its new chairman, Vadim Bakatin, said that as soon as the family completes the usual passport and exit paperwork, "I think they will be able to go."


News Summary
Soviet Turmoil 4-7
The K.G.B. will undergo reform, as will the Soviet defense forces, the new heads of both organizations announced.
But they insisted, however, on the need to keep the organizations from fragmenting.
Page 1


Campaign Trail; For Council, Invoking Mother-in-Law Clause
While City Council candidates battle each other on the streets with sound trucks and leaflets, their lawyers are waging equally relentless campaigns in the city's courtrooms.
It is there that the city's election lawyers are doing their best to throw opponents off the ballot before voters can get to the polls.
The cases usually rest on dry and technical arguments about whether the signers of petitions are registered voters.
But the case of Pedro Espada, a candidate in the 18th District in the Bronx, has held uncommon intrigue.
It was played out on Thursday in a drab courtroom in the Bronx.


Ex-Chief Returning To Janitorial Concern
At the age of 76, Sydney J. Rosenberg is stepping back into the chief executive's position at American Building Maintenance Industries, after a somewhat mysterious change of leadership.
The company, one of the nation's largest providers of janitorial services, with annual revenues of about $700 million, said earlier this week that its board had decided not to renew the contract of R. David Anacker, 56 years old, who had been the chief executive since 1984.
Mr.
Rosenberg, a principal shareholder and chairman, will step in on Oct. 31.


Let the Kurds Speak
To the Editor:
Aydin Sahinbas of the Turkish Embassy, writing of human-rights progress (letter, Aug. 10), does not mention the restrictions that prevent 10 million Turkish citizens from using their mother tongue, Kurdish.
Turkey cannot be considered a democratic state until such restrictions are removed.
STEPHEN BLUM New York, Aug. 12, 1991


I. B. Singer Wouldn't Be Fond of Poland
To the Editor:
As the American-born son of a Polish emigrant Jew, I strongly resent Ambassador Kazimierz Dziewanowski's interpretation of Isaac Bashevis Singer's work as "proof of the deep bonds between Polish and Jewish culture" (letter, Aug. 9).


Bond Prices Fall in Wake Of New Data
Prices of Treasury securities fell and interest rates moved higher yesterday, as credit market participants sold securities in the wake of a series of strong economic reports.
The new signs of economic strength reported yesterday followed by a day a series of reports that were almost universally weak and that had pushed up prices of fixed-income securities.


Back in Miami, Beamon Remains Down to Earth
For 23 years, Bob Beamon had always drawn bigger crowds abroad than at home.
And yesterday, he was surrounded by merely half a dozen members of the news media at the Dade County Parks and Recreation Department office in Miami.
It was the day after his 45th birthday.


Altruism Unrewarded


Newmark &amp; Lewis Files for Chapter 11
Newmark &amp; Lewis Inc., one of the Northeast's most aggressive consumer electronics retailers, filed for bankruptcy protection yesterday, becoming another victim of the voracious competition among sellers of large appliances and home-entertainment systems.
In its filing, under Chapter 11 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code, the company said it would close 29 stores and focus on the remaining 25, which are primarily in Brooklyn, Queens and Long Island.
Those are areas where Newmark has been most profitable in the past.
It said it would also maintain stores in Hartsdale, N.Y., and Stamford, Conn.


2 British Tourists Shot After Losing Way in Miami
A vacationing British couple got lost in a high-crime neighborhood on Thursday and were shot when they asked directions from men who tried to rob them instead.
The wife, Rose Hayward, 59 years old, was reported in serious condition at Jackson Memorial Hospital with a gunshot wound to the chest.
Her 63-year-old husband, John, was listed in good condition with a shoulder wound.


Thurber Drawings Follow New Yorker Across the Street


Kennedy in Appearance At Grand Jury Session
Senator Edward M. Kennedy today testified before a Palm Beach County grand jury considering evidence of possible obstruction of justice during the investigation of rape charges against his nephew, William K. Smith.
In brief remarks to reporters after an 80-minute court appearance this morning in West Palm Beach, Mr.
Kennedy said he was responding to a subpoena.
"We were invited down here to participate in this process and we welcome the opportunity to do so," he said.
Afterward, Mr.
Kennedy left the courthouse with a private investigator who has been aiding Mr.
Smith's lawyers.


Casting Hungry Eyes at Dieters
"Mmmmm . . . mmmm," said S. Daniel Abraham, the chairman of Slim-Fast, after swallowing an Ultra Slim-Fast diet cheese curl, a yellow puff that he says the world will embrace as a new source of vitamins, minerals and fiber.
"This brand is a friendly brand."
Or so he hopes.


Super Decathlon Effort Is Just About a Footnote
If it was Dan O'Brien's misfortune to set an American record in the decathlon on the night that Mike Powell broke the world record in the long jump, the circumstances were lost on O'Brien.
"This is fantastic," he said tonight after his total of 8,812 points won the gold medal at the world track and field championships and replaced Bruce Jenner's 8,634 at the 1976 Olympics in Montreal as the highest total by an American.


F.B.I. Rescue Team's Baptism of Fire
Until today the Federal Bureau of Investigation's elite team that led the assault on the Federal prison in Talladega, Ala., was a little-known force that had never before been used for such a large-scale hostage rescue.
It had taken part in a few violent confrontations with less risk of widespread injury and in fugitive arrests in high-risk situations and it had been posted to several sites where there was a potential for violence.
The bureau's 50-member Hostage Rescue Team was created in 1982 in response to concern about terrorism, hijackings and hostage taking.
The unit serves as a domestic counterpart to the military's Delta Force, set up to conduct similar operations overseas.


Support by U.N. Powers Buoys Cambodian Hopes
The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council offered qualified support today to efforts by the Cambodian Government and three rebel factions to end the Southeast Asian country's long civil war, but called on the Cambodians to resolve troublesome disputes over election procedures and disarmament.
A joint statement of support issued by the five United Nations powers -- the United States, the Soviet Union, China, Britain and France -- came as something of a relief to Cambodian negotiators, who said that with the approval of the Security Council, a final peace agreement could be signed by the end of the year.


Patents; Device to Help Dentists Use Composite Fillings
Franklin M. Din, a dentist in Princeton, N.J., has patented a plastic band that makes it easier to fill cavities with tooth-colored composite materials instead of silver and mercury.
Although composite fillings look better than metal, Dr.
Din said they were more difficult to use.
When dentists fill cavities, they typically surround the tooth with a band of metal or mylar, which is removed after the procedure.
Dr.
Din said composite materials often left undesirable gaps between adjacent teeth when the bands were removed.


Monkey Shows Police Just Who's the Top Banana
A housing project courtyard in East Harlem in the middle of a long hot day: a crowd of spectators, a phalanx of Housing Police, a crew of E.M.S. workers, a truckload of firefighters -- and a monkey in a tree.
The crowd was on the monkey's side.


Patents; Natural Yeast Fungi To Prevent Rotted Fruit
Two researchers, one with the United States Agriculture Department and one in Israel, have patented a way to prevent fruit from rotting shortly after harvest by using naturally occurring yeast fungi.
If the fungi prove safe and effective in more extensive testing, they could give the produce industry an alternative to the synthetic fungicides now used to prevent post-harvest rot.
The advantage of the fungi is that they already breed on the surface of citrus fruits and are routinely consumed by humans, making it unlikely that they pose a health hazard.


Mother Charged for Locking Blind Deaf Daughter in a Car
A woman facing charges of child abuse for locking her blind and deaf 15-year-old daughter in the car while the woman went to work said she had no alternative, the authorities say.
The woman, Deborah Wright, 34 years old, of Burlington, was arrested after the teen-ager was discovered in the locked car in the parking lot of a Acme supermarket here where the woman worked, the Burlington County Prosecutor, Stephen G. Raymond, said on Thursday.
The girl had been in the car two and a half hours, he said.


Mexican Rulers Yield on State Election
The governing party has given up its hardest-won victory of this month's elections, nullifying the vote for governor in a key central state after charges of fraud.
The announcement late Thursday night was a remarkable turnaround after nearly two weeks in which Government and party officials had staunchly defended the result.
It reflected their concern that the irregularities reported by opposition parties and election observers in Guanajuato and some other states would undermine the legitimacy of their party's landslide victory in the mid-term election on Aug. 18.


Gordon Heath, 72; Co-Starred in Play 'Dweep are the Roots'
Gordon Heath, who lived an expatriate life in Paris after winning critical praise on Broadway in 1945 for his performance in "Deep Are the Roots," died on Tuesday at the Clinique Edouard Rie in Paris.
He was 72 years old.
He died after a long illness, said Alain Woisson, his longtime companion.


It's Great to Be Back Home


Youth League to Transform
The Communist Youth League, the once-obligatory rite for Soviet youngsters, "has lived out its political mission," an official of the organization says.
But the group is trying to keep from being dragged down with the Communist Party.
The league, Komsomol, gave up its monopoly as the country's only official youth group two years ago.
Last year, it divorced itself from the Communist Party.


Afghan Chief Confident Of Steady Kremlin Aid
President Najibullah of Afghanistan has said he is confident the Soviet Union will back his Government with food and arms despite the purging of hard-liners in Moscow after the failed coup.
"Cooperation between Afghanistan and the Soviet Union will continue within the framework of agreements already concluded," he told foreign reporters Thursday in his first public remarks since last week's attempted Soviet coup."We have not seen any signals that the implementation of these agreements is facing a slowdown."


Veteran Bannister Released by Angels
FLOYD BANNISTER, a 14-year veteran who pitched for five major league teams, was given his unconditional release by the California Angels yesterday.
Bannister, 36 years old, had no record with a 3.96 earned run average in 16 games with the Angels this year.


Car-Driving to Swine-Selling: Fees Connecticut May Raise
To balance the $7.67 billion budget that was passed last week, Connecticut legislators are considering $87 million in increases and new charges for licenses and other fees.
Among them, with their proposed changes, are these:
*The fee for filing documents with the Secretary of the State, from $6 to $25.


Alekos Sakellarios, Playwright, 78
Alekos Sakellarios, one of Greece's most prolific comic playwrights and lyricists whose works frequently portrayed the lighthearted side of crises, died on Thursday.
He was 78 years old.
He died of a heart attack, his family said.
Mr.
Sakellarios wrote 187 stage comedies and 105 movie scripts during a career that spanned half a century.
He also wrote lyrics for 1,500 songs, many of which are still popular today.
But his works were little known outside Greece.


Communist Party Dead? Hard-Liner Says Just Wait Until Soviet Winter
"The red flag will fly there again," said Nina Andreyeva, with a sweeping gesture toward the flagpole atop the Smolny Institute, where a Russian tricolor flag curled lazily in a fresh Baltic breeze.
The Smolny Institute, a symbol to the entire nation as Lenin's headquarters during the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917, was more recently home to the Leningrad Communist Party committee.
And it was to Smolny that Miss Andreyeva, a leader of the old-style, hard-line wing of the Communist Party, came today to declare that her views and her party were not dead despite the aftermath of the failed coup last week.


A Lament by America's Top Communist
Gus Hall, the chairman of the American Communist Party, yesterday warned of a frightening new wave of "witch hunts," "mass hysteria" and McCarthyism.
He was talking about about persecution of Communists in the Soviet Union.
"I view it as legislative insanity and hysteria," Mr.
Hall said in perplexed tones about the Soviet Parliament's vote to suspend all activities of the Communist Party.
"Those of us who learned the lesson of McCarthyism see this as a wrong turn, there is such similarity in what is going on."
It was a confusing, "Through the Looking Glass" moment in history for the 80-year-old Minnesotan, who took over the leadership of his party in 1959 after being convicted of plotting to overthrow the United States Government and serving eight years in the Federal prison in Leavenworth, Kan.


Michael Korn Choral Director, 44
Michael Korn, the founder and artistic director of the Philadelphia Singers, the city's only all-professional chorus, died on Thursday in Pennsylvania Hospital.
He was 44 years old.
He died of AIDS, said a spokesman for the chorus.


'I Can Read! I Can Read!' She Exclaimed; 'Double Helix' Author
To the Editor:
George Anders has provided a glowing account of our debt to some of the writers of the last 50 years ("Only 50 Great Books of the Last 50 Years?", letter, Aug. 9).
He is mistaken, however, in citing both James Watson and Francis Crick as authors of "The Double Helix."


All Aboard for the Lost and Found
Railroad commuters and business travelers around the country are creatures of routine, generally carrying with them only familiar things they need for the day.
But let them carry something extra -- a raincoat, an umbrella, a gift -- and forgetfulness sets in.
Those are the things passengers most often leave on trains.
These items are often found soon afterward, by train crews or cleanup workers, and turned in to the lost and found department.
The odd range of possessions lost in the New York metropolitan region is typical for other areas, too.


Merrill Staying Cool Amid the Rumors
By his own description, Stump Merrill has been a part of the New York Yankees' organization "for more than a day or two."
So nothing that's happened since the halcyon days of the Yankees' flirtation with .500 this season -- seemingly a lifetime ago -- particularly stuns the manager.
That's why Merrill has refused to act the role of a Hamlet public as rumors that yet another Yankee manager's job is in peril swirl about him.


Sports of The Times; Powell's Long, Long, Long Jump
Now after Mike Powell's record-breaking long jump, the question is asked anew: What are the limits of human potential?
How much farther can a person jump?
How much higher?
How much faster can he run, or swim, or hop and skip?


29-4 1/2! Soaring Powell Conquers Beamon's Record
For more than two decades, it was considered the one record that would stand for the ages: Bob Beamon's extraordinary long jump in the 1968 Mexico City Olympics.
If the record would ever be broken it would have to come in the thin air of high altitude, and if anyone was going to break it, it would be Carl Lewis, the outstanding Olympian who has chased Beamon for a decade.
But all those suppositions were swept aside at the world track and field championships tonight as Mike Powell of Alta Loma, Calif., made a stunning leap of 29 feet 4 1/2 inches, 2 inches beyond Beamon's mark, the oldest record in track and field.


Taunting an Icon in a Cage, Kiev Feels More Unfettered
The sun came out just as the construction of his cage began.
It was a big wooden cage for a three-story-tall pink granite statue of Lenin glaring forward as ever into a future that is rapidly excluding him.
At Lenin's feet was a happy crowd that only Bruegel could have painted: ordinary people leering up at the great figure and gesturing mockingly.
Tired old people, malicious little boys, lunch-hour spooners -- all celebrated with garrulous joy as the gray planking of the cage rose toward Lenin's face, blocking out a cry scrawled on his pedestal: "Death to the idol!"


Bridge
A growing trend among tournament players is to lead "second-high from worthless suits." The idea is to reserve a fourth-best lead for a suit with some high-card quality.
It is indeed frequently vital for partner to be informed about whether or not the opening leader has any strength in the suit he is leading.
This sacrifices information about length, but that can often be inferred from the opposing bidding.
A good example is the diagramed deal from the Spingold Knockout Team Championship in Las Vegas at the end of July.
Sitting East, and heading a New Zealand foursome, was John Wignall, who represents the South Pacific on the council of the World Bridge Federation.
His opponents climbed ambitiously to three no-trump after a slightly unusual sequence.
An immediate raise of diamonds would be normal with the South hand, but he judged that two diamonds would be an underbid and three diamonds an overbid.


Corrections
A listing in Weekend yesterday about holiday events in the New York metropolitan region misstated the telephone area code for the Friends of the Arts Beethoven Festival today and tomorrow in Oyster Bay, L.I.
Its information number is (516) 922-0061.


Hate-Crime Charge Dropped Against Black Man in Florida
Prosecutors have decided to drop assault charges that could have caused the state's racial hate crimes law to be applied to a black man who called a white police officer a "cracker."
Assistant State Attorney Paul Sullivan said Thursday that there was simply not enough evidence that the 21-year-old defendant, Michael Hamm, had assaulted the police officer, Stephen Keyes.


'A Poy-son Can Develop a Cold'
Once again, science has caught up to art.
According to an article in the New England Journal of Medicine, researchers in Pittsburgh and Britain have confirmed what the composer/lyricist Frank Loesser announced 41 years ago in a musical called "Guys and Dolls." Given enough stress, a person can develop a cough, la grippe and la postnasal drip.
Science did it the hard way, by exposing 420 thoroughly vetted volunteers to a variety of virus-tainted nasal washes, then isolating them for a week.
The volunteers suffering high levels of stress, as determined by questionnaires about events and emotions in their lives, developed colds at nearly twice the rate of those in the low-stress group.


Corrections
An answer in the Q&amp;A column of Science Times on Tuesday about spinach gave an outdated dietary recommendation on iron for women.
The National Academy of Science's revised recommendation is 15 milligrams a day, not 18.


Westernmost Soviet Outpost Is Left With Mixed Feelings
The demise of Communism that followed the failure of last week's coup is evident but hardly pronounced in this westernmost outpost of Soviet military power.
This city and the surrounding area that make up Kaliningrad Oblast is an isolated region so dominated by the army and navy that it has all the air of a military reservation.


Patents; Built-In Brake Light For Motorcycle Helmet
Gary Harris, a farmer in Conrad, Mont., has patented a motorcycle helmet with a brake light that can help riders to signal their intentions to traffic behind them.
All cars sold in the United States are now required to carry a third, high-mounted brake light.
But an analogous device for motorcyclists has not been developed because most riders do not want to be wired to their vehicles.


Crash Test Shows Flaw In Braking Mechanism
Federal safety investigators, in a test that simulated the crash on Wednesday of a New York subway train, yesterday produced new evidence of a design flaw in a mechanism meant to slow down trains before they reach the dangerous section of track where the accident occurred.
In the test, conducted by the National Transportation Safety Board, a subway train of the same length and weight as the one that crashed was driven three times at top speed past a device that activated the train's emergency brakes.
The train took more than 35 feet to slow down, investigators said.


Big Contract To Northrop
The Air Force said today that it was awarding the Northrop Corporation $959.4 million to continue work on the B-2 stealth bomber.
The service said the funds were for B-2 equipment and to insure that the Air Force had enough money to cover its liabilities to Northrop if the bomber project was halted.


Houston Post Columnist Dismissed in Dispute Over Announcing His Homosexuality
A columnist for The Houston Post was dismissed today after telling interviewers that his editors had prohibited him from writing about his own homosexuality.
The dismissal grew out of events that began when the columnist, Juan R. Palomo, sought to announce his sexual preference in a column that decried the lack of public outrage over the slaying of a 27-year-old banker, Paul Broussard, on July 4.
Mr.
Broussard was killed when 10 suburban youths allegedly chased down and attacked him and two companions as they were leaving a gay bar in Houston's Montrose neighborhood.


Militant Lithuanian Now Gives Pause
Lithuania's success in breaking away from the Soviet Union is a crowning and personal triumph for the republic's leader, Vytautas Landsbergis.
But even at this moment of victory, as Lithuanian sovereignty is being recognized by growing number of countries, some Lithuanians say Mr.
Landsbergis's radical nationalism and brusque style have created unnecessary problems for their new country.


The Last Picture Show


Escaped Killer Seized in Brooklyn, by Chance
When police officers investigating the slaying of a bartender at a Second Avenue pub late Thursday knocked on the door of a Brooklyn apartment yesterday, the man in the bathrobe who answered turned out to be an escaped murderer who was one of the city's most wanted fugitives.
In the apartment, officers also found five guns, including a sawed-off shotgun and a .380 semi-automatic handgun, the police said.


Images Show Major Venus Landslide
Scientists reported yesterday that they had obtained the first before-and-after pictures ever made of a huge landslide on the planet Venus that is believed to have been caused by a venusquake.
Dr.
Jeffrey Plaut, a research associate at the National Aeronautic and Space Administration's Jet Propulsion Laboratory analyzing images from the Magellan spacecraft, said the face of a steep cliff, or scarp, near the planet's equator in a region called Aphrodite Terra has collapsed.
The formerly smooth valley facing the half-mile-high scarp, an area about five miles long by one mile wide, is now a rough field of rocky debris, apparently the product of a huge slide.


Lean Beef: Giant Defensive Line Is Dangerously Thin
Three days before the Giants open their regular season, their defensive line is in trouble.
Eric Dorsey, the starting left end, will miss at least the first four games after arthroscopic surgery on his right knee.
So when the Giants play the San Francisco 49ers here Monday night, they will have only five defensive linemen.
One of those five, Erik Howard, has a bad back.
Another, Lorenzo Freeman, has been a Giant for only three days.


Salomon's Law Firm Resigns
Salomon Brothers announced yesterday the resignation of the law firm that had been conducting an internal investigation of the firm's trading violations in the Treasury securities market.
The firm, Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz, was hired in July to conduct the investigation, but it was several weeks before Federal regulators were told of the problems.
Salomon disclosed earlier this month that the chairman, the president and a vice chairman of the investment banking firm had known since April of one bidding violation but had not reported it to the Treasury Department.
Omission in First Release
Some current and former Salomon executives familiar with the situation also said yesterday that Martin Lipton, a partner in the firm who is a close friend of Salomon's former chairman, John H. Gutfreund, was involved in the crafting of the first and second news releases in which Salomon publicly acknowledged its trading violations.


YOUNG TEEN-AGERS HAVE MORE BABIES
For the youngest teen-agers, pregnancy today more often means having a baby rather than having an abortion, according to a new Federal report.
The Federal Centers for Disease Control reported Thursday that of the girls under 15 years old who became pregnant in 1988, there were 1,000 live births for every 949 abortions, the highest ratio since the advent of nationwide legal abortion in 1973.
In 1980, the ratio was 1,408 abortions to 1,000 births.


Critic's Notebook; The Music Machine: Hear the Wheels Turn
Instruction books for electrical appliances are fun to read up to a point.
They explain how things operate and, in smaller print, why.
What they can't tell you is what it is you really want to cook in them or what movie video you ought to put inside.
A lot of new music is like this.
We admire how it works but we don't always know how to make it make us happy.
Tod Machover's newest appliance is called "Begin Again Again. . . ." He plugged it in for our benefit at a Tanglewood new-music concert not too long ago.
What does Mr.
Machover's musical composition say to us?
Well, think of a man who is asked about his motor trip to the Grand Canyon and responds by showing you a picture of his carburetor.
In both cases, the means of conveyance has overshadowed the destination.


Beliefs
For the Rev.
John Meyendorff, dean of St.
Vladimir's Orthodox Theological Seminary in Crestwood, N.Y., Aug. 19 was supposed to be a special day.
In the calendar of the Eastern Orthodox Church, that day is the feast of the Transfiguration of Christ, commemorating the mountaintop manifestation of a glorified Jesus described in the Gospels.
Father Meyendorff planned to be in the Kremlin's Cathedral of the Dormition, celebrating the Divine Liturgy with Patriarch Aleksy II, head of the Russian Orthodox Church.


Pentagon Halts Soviet Book
The Pentagon said today that it was suspending publication of its annual "Soviet Military Power" book because of widespread uncertainty about the political and military situation in the Soviet Union.
A Pentagon spokesman, Bob Hall, made the statement, confirming a report in The Washington Post that said the Pentagon had suspended a printing of 195,740 copies of the soft-cover book during the failed coup last week.


I. B. Singer Wouldn't Be Fond of Poland; Jews Were Welcomed
To the Editor:
In "Communism Didn't Cause Polish Intolerance" (letter, Aug. 15), Jerrold P. Katz writes: "Poland has always been a despotic state lacking even a modicum of civil rights or tolerance toward its minorities." In the 14th century Poland became the sanctuary for European Jews, who were persecuted and expelled from other countries.
In 1573 Poland was the first European country to introduce the constitutional equality of all religions.
By the end of the 18th century more than half of the world's Jews lived in Poland.


No Headline
Prices paid to United States farmers in August declined 2.7 percent from July levels, the Government said today.
The decrease comes after a drop of 3.2 percent in July and a rise of 1.1 percent in June.


Polish Prime Minister, Rebuffed By Legislators, Talks of Quitting
Poland's Prime Minister made a surprise offer to resign today after the former Communists and their allies who control Parliament sharply criticized his austerity policies.
Since assuming office eight months ago, Prime Minister Jan Krzysztof Bielecki has moved to accelerate the sale of state-owned industries and to move the economy of post-Communist Poland toward a market-oriented system.


Lower Yields Are Forecast, Pushing Grain Prices Up
Grain and soybean futures prices rose on the Chicago Board of Trade yesterday after a private report predicted lower yields than the Federal Government had estimated.
September wheat futures settled 6 cents higher, at $3.105 a bushel; September corn settled 2 cents higher, at $2.49 a bushel; September oats were 3.5 cents higher, at $1.25 a bushel, and September soybeans were 10.75 cents higher, at $5.7925 a bushel.


Ford Incentives
The Ford Motor Company is offering rebates of $500 to $750 and loans with 7.9 percent interest rates for purchases of certain 1992-model cars and light trucks.
The incentives are in effect for orders placed through Sept. 25, the day before most of the models are to be officially introduced, Ford said.
Cars covered in the incentive program include the Escort, Tracer, Tempo, Topaz, Taurus, Sable, Thunderbird, Cougar, Mustang, Probe, Crown Victoria and Grand Marquis.
Trucks and vans include the Ranger, Aerostar F-series and Bronco.
Not


Viacom Gets MTV Europe
Viacom Inc. yesterday assumed full ownership of MTV Europe, completing its purchase of a 50.1 percent stake in the overseas music-video channel owned by the Robert Maxwell Group P.L.C. of London.
Mr.
Maxwell's cash-strapped publishing company will receive $65 million worth of Viacom's stock in exchange for the MTV stake.
Viacom already owns MTV's American operations.


